ID: 105	RANK: 39	SCORE: 5.761611
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910305-0103
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910305-0103.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Business World:
   Liberating Inventors or Shackling
   Progress With Paperwork?
   ----
   By Tim Ferguson
</HL>
<DATE>
03/05/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A17
</SO>
<CO>
   TXN MAT HIT
</CO>
<IN>
SEMICONDUCTORS, INTEGRATED CHIPS (SEM)
BIOGRAPHY (BIO)
COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)
</IN>
<LP>
   LA PALMA, Calif. -- This small, bedroom community is the
most Asian -- 30.5% -- of any in Orange County, according to
the latest Census figures. That is only one irony in the
story of a suddenly-celebrated resident who says his cause is
no less than building America's technological fortress in the
computer age.
   Gil Hyatt was awarded a patent last summer for the
microprocessor, 20 years after he says he invented it -- only
to see his idea lifted. The effect of his windfall, according
to Silicon Valley chronicler Michael Malone, has been "to
turn the entire semiconductor industry on its ear."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Complex legal matters bearing on the patent's significance
must yet be resolved, but many believe 52-year-old Mr. Hyatt
stands to reap millions of dollars, perhaps hundreds of
millions. Safe to say, the carpets won't be fraying much
longer at his tract home, frugal as he boasts of being. (Our
lunch at his pick of the Chinese restaurants in town came to
$10.50.) Yet, even as he plans to license his package of
personal-computer technology -- including the core patent --
he maintains that personal wealth isn't the point.
   Mr. Hyatt argues that he represents thousands of
"entrepreneurial engineers" whose inventions are the hope for
the U.S. industrial future. He says that these innovators,
whether on a payroll or on their own, have been routinely
ripped off by lawyer-driven, bureaucratic companies and as a
result are holding back breakthroughs that could transform
life on earth and America's competitive posture. Mr. Hyatt
says his wealth will be devoted to lionizing the nation's
inventors and securing their legal rights.
   In semiconductor circles, however, this little guy's
triumph is widely seen as precisely the wrong medicine for
what ails homegrown high-tech. No less a tribune of the
start-up set than George Gilder, whose book "Microcosm" and
other writings seem made to order for Hyatt heroizing,
decries the "promiscuity in the patent office" that he says
is benefiting none other than lawyers and the Japanese. Mr.
Hyatt's is "just a case of one small American inventor
getting in on this gold rush" via a paper trail. Mr. Gilder
and others allege that putting a computer on a chip was a
common idea in the late 1960s; finding a way actually to do
it was key.
   Gil Hyatt, though he's enjoyed notice in the popular press
and is now the talk of the techies, is absent from the
histories of the "micro" that cite the work of Carver Mead at
Caltech, Ted Hoff and colleagues at Intel and Gary Boone of
Texas Instruments. The son of a Russian immigrant who helped
design the New York City subway system, Mr. Hyatt gained an
electrical engineering degree at Berkeley but never joined
the fraternity in Silicon Valley.
   Yet like many of his brethren there, he'd struck out on
his own by 1968 in search of the technological grail. Not
long after, he filed the patent with the long fuse.
   He says he had 25 employees working to make his vision a
reality. But his venture folded in 1971 when investors, who
included the founders of Intel, pulled the plug. Why they did
so is a subject of contention, but Mr. Hyatt maintains the
episode set a pattern for what he has experienced in the
years since as inventor, consultant and patent agent:
Derogation, exploitation and sometimes outright theft of
ideas by corporations that know they can bleed the creator
white in court.
   Mr. Hyatt says he himself spent much of the 1980s paying
off costs from a suit brought by Mattel Corp. that he lost.
(He blames a federal trial judge unsympathetic to patents and
an inadequate appellate procedure -- now changed.) He rattles
off a handful of other major companies that he says tried to
appropriate his work.
   Now Mr. Hyatt calculates how to avenge the inventors. To
date, he has enhanced his own identity, through speeches and
press appearances. He gets calls from the sort of people who
read Midnight Engineering, a 25,000-circulation bimonthly put
out in Colorado. He seeks to persuade U.S. companies that
they will profit by treating creators with more respect and
rewardhe says foreign firms show "reverence." When his money
comes in, he wants to fund selected legal actions on behalf
of his comrades and a PR campaign to bolster their image.
   "The youth don't have proper role models," he says. "You
see lawyers on television, and they make heroes out of them.
Policemen. But they look at the scientists and inventors as
nerds and kooks. It's a very bad environment."
   Mr. Hyatt finds inventive corporate engineers are hemmed
in and then stifled internally. They top out quickly and are
either encouraged to become bureaucratic managers themselves
or are supervised by "BS types" who see them as a threat and
deny them discretion over funds.
   He isn't eager to pick winners himself, and doesn't think
large companies or governments are equipped to do that,
either. Ideas bubble up, they don't get assigned. "Safe"
recipients get the grants. Listen to his reaction to the
notion that the space program has yielded oodles of
commercial technology:
   "That is the biggest load of hokum that you can imagine.
It's just the opposite. It sucked up a lot of money from the
private sector, some of which might have trickled down to
funding some real innovative things. It pumped it into these
big aerospace corporations that are so inefficient, all
political. Sure, there's a little trickle of things, and if
you look hard after spending billions and billions of
dollars, and you might get a few million dollars worth of
results. Those things do not, for the most part, help in our
competition with Japan, which is our big threat."
   Repeatedly, Mr. Hyatt inveighs against the "contemptuous"
attitude of lawyers with whom the inventor must "interface."
Yet as Michael Malone detailed in a recent article in Upside,
a technology magazine, the "great patent war" that loosed the
Hyatt bomb threatens litigious havoc a la torts on the large
and small alike.
   Mr. Gilder says the intellectual-property craze is hurtful
coming now: "The Japanese were ready for it" and have flooded
the Patent Office with applications at each step of the
laboratory process, hamstringing U.S. potential in the
process. Hitachi has led the charge, while in the U.S. it is
Texas Instruments -- "a Japanese company in semiconductors,"
in Mr. Gilder's words. However, the real winners, he agrees,
are the lawyers.
   Mr. Hyatt is undaunted. In the service of modern American
pioneers, he draws an Asian adage. "It's an old expression
from the Orient: It's the nail that sticks up that gets
pounded down," he says. "We're a nation of nails that stick
up."
   Observes Michael Malone, "This is a glimpse into the soul
of engineering." The methodical man from La Palma, unrequited
all these years, now has leverage over the hammer. He wants
compensation but also esteem for his role in an epoch.
Justice aside, however, how much legal backtracking to
establish claims can the rapidfire world of electronics take
before its fabled fibers get caught on the nails?
</TEXT>
</DOC>
