ID: 105	RANK: 80	SCORE: 5.187892
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910826-0090
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910826-0090.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Enterprise -- The New Inventors:
   Machine's Master Hopes He's at Last Near the Payoff
   ---
   After 25 Years of Obstacles,
   Inventor Haber Unveils His EMP Unit
   ----
   By Brent Bowers
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
08/26/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B2
</SO>
<CO>
   HABEE
</CO>
<MS>
BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)
</MS>
<IN>
BIOGRAPHY (BIO)
CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)
</IN>
<NS>
BIOGRAPHY (BIO)
</NS>
<RE>
EUROPE (EU)
NEW JERSEY (NJ)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
GREAT BRITAIN (UK)
UNITED STATES (US)
WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)
</RE>
<LP>
   {Part of a Series}
                                                                                                       

</LP>
<TEXT>
   TOWACO, N.J. -- With his bushy eyebrows, distracted manner
and rumpled shirt, Norman Haber looks like the stereotypical
old-fashioned inventor.
   But he has another stereotypical quality: unflagging
optimism in the face of endless frustration. He says he has
reason to hope he is on the verge of getting his
technological breakthrough to the marketplace.
   He has been trying for almost 25 years.
   Despite the proliferation of help available to them, most
individual inventors still must cope with disappointment. Yet
the allure of the field is so great that thousands persist in
their efforts for years. Few have persisted longer than
Norman Haber.
   Mr. Haber's supporters say he is a genius, whose
exploitation of a chemical force he calls electromolecular
propulsion will give researchers a new tool in dissecting
compounds into their molecular parts. But his critics dismiss
him as a misguided amateur.
   Whether Mr. Haber turns out to be a visionary or an
eccentric might well be answered in the coming months as
chemists at corporate and university laboratories take a look
at his first commercial instrument, the EMP Model 15K-1,
which he unveiled in March with a price tag of $12,500.
   To reach this point, the 63-year-old inventor-entrepreneur
has fought hostile patent examiners and establishment
scientists, endured rebuffs from corporations and the news
media, and suffered through the collapse of his Haber Inc.
stock and a revolt by his board.
   His story illustrates the almost mystical power an
invention can hold over its creator. To hear him tell it, the
potential applications of his EMP device are almost
limitless. With the proper software, he says, the instrument
could improve blood testing, help in forensic analysis and
ultimately be used by entire industries -- including oil,
pharmaceutical and food companies -- to produce materials of
unprecedented purity.
   "I know we have something significant that will be
important in the 21st century," he says. "It's what has
sustained me."
   Some establishment scientists scoff at his claims. Andreas
Chrambach, a specialist in electrophoresis, another
molecular-separation technology, at the National Institutes
of Health, says "there's no such thing" as EMP and describes
Mr. Haber as a self-promoter who has insufficiently subjected
himself to peer review. Mr. Haber says it is hard for an
outsider who has never earned a Ph.D. to break into the
scientific inner sanctum. Others echo Mr. Chrambach's views
and ask why it should take a workable technology so long to
get to market.
   But Gordon Wilkinson, a chemist who publishes Analytical
Instrument Industry Report in Britain, says he is "strongly
persuaded Haber has something special." The U.S. inventor has
yet to sell his technology because it is so novel and
"difficult to understand," he says.
   Mr. Haber says his electromolecular-propulsion technology
harnesses a form of chemical bonding called charge transfer.
So little is known about this force that the Patent Office
refused to recognize the scientific validity of his first
patent application in 1969. "The examiners would say: You're
not supposed to be able to do that," he recalls. He finally
won approval in 1976.
   His machine subjects a substance to an electrical field
that pulls apart its molecules at different speeds. In an
office demonstration using ink, he draws lines from ballpoint
pens on filter paper and turns on the current. The lines
separate into yellow, purple and black or blue stripes from
each of the ink's dyes. He reverses the current, and the
stripes move back together.
   Henry Rosenberg, a chemist touting the machine for
distributor Research Unlimited Inc., predicts it will "catch
fire" with corporate laboratories, because EMP works faster
and more sharply defines the substances' components than
other separation techniques.
   Mr. Haber set up his company in 1967, initially to make
electronic devices, but soon began theorizing about EMP and
tinkering in his lab with ways to apply it. From the
beginnning, scientists questioned his theories, he says, and
big corporations turned him away.
   Yet investors became enamored of Haber Inc.'s technology,
including a separate invention that Mr. Haber claims extracts
gold from ore more efficiently than current methods. Stock in
the company, which went public in 1968, soared to $24 a share
in 1985 after numerous splits, giving it a market valuation
of close to $150 million.
   But the price plunged to $5 a share in early 1986. Mr.
Haber blames unfavorable press articles. Forbes magazine
asked: "If you find 21 times earnings too rich, what about
200 times revenues? That's the valuation accorded" Haber Inc.
   The 1987 market crash knocked the stock down to 17 cents.
In 1988, Mr. Haber forced out several company directors to
thwart their plans to seek bankruptcy law protection for the
company. Haber Inc. has scraped by with infusions of cash
from loyal investors.
   Today, the inventor believes a commercial breakthrough is
at hand. After introducing the EMP Model 15K1, the company
recently reached tentative agreements with Europe's Combio
Group to market it there and with several companies to sell
it in the U.S.
   And he's starting to get more favorable press. He was the
subject of a full-page profile in Chemical &amp; Engineering News
in April and items in Business Week's "Developments to Watch"
section and Chemistry in Britain in May.
   Haber Inc. stock has made a modest recovery to around 50
cents in over-the-counter trading.
   Meantime, the marketing of the EMP machine is under way.
Mr. Rosenberg of Research Unlimited says scientists at a
handful of major corporate laboratories, including
pharmaceutical giant Pfizer Inc., were impressed with initial
demonstrations. A Pfizer spokesman declines to comment.
   Though that elusive first sale has yet to be made, Mr.
Haber vows to find buyers. "I'll bootstrap 'em if necessary,"
he says.
   He has an ally in Brian Lowings, managing director of
Biotech Industries Ltd. of Britain, one of five companies in
the Combio consortium that plans to market the EMP machine in
Europe. Mr. Haber's invention "is the most novel technique
I've seen in the last 10 years," he says.
   Mr. Lowings fears Mr. Haber might be a member of a dying
Yankee breed of individualistic inventors. "Haber is one of
the original American alchemists, and he has to be
encouraged," Mr. Lowings declares. "There aren't enough of
them in the U.S. There are too many clones."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
