ID: 105	RANK: 85	SCORE: 5.168572
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910819-0059
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910819-0059.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Enterprise -- The New Inventors:
   More Inventors
   Try Their Luck
   As Aid Increases
   ----
   By John R. Emshwiller and Brent Bowers
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
08/19/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   KM WMT
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
BROADLINE RETAILERS, DEPARTMENT STORES (RTB)
</IN>
<GV>
COMMERCE DEPARTMENT (COM)
ENERGY DEPARTMENT (ERG)
</GV>
<RE>
ARKANSAS (AR)
MICHIGAN (MI)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   {First of a Series}
                                                                                                       

</LP>
<TEXT>
   Independent inventors, often dismissed as vestiges of a
simpler America, are enjoying a resurgence.
   Patents issued to individuals in the U.S. rose 37% in the
past five years, to 18,300 in 1990 from 13,000 in 1986. Alan
Tratner, executive director of Inventors Workshop
International in Camarillo, Calif., says his appearance on
"The Oprah Winfrey Show" last year triggered more than 10,000
calls and letters to his club. "We've seen a real surge in
interest in inventing," Mr. Tratner says.
   One reason: Help for inventors is proliferating, enhancing
the odds for success. Inventing the better mousetrap remains
a lonely endeavor, likely to end in failure. But before, even
when would-be Edisons made their gadgets work, few knew how
to market them.
   Now, inventors are getting guidance as never before. The
number of major nonprofit inventors clubs has increased
fivefold to 150 in four years, estimates Roberta Toole,
president of United Inventors Association of the U.S.A., an
umbrella group based in St. Louis.
   "Not so long ago, inventors had to slog through every
step. Today, inventors groups will lead them," says Ms.
Toole. "Just about every state's economic-development agency
is working with inventors now." The Department of Energy even
started a free newsletter three years ago expressly to help
inventors clubs.
   The clubs give moral support and tips on everything from
getting a patent to negotiating a licensing agreement. They
can also help find someone to evaluate an idea."You have to
be willing to tell the inventor he has an ugly baby," says
Clayton Williamson, head of the Kansas Association of
Inventors. Mr. Williamson is playing an active role in the
invention boom, building his club's membership to 800 from 17
in four years.
   A growing number of universities are offering to evaluate
inventors' creations, generally for fees of around $150. The
University of Wisconsin's Innovation Service Center finds
market potential in only one of every eight ideas it sees,
says Debra Knox-Malewicki, the program's manager. Successful
items include a plastic tube that fits over crayons to
prevent breakage and a new design for a shoe sole.
   Despite such assistance, would-be inventors face many
pitfalls. For every legitimate evaluation service, critics
say, there's a for-profit "marketing firm" that charges
thousands of dollars for nearly worthless reports and
mailings. Even inventors with useful ideas can find
themselves butting their heads against the walls of
corporations that shun outsiders for legal or internal
reasons. And companies willing to consider an independent's
invention usually want to see a workable prototype -- and
producing that can be costly.
   Despite all that, things are looking up for small
inventors. One bright spot in recent years has been the
courts. A separate federal patent court was created in 1982,
and it has been receptive to claims of patent infringement.
As a result, inventors have been winning more cases -- such
as a recent $10.2 million judgment against Ford Motor Co. in
a dispute over a windshield-wiper design.
   "Big companies used to tell us, go ahead and sue," says
James Fergason, an inventor in Menlo Park, Calif., who did
pioneering work in the liquid-crystal-display technology that
is used in watches and calculators. "We don't have to take
that anymore."
   Government assistance has also helped. Inventors often
start small businesses to commercialize their ideas, and
government research money earmarked for small business has
more than doubled in the past five years, to $446 million in
1990 from $199 million in 1985. The Commerce Department
spends about $5 million a year on individuals and small
companies with energy-saving ideas, and is planning a program
to give technology-evaluation support to the states.
   Luis Muga, a University of Florida chemist, says $500,000
in federal grants have been crucial in helping him develop
his idea for improving the focusing of spectrometers,
laboratory instruments that analyze substances.
   Private venture capital is tough to find, but some
companies do focus on inventors, especially in
high-technology areas. Medical Innovation Partners of
Minneapolis says it looks at two or three dozen ideas a month
in the health-care and medical-devices field. It recently
joined forces with a physician who has found ways to heal
chronic skin wounds.
   Doing a better job getting inventions to the marketplace
could have a significant impact on the nation. Giant,
job-producing technologies -- ranging from photocopying to
personal computers -- were either created or advanced by
individual inventors, says Herbert Wamsley, executive
director of Intellectual Property Owners Inc., a
Washington-based trade group.
   Some don't make it quite that big but still fill niches.
Curt Landi of Sunnyvale, Calif., invented a new method for
making honeycombs, lattice-like structures used in everything
from airplane wings to shoe soles. Since 1989, Reebok
International Ltd. has been using his honeycombs in its shoes
to help cushion shock.
   Another inventor, Robert Parker of Alamo, Calif., whose
patents cover creations from a liquid-crystal digital
thermometer to a device for measuring how hard an egg is as
it boils, licensed technology to Duracell International Inc.
for the battery tester it puts on its packages.
   And Mr. Fergason, the liquid-crystal-display inventor,
joined forces with a company in Holland, Mich., in December
to produce a welding-helmet lens that switches back and forth
between a very light and a very dark filter in 1/20,000th of
a second, shielding the welder's eyes and sharply increasing
his productivity.
   Inventors in academia are getting help, too. In the
mid-1980s, the U.S. gave universities patent rights to
inventions financed by federal research money. As a result,
the number of patents granted to U.S. universities has
soared, jumping 50% in 1989 alone to 1,216, and royalty
revenues have shot up.
   University researchers are being turned into
inventor-entrepreneurs. Research Corporation Technologies
Inc. of Tucson, Ariz., commercializes inventions for
universities, paying faculty researchers up to $3,000 to
disclose ideas for possible marketing. Arlon Hunt, a
scientist at the Lawrence Berkeley laboratory at the
University of California's Berkeley campus, has used his
federally financed research on super-insulating materials to
help form a company to commercialize the technology. "Fifteen
years ago the government probably would have tried to jail me
for doing that," says Mr. Hunt, describing the change in the
climate.
   Increasingly, forging a corporate partnership is also
possible. Wal-Mart Stores Inc. has started a program looking
for inventions that can be sold at its stores. And Gerald
Udell, a professor at Southwest Missouri State University and
the head of Innovation Institute, which evaluates inventors'
ideas, says that "companies that 10 years ago were totally
closed to inventors are opening their doors."
   That can only fan the hope that springs eternal for every
inventor. Jay Edward Jones, an engineer in Youngstown, Ohio,
has held talks with Kmart Corp. about distributing his Timber
Ties, which hold together landscaping timbers. While a
manufacturing problem has put his project on hold, Mr. Jones
boasts that the next office he decorates "will be on a
yacht."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
