ID: 176	RANK: 34	SCORE: 4.707242
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890711-0036 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-11-89 0159EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-Obit-Blanc 6thLd-Writethru a0439 07-11 1141</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Obit-Blanc, 6th Ld - Writethru, a0439,1171</SECOND>
<HEAD>Cartoons' `Man of A Thousand Voices' Dies At 81</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: SUBS 23rd graf, `Blanc invented ...' to DELETE INCORRECT statement
that Blanc invented Elmer Fudd</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto NY48</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By JOHN HORN</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>LOS ANGELES (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Mel Blanc, who entertained generations of
cartoon viewers as the voice of Bugs Bunny, Porky Pig, Barney
Rubble, Tweety and hundreds of other characters, died Monday
following a lengthy hospital stay. He was 81.
   The creator of such classic cartoon trademarks as Bugs Bunny's
``Eh, what's up, Doc?'' Porky Pig's ``Th-th-th-th-that's all
f-f-f-folks'' and Road Runner's ``Beep, Beep'' died at 2:30 p.m.
from complications of heart disease and other ailments at
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, said hospital spokesman Ron Wise.
   He had been suffering from cardiac problems and emphysema when
admitted May 19.
   Blanc performed the voices on 850 cartoons for Warner Bros. in a
career spanning more than 50 years. His versatility was so profound
that few would have presumed just one actor was behind so many
markedly different characters. He also performed voices on countless
other cartoons, such as ``The Flintstones'' for Hanna-Barbera, and
commercials and radio fillers.
   In an interview last November, he estimated he had done 900
voices in all.
   ``Those voices were part of him, and he loved every moment of
it,'' said his son, Noel. ``When the kids would come to the door or
in the studio, he became those characters.''
   Blanc made a car commercial on the day he went into the hospital
``and the last thing he said on the commerical _ the only thing he
said _ was `That's all folks,' and that's the last thing that was
recorded on tape,'' his son said.
   ``The reservoir of Hollywood legends is extremely low, and Mel
Blanc's passing is a deep personal loss,'' said longtime friend
Mickey Rooney.
   Working decades before the advent of high-tech sound effects,
Blanc was a human synthesizer and a verbal computer. It has been
estimated that more than 20 million people hear his voices daily.
   Blanc had a ``magnificently versatile voice,'' said Robert A.
Daly, Warner's chairman and chief executive officer. ``Bugs Bunny,
Porky Pig, Daffy Duck, Sylvester the Cat, Tweety and so many more _
they were all Mel Blanc.''
   Besides Warner Bros., Blanc worked for other animated film
makers, playing the part of the hyperactive, yammering Dino, Fred
Flintstone's pet dinosaur. Within the industry he was known as ``The
Man of a Thousand Voices.''
   Blanc said he once tried to count all the cartoon voices he did,
while recuperating in 1961 from a near-fatal car accident. He said
he fell asleep shortly after passing the 400 mark.
   Blanc's last cartoon contribution came with 1988's popular
animation-live action film, ``Who Framed Roger Rabbit,'' in which he
did the voices of Daffy, Tweety, Bugs and Sylvester. He wrote an
autobiography that year, ``That's Not All, Folks: My Life in the
Golden Age of Cartoons and Radio.''
   Blanc also played the voice of the robot Twiki on the live-action
television series ``Buck Rogers in the 25th Century.''
   Blanc said in an interview last year that Bugs Bunny _ originally
called Happy Rabbit _ was his favorite. ``Everybody knows who I am,
Doc,'' he said in the character's voice. ``I don't cayuh where dey
are who dey are. Even in Mars dey know about me.''
   Born in San Francisco on May 30, 1908, and raised in Portland,
Ore., Blanc discovered his vocal skills while in grammar school.
   He began his career in show business both as a musician and a
radio perfomer. He started in 1927, when he sang and performed on a
Portland radio show called ``The Hoot Owls.''
   He and his wife, Estelle Rosenbaum, subsequently wrote, produced
and performed all the characters for the daily radio show ``Cobwebs
and Nuts.''
   In 1928, Blanc _ who played the bass, violin and sousaphone _ was
hired by the NBC Radio Orchestra in San Francisco.
   Starting in 1937, he became part of Warner Bros.' cartoon studio,
which produced one short feature subject each week.
   His first Warner Bros. character was a drunken bull in the Looney
Tunes short ``Picador Porky.'' As legend has it, the actor playing
Porky Pig in that short actually did stutter. A few months later,
Blanc took over the role in ``Porky's Duck Hunt,'' stuttering
intact, and created Daffy Duck at the same time.
   Blanc introduced Bugs Bunny in the 1940 short ``A Wild Hare,''
giving the cartoon rabbit a combination Bronx and Brooklyn accent.
   Blanc invented the voices of such well-known cartoon figures as
Woody Woodpecker, Speedy Gonzalez, Pepe Le Pew, Tasmanian Devil,
Road Runner, Foghorn Leghorn, Heathcliffe the cat, Speed Buggy and
Yosemite Sam.
   He also did voices for Mr. Spacely on ``The Jetsons'' and the
Frito Bandito. In 1987, Blanc performed in the Daffy Duck short
``The Duxorcist,'' marking the return of Looney Tunes movie shorts
after a 20-year absence. He also worked on the 1988 short ``The
Night of the Living Duck,'' which kicked off the New York Film
Festival.
   Blanc said persistence paid off in landing the Warner Bros. job.
Frequent trips to the studio seeking an audition were met with
constant rejection by the personnel manager.
   ``That didn't stop me,'' Blanc said in a 1980 Associated Press
interview ``I kept going back every two weeks and always got the
same answer.
   ``Finally the guy died. The man who took his place decided to
give me a chance.''
   During Warner Bros. cartoon film short heydey, which lasted well
into the 1950s, few people in the United States recognized Blanc's
face, but hardly anyone was unfamiliar with his voices.
   From Sylvester's ``Thufferin' thuccotash!'' to Tweety's ``I tawt
I taw a puddy tat,'' Blanc's voice characterizations became
household tidbits of U.S. popular culture.
   Blanc called Bugs his favorite character, although he hated the
taste of carrots he chewed for sound effects and spit the uneaten
remains in the trash can.
   But for all his fame as the voices of cartoon characters, the
most Warner Bros. ever paid him for his vocal skills was $20,000,
and the studio retained the rights to the phrases Blanc invented.
   In addition to working in animation, he was a regular on radio's
``The Jack Benny Show,'' playing Professor LeBlanc, Benny's violin
teacher, and the train dispatcher who announced the stops of
``Ana-heim, A-zusa and KOOK-amunga!''
   Blanc also played Carmichael the Bear, Sy the Mexican gardener
and made the wheezing sounds of the timeworn 1924 Maxwell automobile
owned by Benny's skinflint comedy character.
   He reprised many of the roles when Benny moved to television.
   He married Miss Rosenbaum in 1933. Their son, Noel, was born five
years later. Blanc once said the only person who can imitate his
repertoire of cartoon voices was his son.
   Blanc is survived by his wife and son. Funeral arrangements were
pending.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
