ID: 176	RANK: 82	SCORE: 4.267529

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61018 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuac002___94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UAC-94-002 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  AVIATION AND COSMONAUTICS No 3, March 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   12 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     Zenit Reconnaissance Satellites Described </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94UM0004E Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA in Russian No 3, 
Mar 93 (signed to press 4 Mar 93) pp 41-42 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0004E </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yuriy Mikhaylovich Frumkin under the rubric </F>
"Without the `Secret' Stamp": "The First Reconnaissance 
Satellite"] 
  [Text] Up until recently, only specialists knew that 
some unannounced areas of work were envisaged, aside from the 
officially indicated ones, under the Kosmos program. 
  One of them was the flights of the Zenit reconnaissance 
satellites. The work on those started in 1956, even before the 
launch of the first artificial Earth satellite in the world, 
with design-flight testing in 1962 and standard operations in 
1963. These spacecraft (later modifications of them) served more 
than 20 years. One of their developers, Yuriy Mikhaylovich 
Frumkin, talks about the first Zenit. 
  Zenit is a heavy satellite intended for the performance of 
detailed photographic reconnaissance, equipped with three 
cameras with a lens focal length of F = one meter, one 
topographic camera (F = 0.2 meter) and radio reconnaissance gear. 
  The cameras were able to take pictures in a small series of 
frames and in long paths. The width of the photographed strip in 
satellite flight at an orbital altitude of H = 200 km 
[kilometers] was 180 km. Long-focus apparatus provided a 
resolution of the pictures equal to 10--12 meters, with the film 
supply sufficient for each spacecraft to take 1,500 frames. 
  The duration of the flight of the satellite, as confirmed by 
flight-design testing, was 8--12 days. The data obtained by the 
radio reconnaissance gear and telemetric information on the 
functioning of on-board systems, the power plant and structural 
elements was transmitted to Earth in radio communications 
sessions. The exposed film was returned to Earth together with 
the camera in a descent section (SA). Flight control was 
accomplished from the Control Center, with the participation of 
many ground and floating command and telemetry stations. Special 
ground services and aircraft also provided for the retrieval and 
appropriate delivery of the descent section that had landed. 
  The Zenit consists of two major sections--the instrument 
section (PO) and the SA. They are connected by a host of 
electrical, hydraulic and other types of communications. The 
descent section has a spherical shape with an outer covering of 
heat-protective coating. The strong and airtight metallic 
covering, with thermal protection applied to it, has three large 
hatches. The cover of one of them is jettisoned to open the 
parachutes as it reaches the ground. The other two are 
technological hatches, and provide for the installation of 
apparatus and equipment. The cover of one holds the portholes 
for the camera gear. The PO is made in the form of two conical 
fairings linked by a cylindrical insert. It is destroyed and 
burns up during passage through the atmosphere with the descent 
section returning from orbit. The configuration of the Zenit 
spacecraft and its mass, shape of the SA and basic functional 
systems in descent and landing are very close to those on the 
Vostok spacecraft. Despite their outward similarity (they were 
developed at roughly the same time), however, they have 
substantial differences (Fig. 1). 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UAC-002C-11A>           Fig. 1. Specific features of the structural </FIG>





    The specific nature of the tasks performed by the Zenit 
spacecraft presupposed fitting it with equipment based on new 
systems or considerably upgraded from the Vostok spacecraft. A 
new and quite complex project, requiring the resolution of a 
large number of problematical scientific and technical issues, 
was the special apparatus for photographic and radio 
reconnaissance. Apparatus was created with long-focus lenses. 
The specific features of its operation through multiple-pane 
portholes bearing internal pressure, the effects of 
weightlessness and other factors of flight, along with the small 
volume of the SA, were all taken into account therein. It was 
moreover necessary to ensure the high reliability of the 
apparatus, a broad range of adjustment characteristics, high 
resolution of the pictures obtained and precision in referencing 
them to the terrain. 
  Fundamental difficulties arose in the development of the 
system for orienting the spacecraft. It was necessary to have a 
virtually constant, precise three-axis orientation in the 
orbital system of coordinates in order to photograph the Earth's 
surface and obtain high-quality images, with one of those axes 
tracking the direction of the Earth in the orbital movement of 
the craft. The Zenit craft was able to realize this mode during 
flight testing for the first time in space science. The 
orientation system performed "rapid" programmed revolutions 
across a wide range of angles in order to expand the 
opportunities to obtain photographic information from the 
satellite, which made it possible to take pictures of areas 
located at a considerable distance from the flight path of the 
satellite. The orientation of the system was structured on the 
basis of fundamentally new optical and gyroscopic sensors, using 
logic blocks with a complex functional algorithm and 
multiple-nozzle control elements with economical modes for the 
consumption of the working medium (nitrogen). The principal 
units of this system were located in the instrument section, 
while the micromotors, tanks with the reserves of the working 
medium and optical sensors were mounted on its outer surface. 
  The control system for the on-board complex that provided 
the 
logic and electric-power control of all on-board apparatus was 
also qualitatively altered. The necessity of flexibility in the 
operational control of the photographic gear, its adjustment 
depending on the flight altitude, illumination of the Earth's 
surface, location, planned length of the picture track and much 
more required the creation of a complex program-logic device 
with a radiotechnical channel for the on-board program radio 
line. This was an innovation in the radiotechnical systems of 
spacecraft. 
  A number of difficult problems had to be solved by the 
developers of the system to maintain the thermal conditions of 
the satellite. The long-focus camera set the terms, since the 
quality of the pictures and their resolution were directly 
dependent on the range and rate of change of the temperature of 
the lens, the camera as a whole and the porthole. The 
maintenance of the temperature of the gas with a precision of 
about one degree posed a difficult engineering task in the face 
of the marked fluctuations in the values of the internal and 
external thermal fluxes. 
  The Zenit, as a secret device, had to meet special 
requirements, and systems were thus included in it for 
self-destruction in emergency situations (emergency detonation 
of the craft) and radio telemetry for the radio reconnaissance 
gear, as well as a means of protecting the information etc. 
  The design engineering of the Zenit spacecraft was performed 
on the basis of broad cooperation among scientific-research and 
experimental-design enterprises and major centers equipped with 
complex systems and devices for the experimental ground 
run-through of the satellite as a whole and its systems and 
assemblies, in close interaction with the customer, the Ministry 
of Defense, including using test-range services as well as the 
Kuybyshev OKB-1 [Experimental Design Bureau 1], to which all of 
the work on this type of spacecraft was transferred upon 
completion of the program of flight-design testing. The lead 
organization was Experimental-Design Bureau No. 1 (OKB-1), 
headed by S. Korolev. 
  Design research went on for two years (starting in 1956), 
and 
concluded with the selection of a configuration for the 
reconnaissance satellite and its principal flight and 
engineering characteristics, as well as the composition and 
operating principles of its on-board systems. 
  The return of the exposed film from orbit to Earth in a 
special capsule was envisaged therein. It was to have a 
relatively small mass, conical shape and be equipped, aside from 
the film cassettes, with the minimally necessary means to ensure 
the physical preservation of the film in flight in the 
atmosphere and in landing, as well as to find the landing 
location. 
  The second section of the satellite was designed to be 
larger. Its shape varied from cylindrical, with small conical or 
spherical ends, to a combination of complex shapes. This 
configuration was selected because an opportunity appeared, 
while reducing the dimensions and mass of the section to return 
to Earth and the required mass of the satellite as a whole, to 
increase the period of its active existence and the volume and 
quality of the information obtained. This was achieved through 
the installation of more advanced gear, an increase in the film 
supply and the working medium for the orientation system, and 
larger-capacity batteries for the electric-power system. 
  At roughly the same time, starting in 1958, the OKB-1 
launched work on the creation of the Vostok manned spacecraft. 
It was designed in two sections of roughly equal mass--an SA 
that was spherical in shape, and a PO whose outer contours were 
two cones, with articulated bases. The same configuration was 
adopted for the reconnaissance satellite under real "pressure" 
from S. Korolev. 
  This was not a simple solution, since the descent section 
was 
adapted to accommodate a person rather than the equipment of a 
reconnaissance satellite. The insistence of the Chief Designer 
and the inventiveness of the participants in the project 
nonetheless made it possible to solve this problem. 
  The Zenit (Fig. 2) as a result came to consist of an 
instrument section and a descent section with dimensions close 
to those of the Vostok spacecraft. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UAC-002C-12A>           Fig. 2. Zenit-2 spacecraft </FIG>





    The PO accommodated units for the orientation system, the 
control of on-board systems, electric-power supply, thermostatic 
gear, radio systems and radio reconnaissance gear, among others. 
Its external surfaces had a host of antennas for the electronic 
gear, an optical sensor for orientation to the sun--used in one 
of the satellite turning modes before the issue of the braking 
command to descend from orbit--and an infrared vertical 
reference, which could also be used for orientation before 
descent from orbit. There were also rocket motors for 
orientation and tanks with the gas supply. The braking engine 
installation from the design bureau of A. Isayev and the 
radiator of the thermal-regulation system were also located in 
the lower section. 
  The descent section housed, aside from the camera, the 
landing system (a parachute system, automatic devices and 
sensors), means of electric-power supply, control of on-board 
systems, thermal regulation, radio stations to get a bearing on 
the SA, and a system for the autonomous recording of the 
readings of a number of sensors monitoring the process of the 
flight during the descent. A system for the emergency detonation 
of the craft was also installed in the SA (a charge, logic unit 
and sensors), which destroyed the contents of the descent 
section in the event emergency situations arose. 
  The transition to the new configuration, through an 
inconsiderable deviation from the configuration of the 
reconnaissance satellite optimized from a mass standpoint, made 
it possible to reduce the spending for its flight testing, since 
the important stages--deorbiting, descent and landing--had been 
worked out in testing of unmanned satellites and in the first 
manned flights of the Vostok spacecraft. 
  The flight and design testing confirmed the correctness of 
the decision made in 1958. This was one of many examples of the 
intuition and ability of the Chief Designer to evaluate problems 
broadly and comprehensively in the development of complex space 
projects. The results of the design engineering were formulated 
in the middle of 1961. The satellite had already been 
manufactured by this time, had completed a full cycle of ground 
run-through and was at the Baykonur cosmodrome. The flight and 
design testing was completed with the flight of a Zenit launched 
on 19 December 1963 under the name Kosmos-20. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Aviatsiya i kosmonavtika", 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
