ID: 176	RANK: 86	SCORE: 4.246103
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT911-1498</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-BEEAAAC2FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>910504
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  04 MAY 91 / Arts: A service to the community - Radio
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By BA YOUNG
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
FEW OF the Sony Radio Awards, presented last Monday, went to programmes I
have written about, but this means neither that the judges' tastes are
astray or that I have overlooked masterpieces each week. The Sony prizes
cover a wider field of radio than any single writer could know, and rely on
judges - 38 this year - each expert in his own field, as well as the Society
of Authors, the Radio Academy and Smash Hits. The best education programme
was Women and Aids from Radio Sussex; the best local station of the year was
Radio Borders, from the Borders; the best rock programme was Cousin Matty
from Radio City FM.
The judges will have had tapes of the nominations and need never have
hoisted aerial in Sussex or the Borders. Radio Stoke, whose new serial
(heard on tape) I mentioned last week, won a Sony award with On the Street
for outstanding service to the community. The awards tell usefully of the
varying calibre, and the growing amount, of radio all over the country. One
award few would oppose was Woman's Hour as the best magazine programme -
few, that is, but the Controller of Radio 4, who has been talked out of
changing its name but not out of shifting it to the morning later in the
year.
'Service to the community' can be a broad function. Radio 4's programmes
about bullying at work certainly qualify, but its current series Work Talk
is interesting rather than instructive. Ferdinand Dennis interviews workers
born in the colonies and now living in Britain. His first three have been
Norman Beaton, the actor, Clyde Williams, head of FullEmploy Training, and
Margaret Busby, the publisher. All these are from the West Indies, like
Dennis himself, and all reasonably successful The point made, as I see it,
is that colonials, if that word may be used, show special interest in the
work of other colonials, a prejudice some might call loyal and others
racist.
The Unfair Sex (Radio 4, four consecutive Sundays) is for feminism, for the
unfair sex is, of course, the male. This week we had misogynist quotations
from Fidelis Morgan's The Misogynist's Source-Book. Beginning with the
account of Eve's creation from Genesis, we ran through Roget, Percy's
Reliquiae Antiquae, pop songs, Ovid, Beerbohm, Dali, Ecclesiastes and
Proverbs, to end with Boucicault's remark summing the theme up neatly, 'I
wish Adam had died with all his ribs in his body.' Entertainment more than
service, but good listening, agree with it or not.
Later the same evening The Deserted Child showed how misogyny might be
prompted. Queen Victoria's treatment of her third son, Prince Arthur, was
unspeakable. Her own childhood was bound to have given her some unusual
notions. Perhaps she wanted to make sure that Prince Arthur was not like the
Prince of Wales. After the death of Prince Albert ('father, protector,
guide') the Queen appointed Major Howard Elphinstone as the Prince's
'governor', and he remained in that post even after the Prince had been to
Woolwich and granted an Army commissioned.
But the Queen wrote endless personal notes. Be reserved in Society, but
affectionate with servants. Never speak harshly to Highlanders. Do not copy
Bertie's way of sitting with arms on the table. Do not read too much
scripture on Sundays. Polo is 'really cruel', hunting overdone. The
unfortunate Elphinstone was ultimately promoted lieutenant-colonel and
knighted. The Prince became a field-marshal and Duke of Connaught, and
married a German princess. The Queen's expertise at arranging marriages will
be dealt with in next week's programme. We may also learn the point of the
title.
A word on Radio 3's Two's Company on Fridays. Charles Melville considers
jazz players who liked playing together, and could hardly begin with anyone
but Joe Venuti and Eddie Lang (Wildcat, he gave us). But some of the other
duos - Armstrong and Hines, for instance - seem to me no more than happy
studio meetings. In that category, we might extend to such joys as Tram, Bix
and Eddie.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XIV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
