ID: 176	RANK: 90	SCORE: 4.238671
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-173</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CL3BJABRFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921230
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  30 DEC 92 / Arts: New brooms and contemporary music - Andrew Clements
stresses the importance of the BBC in commissioning new works
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW CLEMENTS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
There is no doubting the single issue that exercised British music lovers
most strenuously during 1992. Elevated from the ranks of music critics to
become the BBC's Controller of Radio 3, Nicholas Kenyon set about making the
network more approachable and user-friendly, and immediately brought the
massed forces of reaction down upon his head. There was, he claimed, no
intention of diminishing the breadth and depth of Radio 3's music and drama
output; the perceived threat to his audience was the imminent arrival of
Classic FM, the first nationwide independent radio station and the first
promising to devote itself to 'classical' music.
Kenyon's innovations, brightening up the travel-time programmes with more
news and chat, replacing hardened Radio 3 announcers with 'personalities'
and mixing and matching the late-night schedule with reviews and interviews,
were all in place well before Classic FM hit the airwaves. When it did one
could only wonder why he had worried so much; anyone with half an ear for
serious music was quickly repelled by the mixture of ignorance and
incompetence that packaged the bite-sized chunks of easy listening on the
commercial station; Radio 2's audience rather than Radio 3's was surely the
target.
If in retrospect Kenyon's hasty changes look the result of a panic attack on
either his own part or that of his paymasters, listeners have been left with
the consequences for good or bad. Time will doubtless heal the worst scars
of the cosmetic surgery to the network, though the emetic effects of Sunday
mornings' stream of cosiness will take a very long time to overcome. In
general terms anything which increases the discourse on the arts is a good
thing, provided it is well-informed discourse and not softened and sanitised
for BBC consumption.
There remain, though, some worryingly grey areas in the Kenyon plan.
Certainly Radio 3 drama seems an endangered species, and the future for
contemporary music on the network seems a precarious one; it is easy to
envisage it shunted off into the late-night 'cross-over' programmes where
art music and rock and pop can lie together in blissful ecumenical union.
That may be good news for the currently trendy holy minimalists - Tavener,
Part, and Gorecki (a particular Kenyon favourite) - but hard on the
mainstream which lacks a popular, record-buying following; to be shunted off
into the ghetto of 'Music in Our Time' seems an increasingly uncertain fate.
Already the BBC's winter week of contemporary music at the Barbican has been
abandoned, reduced to a weekend of more accessible 20th-century music -
concerts of Alban Berg last January, Janacek this time - the splendidly
valuable surveys of Berio and Stockhausen, Henze and Birtwistle are now
things of the past.
In the current climate the extent of the BBC's role in actively fostering
contemporary music will surely come under further scrutiny before too long.
Doubtless the major orchestral commissions will survive; they will be fitted
into the showcase of the BBC Symphony Orchestra's South Bank concerts (which
are undeniably benefitting this season from Kenyon's policy of single-price
tickets) and at the Proms, while the regional orchestras too will continue
to get their quotas of new works.
Where the BBC commissioning policy does much of its most important work is
precisely where it is most vulnerable - in the 'hidden' commissions, the
works that are commissioned for performance by independent ensembles and
soloists and receive their premieres under BBC auspices in a wide variety of
invitation concerts and studio sessions. It would very tempting for a
financially embarrassed BBC to reduce this expenditure drastically, and
almost impossible for anyone outside the organisation to quantify the loss
of revenue to composers, those less well-known and up-and-coming figures who
need this kind of unglamorous encouragement. Just how essential the BBC
remains to the vitality of new music in this country is demonstrated by
three of the most impressive British orchestral scores of the year, all
commissioned by the corporation - Colin Matthews's Broken Symmetry, Simon
Holt's viola concerto walking with the river's roar, and David Sawer's
Byrnan Wood.
These and the tour de force of Dominic Muldowney's Violin Concerto aside, it
was an undistinguished year for British composers - Tippett's new work, a
fifth string quartet, was a sad disappointment, Birtwistle's wind and piano
quintet failed to materialise, the younger generations paused for breath.
Yet in Europe as a whole there was much to admire, not least the definite
emergence of the Finns Magnus Lindberg and Kaaija Saariaho as composers of
real international stature. Dienstag, the latest instalment of Stockhausen's
Licht project, was the familiar infuriating mixture of vivid musical
invention and absurd, heavy-handed theatricals, while the retrospective of
Luigi Nono's late works mounted at the Holland Festival was a marvellous
tribute, crowned by a performance of his unclassifiable, evening-long
Prometeo.
Highlight of the year, though, was the premiere in Hamburg of Wolfgang
Rihm's theatre piece Die Eroberung von Mexico, perhaps the finest new opera
since Birtwistle's The Mask of Orpheus and like that work a marvellous
mingling of myth and magic, underpinned with music of sensuous beauty and
immense power. In some shape or form it really must be heard in Britain
before too long, even perhaps under the auspices of the BBC.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 7
</PAGE>
</DOC>
