ID: 109	RANK: 32	SCORE: 6.883907
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880713-0102 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-13-88 1224EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u p PM-PoliticalRdp 4thLd-Writethru a0612 07-13 1142</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Political Rdp, 4th Ld-Writethru, a0612,1100</SECOND>
<HEAD>Dukakis, Bentsen Seek Democratic Unity</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Top 8 grafs new with Dukakis speech; pick up pvs bgng ``He's
a terrific...; SUBs grafs 9-14 pvs with 7 new grafs; pick up pvs
bgng ``I did think...''</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By EVANS WITT</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP Political Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Michael Dukakis told black leaders today that running mate Lloyd
Bentsen has been a civil rights advocate since ``way back when in
the 1940s,'' while a disappointed Jesse Jackson was described as
flabbergasted at the way he has been treated by the Democratic
nominee-to-be.
   Jackson convention manager Ron Brown said negotiations with the
Dukakis campaign have been halted.
   ``It is now up to Michael Dukakis to make it a unity
convention,'' Brown said in an interview in Atlanta.
   Brown said Jackson and his aides could not understand what they
felt was a deliberate Dukakis snub of Jackson, who learned from
reporters that Bentsen was the vice presidential choice.
   ``Basically we were flabbergasted by the way this was handled,''
Brown said.
   At the annual meeting of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People in Washington, Dukakis sought black
support in a speech that was mostly a straight campaign talk.
   NAACP President Benjamin Hooks told Dukakis, ``You know, knowing
Jesse has been good for you.''
   And Dukakis replied, ``Yes, Ben, I learned a lot from Jesse and
I've learned a lot from you....And I'm still learning.''
   As Dukakis and Bentsen wrestled with how to unify the party in
advance of nest week's convention in Atlanta, most Democrats sang a
chorus of praise for the 67-year-old Texas senator after his formal
introduction as Dukakis' running mate at Boston's Faneuil Hall.
Hopeful refrains citing the parallels with the 1960 Kennedy-Johnson
ticket were heard again and again.
   ``He's a terrific guy. He's very tough, very smart,'' Oregon
Gov. Neil Goldschmidt said of Bentsen.
   Former Vice President Walter F. Mondale, the 1984 Democratic
presidential nominee, said Bentsen ``has been a source of good
sense, moderation and decency throughout his years of public life.''
   ``He knows how to beat George Bush,'' said Sen. Barbara
Mikulski, D-Md. ``He did just that in 1970'' _ when Bentsen
defeated Bush for the first of three terms in the Senate.
   Bush, the Republican nominee-to-be, called Dukakis' choice of
the Senate Finance Committee chairman ``interesting'' but refused
to say more.
   Bush's supporters were quick to argue that Democrats still won't
carry the state Bush calls home _ and its 29 electoral votes _ in
the November balloting.
   ``He is desperate. He knows he can't win without carrying
Texas,'' Texas Gov. Bill Clements said of Dukakis. ``It ain't going
to work.''
   But the Jackson problem loomed as the major stumbling block
between Dukakis and seamlessly positive four days in Atlanta.
   At the NAACP, Dukakis referred to Bentsen's long committment to
civil rights.
   ``He was committed to civil rights and equal opportunities way
back then, way back then in the 1940s,'' Dukakis said.
   Bentsen then addressed the meeting, with an admonition from
Hooks.
   ``You may as well know you've got a hard act today, so do your
best,'' Hooks said. ``Many of our delegates wanted to see Jesse in
this position.''
   Former party chief and Jackson adviser John White echoed those
sentiments about his fellow Texan: ``He's got one of the best civil
rights records in the Senate. He voted against the poll tax when he
was in the Congress back in the '50s.''
   It was clear that the Democratic ticket needed to calm some
angry Jackson backers.
   ``I did think he was very rude not to let Jesse know
beforehand,'' said Beulah C. Wright of Main Line, Pa., a NAACP
delegate.
   ``I frankly think he's made life a lot more difficult for
himself and will have to work a lot harder,'' said Rep. Ron
Dellums, a Jackson supporter from California.
   Jackson spoke to NAACP Tuesday night, delivering an emotional
speech that drew cheers from the overflow crowd.
   ``I may not be on the ticket, but I'm qualified! That's what I
know! Qualified!'' Jackson shouted. ``I will never surrender.''
   The civil rights leader promised that he would press his stands
on the issues at the convention that opens Monday.
   ``We go to Atlanta not to smile and style and profile, but to
deliberate and debate our nation's priorities,'' Jackson said.
   Ann Lewis, a top Jackson adviser, said today that the
presidential hopeful will strike a positive tone at the convention.
   ``You're going to see a Jesse Jackson who is forward looking,
who's talking about the fall, who's talking about the issues,'' she
said on ``CBS This Morning.''
   Earlier Tuesday, at a news conference, Jackson insisted he was
not angry at the Dukakis decision.
   ``No, I'm too controlled, I'm too clear, I'm too mature to be
angry. I'm focused on what we must do to keep hope alive,'' he said.
   Earlier, Jackson had clearly been upset that he learned of
Dukakis' choice from reporters rather than from the Massachusetts
governor directly.
   Bush spoke to the NAACP ahead of all the Democrats, addressing
them early on Tuesday. He didn't mention Bentsen, but he did praise
Jackson.
   ``I salute him for running the race, for being heard, and he
deserves a salute from us,'' the vice president said.
   Late Tuesday, on the way to baseball's All-Star game in
Cincinnati, Bush had only a brief remark on the choice of Bentsen:
``That's interesting. That's what I think about it.''
   Dukakis often compares himself to the last president from
Massachusetts _ John F. Kennedy _ and invited more comparisons of
his decision for Bentsen with Kennedy's selection of Texas Sen.
Lyndon B. Johnson in 1960.
   Bentsen put it this way: ``The Massachusetts and the Texas axis
was good for the country and good for the Democratic Party in 1960
and it's going to be a real winner in November of '88.''
   ``There's something lucky about a Massachusetts-Texas
connection,'' said North Carolina Lt. Gov. Bob Jordan.
   ``The Boston-Austin axis is reborn,'' applauded Rep. Richard A.
Gephardt of Missouri, a former contender for the Democratic
nomination.
   ``He will help the ticket in the south and all over the
country,'' added Sen. Albert Gore Jr. of Tennessee, another former
hopeful for both the presidential and vice presidential nominations.
   Another former hopeful, Sen. Paul Simon of Illinois, said,
``When the American people get to know Lloyd Bentsen, it will
strengthen the ticket everywhere.''
   The preparations for Monday's opening session in Atlanta
intensified as construction work in the convention hall was wrapped
up. The trickle of delegates, party pros and news people arriving
in the city turned to a steady flow.
   Polls in Texas said Bentsen would help Dukakis there, but
nationally the polls said the voters knew little of the Texan.
   ``It's like dropping a rock in a pond and having no ripples. ...
They're both unknowns'' to Californians, said Golden State pollster
Mervin Field.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
