ID: 109	RANK: 65	SCORE: 6.122760
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP881023-0105 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-10-23-88 0252EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u p BC-APElectionService 56thadd   10-23 1182</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-AP Election Service, 56th add,1,230,1231</SECOND>
<HEAD>BC-Women In Office</HEAD>
<HEAD>23 Women Serving In U.S. House, 2 In U.S. Senate, 3 Are Governors</HEAD>
<HEAD>With BC-AP Election Service</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By PAMELA B. SCHMID</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Congresswoman Nancy D'Alesandro Pelosi of California, a San
Francisco Democrat, is right at home in the U.S. House _ it's where
her father had represented a Maryland congressional district many
years ago, before he became Baltimore's mayor.
   She is among 23 women serving in the U.S. House during the 100th
Congress, and all are running for re-election this year to the
101st Congress. The number of females in the 435-seat House matched
a record set in the 99th Congress (1985-87), up from 22 in the 98th
Congress and 21 in the 97th Congress.
   Pelosi was born into a prominent political family March 26,
1940. Her father, Thomas D'Alesandro Jr., was elected to the U.S.
House as a Democrat representing a Maryland district and served
from Jan. 3, 1939, to May 16, 1947, when he resigned to become
mayor of Baltimore; he was elected mayor three times, serving from
1947 to 1959.
   Pelosi was educated at Trinity College in Washington, D.C.,
receiving a bachelor's degree in political science in 1962. She
made her home in San Francisco starting in 1969. She was a
California Democratic leader, playing a major role in helping bring
the 1984 national convention to San Francisco.
   She was elected to the U.S. House at a special election in June
1987 to fill a vacancy caused by the death of Democratic Rep. Sala
G. Burton. Mrs. Burton, who died in February 1987 of complications
from cancer, also had gained the seat at a special election,
succeeding her late husband.
   Three of the nation's 50 governors are women and there are two
females in the 100-member U.S. Senate.
   The women who are governors are:
   _ Arizona's Democrat Rose Perica Mofford, who became chief
executive in April when the state Senate convicted Republican Gov.
Evan Mecham of ``high crimes, misdemeanors and malfeasance in
office'' and thus removed him from office.
   Moving up from secretary of state, she is the first female to be
her state's chief executive and only the ninth woman in American
history to become a governor.
   _ Nebraska's Republican Kay Avonne Orr, who was elected in 1986,
defeating Democrat Helen G. Boosalis, a former mayor of Lincoln. It
was the first time both major political parties in any state had
selected female nominees for governor. Mrs. Orr is the first female
to be elected Nebraska's governor, and the first Republican woman
governor in American history.
   _ Vermont's Democrat Madeleine May Kunin, who won in 1984, was
re-elected in 1986, and is seeking a third term this year. She is
the first woman to be elected Vermont's chief executive.
   In all, throughout American history, eight women have been
elected governor, while one woman (Mrs. Mofford) became chief
executive after the governor was removed from office through
impeachment and conviction, for a total of nine female governors.
   Three is the record for the most women serving as governor at
the same time. The first woman governor in the United States was
Nellie Tayloe Ross of Wyoming, a Democrat who began serving Jan. 5,
1925.
   The women in the Senate are Kansas Republican Nancy Landon
Kassebaum and Maryland Democrat Barbara Anne Mikulski, the latest
in the line of 16 females who have been either elected to the
Senate or temporarily appointed by a governor to fill a vacancy.
   Ms. Mikulski was a congresswoman from Maryland before she was
elected to the Senate in 1986. Kassebaum's father, Alfred M.
Landon, was the GOP's 1936 presidential nominee and served as
governor of Kansas. Kassebaum was elected to the Senate in 1978 and
re-elected in 1984.
   The record for the most women serving in the Senate at the same
time is two. The first woman U.S. senator was an appointed one,
Rebecca Latimer Felton of Georgia, a Democrat, who was in office
very briefly in late 1922. The first woman to win election to the
Senate was Hattie Wyatt Caraway of Arkansas, who was initially
appointed in 1931 to succeed her late husband and then was elected
in January 1932.
   Here, state by state, were the 23 women elected to the House for
the 100th Congress.
   The number after her name is her seniority ranking among other
congresswomen of her party, followed by the year she was first
elected.
   
   DEMOCRATS (12):
   _ California: Pelosi (No. 12 _ 1987) and Barbara Boxer (tie No.
8 _ 1982).
   _ Colorado: Patricia Scott Schroeder (No. 1 _ 1972).
   _ Connecticut: Barbara Bailey Kennelly (No. 7 _ January 1982).
   _ Illinois: Cardiss Robertson Collins (No. 3 _ June 1973).
   _ Louisiana: Corinne C. ``Lindy'' Boggs (No. 2 _ March 1973).
   _ Maryland: Beverly Barton Butcher Byron (No. 6 _ 1978).
   _ New York: Democrat Louise McIntosh Slaughter (tie No. 10 _
1986).
   _ Ohio: Democrats Marcia Carolyn ``Marcy'' Kaptur (tie No. 8 _
1982) and Mary Rose Oakar (No. 5 _ 1976).
   _ South Carolina: Democrat Elizabeth Johnston ``Liz'' Patterson
(tie No. 10 _ 1986).
   _ Tennessee: Democrat Marilyn Laird Lloyd (No. 4 _ 1974).
   
   REPUBLICANS (11):
   _ Connecticut: Republican Nancy Lee Johnson (tie No. 6 _1982).
   _ Hawaii: Republican Patricia Fukuda Saiki (tie No. 10 _ 1986).
   _ Illinois: Republican Lynn Morley Martin (tie No. 3 _ 1980).
   _ Kansas: Republican Janis Lenore Meyers (tie No. 8 _ 1984).
   _ Maine: Republican Olympia J. Snowe (No. 2 _ 1978).
   _ Maryland: Republican Helen Delich Bentley (tie No. 8 _ 1984),
and Republican Constance A. ``Connie'' Morella (tie No. 10 _ 1986).
   _ Nebraska: Republican Virginia Dodd Smith (No. 1 _ 1974).
   _ Nevada: Republican Barbara Farrell Vucanovich (tie No. 6 _
1982).
   _ New Jersey: Republican Margaret Scafati ``Marge'' Roukema (tie
No. 3 _ 1980).
   _ Rhode Island: Republican Claudine Cmarada Schneider (tie No. 3
_ 1980).
   In all, 110 women _ including one delegate from Hawaii before it
became a state _ have been elected to the U.S. House.
   The first woman member of Congress was Rep. Jeannette Rankin of
Montana, a Republican, elected to the House in November 1916.
   Here are the figures, by state, throughout history, on women
elected to the House:
   _ 13 from New York.
   _ 9 from California.
   _ 8 from Illinois.
   _ 7 from Maryland.
   _ 5 from Connecticut, 5 from New Jersey, 5 from South Carolina.
   _ 4 from Ohio, 4 from Tennessee.
   _ 3 from Arkansas, 3 from Georgia, 3 from Hawaii (including 1
delegate), 3 from Indiana, 3 from Kansas, 3 from Massachusetts, 3
from Pennsylvania.
   _ 2 from Louisiana, 2 from Maine, 2 from Michigan, 2 from
Oregon, 2 from Texas, 2 from Washington state.
   _ 1 from Alabama, 1 from Arizona, 1 from Colorado, 1 from
Florida, 1 from idaho, 1 from Kentucky, 1 from Minnesota, 1 from
Missouri, 1 from Montana, 1 from Nebraska, 1 from Nevada, 1 from
New Mexico, 1 from North Carolina, 1 from Oklahoma, 1 from Rhode
Island, 1 from Utah, 1 from West Virginia.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
