ID: 109	RANK: 77	SCORE: 6.002530
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880721-0001 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-21-88 2341EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u p AM-CVN--Bentsen 6thLd-Writethru a0889 07-21 1068</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-CVN--Bentsen, 6th Ld-Writethru, a0889,1,100</SECOND>
<HEAD>Bentsen Celebrates Democratic Diversity</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Inserts new 2nd-3rd grafs to UPDATE with Dukakises-Bentsens
holding hands after Dukakis speech; Inserts 2 grafs after 9th graf
bgng: In a ... to UPDATE with Dukakis quotes. Subs 15th graf bgng:
Bentsen, who ... to UPDATE.</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By STEVEN KOMAROW</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>ATLANTA (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Texas Sen. Lloyd Bentsen won by acclamation the
Democratic vice-presidential nomination Thursday and said he and
Michael Dukakis ``have differences ... but stand united'' on basic
party principles and their determination to regain control of the
White House.
   There was a thunderous ovation as Dukakis, his wife Kitty,
Bentsen and his wife Beryl Ann held hands and acknowledged the
crowd at the evening's climactic moment after Dukakis' own
acceptance speech. The band played patriotic music and the
delegates held small American flags aloft.
   Jesse Jackson and his wife Jackie later joined the group on
stage, as did some of Dukakis' other defeated rivals.
   Bentsen was the choice of the Massachusetts governor and won
Jackson's written endorsement just as his name was being entered in
nomination.
   Still, when the voice vote was taken to acclaim him the nominee,
many Jackson supporters shouted ``no,'' voicing their continued
displeasure at the absence of their candidate on the ticket.
Fifteen members of Bentsen's Texas delegation refused to join in
the celebration.
   House Speaker Jim Wright, the convention chairman, declared the
nomination approved by a two-thirds vote, and Dukakis and Bentsen
signs were thrust into the air. The signs changed to
``Dukakis-Bentsen'' before the new vice-presidential nominee could
finish his acceptance speech.
   Bentsen, in accepting the nomination, attempted to portray the
contrasts between him and the more liberal Dukakis as good for the
ticket.
   ``We Democrats do not march in lockstep behind some narrow,
rigid ideology,'' he said in a speech prepared for delivery to the
Democratic National Convention. ``We are not gray grains of oatmeal
in a bland porridge of privilege.''
   ``Of course we have differences of opinion,'' Bentsen said in an
oblique reference to the fact that he and the presidential nominee
disagree on many issues.
   ``But on the basic issues of justice and opportunity, we stand
united,'' he said.
   In a sharp attack on the Reagan-Bush administration, Bentsen
said, ``America has just passed through the ultimate epoch of
illusion, an eight-year coma in which slogans were confused with
solutions.''
   Dukakis, in his own remarks, paid tribute to Bentsen, saying he
would speak up if the National Security Council came up with the
``cockamamie idea that we should trade arms to the ayatollah for
hostages.''
   ``We're going to have a vice president named Lloyd Bentsen who
will walk into the Oval Office and say, `Mr. President, this is
outrageous. It's got to stop.''' The crowd cheered.
   Jackson supporters had threatened earlier this week to place
Jackson's name in nomination for the No. 2 spot on the ticket. But
the Dukakis and Jackson camps resolved their differences and no
nomting petition was filed.
   Jackson's last-minute statement in support of the Texan said:
``While I may disagree with both Governor Dukakis and Senator
Bentsen on some important issues, our interests converge in
building a coalition to beat the Republicans this fall.''
   Some in the audience chanted ``No Contra aid'' as he started to
speak, and a smattering of ``No Contra aid'' signs were sprinkled
throughout the audience. Bentsen has supported U.S. assistance to
the Nicaraguan rebels, which Dukakis opposes.
   After his speech, Bentsen was joined on the podium by his
family, including his 94-year-old father Lloyd. He and his wife
embraced and waved to the crowd, which clapped along with the Air
Force Hymn. They held up ``beat Bush Again'' signs and chanted that
refrain. Bentsen first won election to the Senate in 1970 by
defeating Bush.
   Bentsen, 67, made a bid for the presidential nomination in 1976,
then stayedin the Senate, two years ago becoming chairman of the
powerful Senate Finance Committee. He has since shepherded through
his panel some of the legislative initiatives the Democrats plan to
brag about this fall _ welfare reform, Medicare insurance for
catastrophic illness, and the trade bill including a 60-day advance
notice for plant closings.
   Bentsen was nominated by Rep. Dan Rostenkowski, D-Ill., and
former Rep. Barbara Jordan of Texas and Sen. Tom Daschle of South
Dakota seconded the nomination.
   ``Lloyd Bentsen has everything it takes to become one of
America's great vice presidents,'' Rostenkowski said. ``Lloyd
Bentsen is straightforward, Lloyd Bentsen is smart and, yes, Lloyd
Bentsen is tough. He knows that compromise keeps the political
process running.''
   Sen. John Glenn of Ohio, who was considered by many a more
likely choice for Dukakis, introduced Bentsen to the convention.
   ''You want to know something,'' he said. ``To get to the Senate
in 1970, Lloyd Bentsen beat George Bush. And this November, he and
Michael Dukakis will do it again.''
   Many of Bentsen's public events in his four days in Atlanta
prior to his nomination were aimed at soothing the Democrats who
had hoped Dukakis would pick someone else.
   Bentsen is more conservative than Dukakis and many Democrats on
many issues, including his support of school prayer, the Contra
rebels in Nicaragua and his opposition to gun control.
   But his acceptance speech was crafted to highlight something
nearly all the Democrats agree upon _ beating the Republicans.
   ``The Reagan-Bush administration likes to talk about prosperity.
But the farmers in Iowa don't hear them,'' he said. ``The oil field
workers in Texas and Oklahoma and Louisiana don't hear them. The
factory workers in John Glenn's Ohio don't hear them.''
   The first stop for the new Democratic ticket upon leaving
Atlanta Friday will be Bentsen's hometown of McAllen, Texas.
   Meanwhile, spokesmen for Bentsen said that past campaign
literature exaggerating the number of missions he had flown in
World War II had been corrected a few years ago.
   Official biographies put out during earlier campaigns say that
as a B-24 bomber pilot based in Italy, ``Bentsen flew 50 bomber
missions over Europe during the war.'' But Air Force records show
that he flew 35 combat missions, according pan Air Force spokesman
in Washington, Maj. Lou Figeroa.
   Jack Devore, Bentsen's press secretary, said he is not sure how
the incorrect number worked its way into the official biographies,
but that Bentsen had noticed the mistake ``a few years ago'' and
that subsequent campaign literature did not mention a specific
number of flights.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
