ID: 109	RANK: 98	SCORE: 5.799235
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880722-0032 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-22-88 0557EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r p PM-CVN--Convention-TV     07-22 0861</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-CVN--Convention-TV,850</SECOND>
<HEAD>GOP Might Get Less Coverage After Democrats' Performance</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By KATHRYN BAKER</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP Television Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>ATLANTA (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The Democrats put on a slickly produced,
prime-time ``miniseries'' for the networks, but succeeded so well
that the networks are considering cutting back on future convention
coverage.
   ABC News President Roone Arledge even suggested Thursday that
his network would cut back on coverage for the Republican National
Convention in August.
   ``If you keep the conventions in this form, obviously it's not
attracting anybody to the process,'' said Arledge. ``It's driving
people at home not to watch, to find something else rather than
watch the political process. It's not healthy for the country.''
   NBC and CBS said they would give the same coverage to the GOP as
they did to the Democrats.
   CBS even added an hour to its coverage of the closing session of
the Democratic National Convention on Thursday night, beginning at
8 p.m. EDT instead of 9. CBS viewers therefore got to see one of
the better speeches, the vibrant and stirring seconding speech for
Lloyd Bentsen delivered by former Rep. Barbara Jordan, speaking
from her wheelchair. NBC and ABC joined in mid-speech.
   CBS declined to run a campaign film on Michael Dukakis that the
other networks carried, filling in instead with commentary and a
commercial.
   There was controversy at the 1984 GOP convention when NBC was
the only network to carry an 18-minute film produced by President
Reagan's re-election campaign.
   The six-minute Dukakis film was narrated by his cousin,
Oscar-winning actress Olympia Dukakis, who introduced him on the
podium.
   ABC said it ran the Dukakis film because it was short. NBC and
CNN ran the Dukakis film as just another part of the proceedings.
   Thursday night's concluding session was Dukakis' show, and after
three days of prime-time coverage of the well-orchestrated, and
therefore mostly dull convention, the networks just let it play out
on Thursday.
   The ratings for this year's Democratic convention have been
running about 10 percent lower than the ratings for the 1984
convention. The networks carried gavel-to-gavel coverage of the
conventions until 1984, but ratings have been in a decline since
1976. That's due in part to the primary system eliminating the
drama of the nomination conventions, but also the proliferation of
video and cable providing other viewing options.
   In order to avoid unsightly conflict, the Democrats even
scripted their convention down to the minute to eliminate
controversy and get favored players prime-time exposure.
   Earlier this year, the networks were excited by the prospect of
contested nominations in both parties, and the idea of returning to
gavel-to-gavel coverage was even discussed. But by the time the
Democrats arrived in Atlanta, Michael Dukakis had even selected a
running mate, Texas Sen. Lloyd Bentsen. The only real high point of
the four nights of prime-time coverage came late on Tuesday when
Jesse Jackson delivered his speech.
   Arledge, who has been most outspoken about the generally
lackluster event, said his network's coverage, including two hours
a night of prime time, ``might be less in '92, if the situation
were identical. It might be less at the Republican convention.
Depends on what they do,'' Arledge said.
   Vice President George Bush has enough delegates for the GOP
nomination. He has not selected a running mate yet, though.
   NBC News President Lawrence K. Grossman said NBC would not cut
back on the GOP out of fairness after giving so much prime time
exposure to the Democrats, but would reassess the amount of
coverage in 1992.
   ``On a basic editorial judgment we would be hard put not to go
to an hour special a night summarizing the convention in New
Orleans, except for the fundamental issues of fairness and
balance,'' Grossman said.
   The networks are not constrained by law to give equal time
because the conventions are considered news events.
   CBS News President Howard Stringer argued that since it's
summer, most viewers would just get reruns on the networks, anyway.
He wouldn't speculate on 1992, but said the prospect of doing
prime-time coverage remains ``attractive.''
   ``This is a moment, perhaps the only moment, and there are four
days of it, when the American people can get to know the political
leaders,'' he said. ``Otherwise it's a minute-twenty and sound
bites.''
   ``There's always going to be an audience for the process of
selecting the leadership of the country,'' said CBS anchor Dan
Rather. ``On any given night, it's not going to be as big as the
audience for whatever inane sitcom is on, but some network news
department is going to cover. Bank it, bet it, if nobody else does,
CBS News is going to do it.''
   Former CBS anchor Walter Cronkite, who has been covering
conventions since 1952, agrees they have become less functional.
   ``We are in the position of covering a staged entertainment, and
it turns out the parties are not nearly as good at that as they are
at politics,'' he said.
   But he said he did not favor cutting coverage. ``I think it's a
shame the public is not more attentive to these proceedings. The
mere gathering of these people in one hall is, I think, fascinating
unto itself.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
