ID: 191	RANK: 20	SCORE: 13.946034
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910626-0058
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910626-0058.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
   African Follies: Of Chimps, Politics and Love
   ----
   By Lee Lescaze
</HL>
<DATE>
06/26/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A7
</SO>
<LP>
   How can one dislike a book whose first chapter opens, "I
never really warmed to Clovis . . . but he always claimed a
corner of my heart, largely, I suppose, because of the way he
instinctively and unconsciously cupped his genitals whenever
he was alarmed or nervous."
   On the other hand, how can one not be wary of a novel that
takes Socrates' worn observation "The unexamined life is not
worth living" as both its epigraph and final sentence.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   William Boyd writes with such charm, clarity and energy
that he overcomes whatever wariness he arouses, propelling
his story, almost unscathed, through thickets of symbolism
that would hopelessly snag a less-skilled novelist. Mr. Boyd
may not know exactly when a bag of tricks turns into excess
baggage, but "Brazzaville Beach" (Morrow, 316 pages, $21) is
a fast-moving, intricately plotted novel that further
demonstrates his great storytelling talent.
   In his first two novels, "A Good Man in Africa" and "An
Ice-Cream War," Mr. Boyd demonstrated an expert eye for the
follies of African politicians and the sad fruitlessness of
African wars. "Brazzaville Beach" is set against a
contemporary African civil war (most closely resembling
Angola's), but the conflict is subordinate to the story of a
young English scientist, Hope Clearwater, and two appalling
events that befall her -- the madness of her genius
mathematician husband and the descent into evil of the
chimpanzees she studies.
   The structure of "Brazzaville Beach" is dazzling. Mr.
Boyd's twin dramas unfold in alternating sections: Hope's
courtship and marriage told in the third person and her
African adventures in her own voice. Between the dramatic
sections, Mr. Boyd inserts bits of mathematical, zoological
and other lore. The potential for missteps is high, but Mr.
Boyd keeps his novel moving without a serious stumble. The
elan of his prose enlivens these brief accounts of the habits
of such phenomena as the wave albatross, lemmas and Fermat's
Last Theorem (its beauty lies in its unprovability).
   Even when he overloads his chimpanzee tales with symbolic
reference to the fall of man from the Garden of Eden, the
storytelling overcomes the potential for disaster.
"Brazzaville Beach" is probably the most serious novel
dealing with apes since "You Shall Know Them" by the French
writer Vercors in the 1950s. If apes are so like us, Vercors
asked, where do we draw the line on what is human and what is
ape? Mr. Boyd's question is: If chimpanzees share all but a
tiny percentage of our genetic makeup, do they share
humankind's evil? It is "Brazzaville Beach's" conceit that
Hope is the first human to witness chimpanzees murdering
their own kind, enjoying their victims' pain and eating their
dead enemies.
   Hope discovers what she calls the chimpanzee wars. She
watches in horror (just as famed chimpanzee-observer Jane
Goodall once did) as a large group hunts and destroys a
smaller group.
   Hope is a sometimes puzzling, but fascinating, heroine.
She is a woman of enormous determination who studies her
future husband from afar rather as she later watches
chimpanzees. She questions her behavior, wondering when she
has done the right thing as she recollects the events of her
life. Still young, certified by academic degrees, she finds
life on the remote beach not stultifying, but satisfying.
After the great passions she has witnessed, quiet is welcome.
   No passion in this novel is greater than her husband
John's ache for fame in mathematics.
   Hope, herself, watches the chimpanzee wars with growing
excitement, knowing that her name is likely to be associated
forever with this evil turn. But, this is not a novel in
which great expectations are rewarded; John's hopes are
crushed and Hope also has wounds to lick as she rests in her
shack by the sea. Fame can be stolen in many ways.
   "Brazzaville Beach" is highly entertaining, but darker
than Mr. Boyd's sparklingly witty first two African novels.
His wit surfaces most often here when he turns to the
cynicism and incompetence of the civil war being conducted
around the chimpanzee reserve. When Hope and a colleague are
seized, their young captors are wearing identical track-suit
tops reading: "Atomique Boum." Her colleague prods Hope to
find out what it means. "Relax," she says, returning with the
information. "We've been captured by a volleyball team."
   Hope's lover is a gentle Egyptian pilot who flies MiGs for
the government's air force. The guerrillas' guns aren't very
dangerous, he tells Hope. "Your ground crew is your greatest
enemy."
   Along with its futility, the war has its cruelties. One of
Mr. Boyd's most sympathetic characters is a doctor who leads
the boys of "Atomique Boum." He understands his country's
needs and, what's more, knows how to fight a guerrilla war.
But "Brazzaville Beach" is no kinder to political dreams than
it is to scholarly ones.
   In the end, the mood of "Brazzaville Beach" is not unlike
that of the film "Casablanca" and other great romances. It is
a survivor's tale. As Hope examines her life she knows that
her pilot lover made a wise choice of personal motto: "Never
be too happy."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
