ID: 191	RANK: 22	SCORE: 13.275682
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890103-0191 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-01-03-89 1353EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>s a BC-APN--AnimalActivists Adv15-1stAdd   01-03 0994</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-APN--Animal Activists, Adv 15-1st Add,1027</SECOND>
<HEAD>$Adv15</HEAD>
<HEAD>AGENCIES AND RADIO OUT</HEAD>
<HEAD>For Release Sunday, Jan. 15</HEAD>
<HEAD>ROCKVILLE, Md.: make choices.''</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   Cave, a former professor of philosophy, exempts American Indians
and Eskimos, whose survival is dependent on the hunting of game.
   The movement is marked by a hyperbolic rhetoric reminiscent of
the '60s. Some activists call themselves freedom fighters for
animals. Newkirk is happy to reiterate a statement some others wish
she had never said in the first place.
   ``I can't even remember it exactly,'' says British-born Newkirk,
``but I stand by it l00 percent. What I said was a pig is a boy is a
dog is a rat in that they are all sentient beings, they are all
capable of suffering. That is indisputable.''
   The various groups are not above squabbling, especially over
funding.
   Cave says the Humane Society of the United States, which has an
annual budget of $9 million, ``has a stranglehold on the funds that
is totally unethical. Its president, John Hoyt, is paid $139,000 a
year. The Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals has a fortune sitting idle in investments. They could wipe
out the pet overpopulation in one year if they would use some of
that money.''
   The MSPCA, founded in 1839, has an endowment of $42 million and
spent $15 million last year supporting three veterinarian hospitals,
nine shelters and various educational projects.
   The Humane Society doesn't support some of the statements of the
radicals, and deplores the violence.
   ``We like to be taken seriously when we go to the Hill,'' says a
Humane Society spokeswoman. ``We don't like to be seen as frothing
at the mouth.''
   Cave, who lives on a $10,000 salary, part of his group's total
budget of $350,000, led the Cornell campaign. He calls it a landmark
in that the challenge was not about sloppy laboratory conditions,
but the very nature of the research.
   He maintained that barbituate addiction is a complex human
problem and that it was inappropriate to expose cats _ or any animal
_ to the horrors of withdrawal, a self-inflicted condition in humans.
   Cave is now attacking a glue-sniffing experiment using monkeys at
New York University Hospital. In nice weather, Trans-Species has 14
tables out every weekend on New York City streets explaining its
philosophy.
   The biomedical research community has reacted by forming a
Washington-based educational and lobbying group.
   ``We're not talking here about little old ladies in blue hair,''
says Frankie Trull, president of the Foundation for Biomedical
Research. ``We have heard of over 50 death threats. The research
community is so unprepared for the animal rights movement. First of
all, they have jobs and they don't have time to hang out at shopping
centers with signs.
   ``It is costing millions in increased security, replacing animals
that were stolen and buildings that were torched. It is no laughing
matter.''
   The research scientist at Cornell, Dr. Michiko Okamoto, refuses
to talk to reporters. Her colleagues say she was shocked by the
developments.
   Dr. Michael E. DeBakey, a cardiovascular surgeon who became a
household name, has emerged as one spokesman for the researchers.
Now 80, but working daily from 4 a.m. till midnight, DeBakey says he
occasionally gets death threats. He sees the animal rights movement
as one with great emotional appeal, but one that is not telling the
whole story.
   ``These people are intimidating a lot of people,'' DeBakey says.
``If you want to become a Jehovah's Witness and refuse blood from
another person, I have no argument. I don't agree with it, but I
respect your right to do it. What I object to here is the attempt to
enforce this view on others.
   ``I have yet to see a patient who refused treatment from research
gained from animals. Do these people plan on turning down such
treatment if they need it?''
   DeBakey says his surgical breakthroughs, which saved thousands of
lives, resulted from experimentation on dogs.
   ``Almost everything in the cardiovascular field was developed
through animal research. You can't use cells or cell cultures or
computers.''
   The surgeon says animal activists ``are not improving the
conditions of animals used in research, They are pricing it out of
the market. Twelve states have now passed laws prohibiting the use
of pound animals. Yet the taxpayer spends $600 million a year caring
for pound animals and putting them to sleep.
   ``The activists have great political strength and slick
organizations. They say alternative methods can be used. They are
wrong.''
   DeBakey worries about the Cornell decision.
   ``It is disturbing to see an institution of higher learning cave
in,'' DeBakey says. ``The integrity of that academic institution is
eroded.''
   Medical scientists point to the great strides made using animal
models. Everything from polio vaccine to treatments for such
diseases as diabetes, cancer, and heart disease have benefited from
research on animals.
   The activists insist the same advances could have been made using
different kinds of research.
   Dr. Frederick King, director of the Yerkes Primate Center at
Emory University in Atlanta, also a target of death threats, is
eager to speak out. Researchers at his institution are injecting
chimpanzees with the deadly AIDS virus (So far it has not jumped
their immune barrier, but King says that does not mean it will not
with a longer incubation).
   The animals rights militants say that is not necessary since
there are thousands of dying human victims who would gladly allow
themselves to be experimented upon.
   ``Forget the ethical questions,'' Newkirk says. ``It's bad
science. They are retarding the AIDS research by using animals.''
   King dismisses that argument. He says it's yet another case of
non-scientists throwing in their non-scientific opinion.
   ``My question is where have all the moderates gone?'' King says.
``Even Jane Goodall, who came here about a year ago, has turned to
their side. She's a one-agenda person, fanatically attached to
chimps.
   ``The moderates all seem to have gone into the woodwork.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Sunday, Jan. 15</NOTE>
</DOC>
