ID: 191	RANK: 27	SCORE: 12.245558
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890213-0185 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-02-13-89 1359EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>s a BC-APN--YerkesPrimates Adv26-1stAdd   02-13 0942</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-APN--Yerkes Primates, Adv 26-1st Add,0967</SECOND>
<HEAD>$Adv26</HEAD>
<HEAD>AGENCIES AND RADIO OUT</HEAD>
<HEAD>For Release Sunday, Feb. 26</HEAD>
<HEAD>ATLANTA: clinically ill.</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   ``We hope that if we can figure out what the devil provides that
protection, we can contract a vaccine that provides protection,''
Gordon says.
   Around the corner from the mangabeys is a family of pygmy
chimpanzees, part of an ambitious breeding program. The animals
sometimes don't breed easily in captivity, and Yerkes researchers
are proud of their eight pygmy births.
   Across the grounds is a group of full-size chimpanzees, being
watched in a food-and-behavior study and also part of the National
Institutes of Health's five-institution National Chimpanzee Breeding
and Research Program. Researchers figure the animals, so closely
related to man, may be needed someday for AIDS research.
   In the laboratories at the main Yerkes station in Atlanta,
scientists are studying various primates in efforts to combat
Parkinson's disease, eye disorders and even tooth decay.
   The Parkinson's research, King says, is one of the center's
crowning achievements since he arrived as director in 1978. Yerkes
scientists were the first to demonstrate the feasibility of
implanting fetal brain tissue that produces dopamine _ a compound
which acts as a transmitter in the nervous system _ into the brain
of Parkinson's patients as a treatment for the debilitating nerve
disease. Now, doctors in several countries are trying the same
technique in humans.
   ``I consider this one of our major advancements,'' King says.
``We were the first. It's a big step in the right direction.''
   Other achievements at Yerkes in the past 10 years:
   _An anti-inflammatory drug, effective in rhesus monkeys in
stopping the progression of periodontal disease, is now being tested
in human patients at Emory's dental school.
   _Yerkes scientists and Emory ophthalmologists, using primates,
are studying methods of post-surgery treatment for children born
with cataracts. Their work has shown that a traditional technique of
patching the normal eye, forcing the child to use the operated-upon
eye, may be detrimental.
   _Researchers using monkeys, chimps and human volunteers have
found structural and chemical changes in cervical secretions during
the menstrual cycle, which could someday lead to new methods of
birth control or promoting fertility.
   _Language studies in chimpanzees yielded a language system _ with
visual symbols, a computer-operated keyboard and step-by-step
teaching strategies _ that is now being used by cooperating Georgia
State University experts to teach severely retarded children to
communicate. The work was spearheaded by two psychologists from
Yerkes and Georgia State University, Dr. Duane Rumbaugh and his
wife, Dr. Sue Savage-Rumbaugh.
   ``The work of the Rumbaughs must stand very high in the
achievements of this center,'' King says.
   King, a neuroscientist and psychologist, enjoys explaining that
the Rumbaughs were not, at first, looking for a way to help retarded
kids; they were looking at apes.
   ``That began as an attempt to explore some fundamental questions
about the use and capability of great apes to use symbols,'' he
says. ``The important thing is that it started out as a fundamental
scientific project, with nothing in sight in terms of application.''
   He compares the accomplishment to Alexander Fleming's accidental
discovery of penicillin's properties during routine mold studies.
   ``It is that kind of science that has brought us out of medieval
fear and superstition into enlightenment and our ability to deal
more effectively with the world around us,'' King saysd.
   King acknowledges that animals die at Yerkes, but he maintains
they die in the pursuit of what researchers believe is a greater
good. Most people, King says, believe that way, too.
   ``I believe in the sanity of the people of this country,'' he
says. ``This is a utilitarian nation. That utilitarian sense, and
the recognition of what animal contributions have been _ and the
recognition that scientists are not ogres, but care for living
beings other than humans _ I think will lead the nation to recognize
eventually the benefits of science.
   ``This nation will support, and continue to support, life
sciences in general and medical and behavioral sciences in specific,
with primates or whatever other species. I have that confidence.''
   King bristles when asked whether, in retrospect, some experiments
have proven to be unnecessary killing of animals.
   ``Do we have experiments that fail? Of course we do,'' he says.
``It's part of science.
   ``If we knew what was going to happen for sure, we wouldn't do
the experiment! Nobody wants to do stupid, meaningless work.''
   King's stresses in his lectures that animal researchers are not
extremists. The extremists, he insists, are those who would
needlessly butcher and torture animals _ or those who would ban any
scientific use of animals at all.
   ``In all sincerity,'' he says, ``scientists occupy the middle
road of compassion and humane treatment...I don't know any scientist
or institution that doesn't want to reduce that discomfort or pain
to a minimum, but at the same time recognizes that human priorities,
with regard to using animals in research, must come first.''
   King envisions a day when he and Yerkes can put the debate behind
them and get on with their work, and his goals go beyond behavioral
and medical research.
   Without prodding, a discussion of Yerkes quickly turns to King's
two passions: the endangered South American rain forests _ ``without
those, neither the primates nor other species will survive long'' _
and global population control, as man's increasing presence taxes
his planet's resources.
   ``I would like to see us move into the area of population
concerns,'' he says, conceding that for a traditional primate
research center, such work poses ``a difficult question.''
   ```Primate center' doesn't just mean monkeys and apes,'' he said.
``It means humans, too.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Sunday, Feb. 26.</NOTE>
</DOC>
