ID: 191	RANK: 42	SCORE: 10.628382
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910926-0118
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910926-0118.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Few Bears Have
   A Human Following
   As Big as Gerry's
   ---
   She Even Gets an Entourage
   During Hunting Season;
   A Biologist Explains Why
   ----
   By David Stipp
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
09/26/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<GV>
AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENT (AGD)
</GV>
<RE>
MINNESOTA (MN)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   ELY, Minn. -- Biologist Lynn Rogers knows black bears the
way Dian Fossey knew gorillas. Over some 22 years he has
tracked them, crawled into their dens, slept next to them in
the wild, been charged by them and shared food with them.
   Through his eyes, their full complexity first emerged:
Neither Gentle Bens nor fierce attackers, they are generally
as shy as rabbits, curious as raccoons, smart as dogs,
irascible as blue jays and contrary as cats. Demonstrating
the latter, one lumbers out of the woods near this little
town reeking of rotten fish. She had smeared fish on her head
like styling jell, perversely presenting herself soon after
Dr. Rogers had declared that it is a myth black bears are
smelly.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But Dr. Rogers, a U.S. Forest Service researcher who
studies bears in the Superior National Forest near here, is
about to teach the stinker a lesson. He tails her as she
follows her nose to a campground with a tent, picnic table,
ice chest and, for the moment, no people. "This is a dream
come true" for a bear, he murmurs.
   As she closes in on the food, he jolts her with an
electric "shock" collar he has strapped around her neck and
controls from a hand-held radio transmitter. She bounds out
of the camp, plops down 50 feet away, shakes her head like a
dog and moans. "I'm mean to that bear {who he has named
Gerry} because I like her," says Dr. Rogers, an affable,
burly man who earlier shocked his own neck to make sure the
collar wouldn't hurt a bear.
   Gerry is a "nuisance" bear, one of a growing number of the
omnivores that amble into human habitats to forage for
marshmallows, toothpaste and eggs Benedict. Black-bear
country, encompassing most of North America's large forested
tracts, has been invaded by ski condos, vacation homes and
retirement cottages -- food centers that attract bears the
way bug zappers lure insects. The result is carnage:
Intruding bears almost never hurt people but often are gunned
down by homeowners.
   Black bears aren't an endangered species, and Dr. Rogers,
52, has spent his career trying to keep it that way. His
early studies, indicating bear numbers were declining due to
unregulated hunting, helped inspire laws that make bears
state-regulated game animals with limited hunting seasons.
While pioneering techniques to study bears (such as mapping
their movements with radio-tracking collars), he has defined
habitat ingredients that forest managers must preserve for
bears to thrive. In recent years, he has conducted close-up
studies of bear life that have helped show how bears and
people can coexist. Prominent Harvard biologist E.O. Wilson
compares his work to Jane Goodall's landmark chimpanzee
studies in Africa.
   Some excerpts from the Rogers canon: Black-bear society is
a matriarchy in which mothers establish and oversee
territories of several square miles, parceling out pieces to
female offspring like dowries. Among the flora bears need
most are mature white pines -- mothers use them as day-care
centers for posting cubs out of harm's way while foraging.
Black-bear mothers, unlike grizzlies, don't aggressively
defend cubs.
   If a black bear approaches, stand tall, roar and wing a
rock at it, advises Dr. Rogers. The animals very rarely
attack. Dr. Rogers says he has often been lunged at -- and
even run over by a frantic bear -- but never injured. Once,
he recalls, the mother of a squawking cub he was holding
unexpectedly rushed him. He gingerly held the cub out. She
gently took it in her mouth and walked away.
   While not given to violent crimes, black bears have
larceny in their hearts. To help deal with that, Mr. Rogers
is developing a special dumpster designed to thwart a typical
bear trick -- jumping up and down on the top to bend open the
edges. For hardened thieves, the shock collar he has just
started testing may help.
   He is investigating it as a way to rehabilitate nuisance
bears of all kinds, including the endangered grizzly. His
first trainee, however, is Gerry. This small black bear has a
unique affinity for humans -- in fact, she may be the only
wild bear a person can give a bear hug to.
   Gerry is one of several "human habituated" black bears
that Dr. Rogers and assistants have spent so much time with
that the animals now mostly ignore people following them.
But, like more typical bears, other habituated ones shrink
from being touched and "bluff" charging at humans that get
too close. The bluff charge is an explosive lunging, blowing
and chomping of teeth that doesn't mean "You're about to die,
yuppie scum," as one might assume without Dr. Rogers there to
translate -- but rather, "I'm nervous, please stand back."
   Gerry, however, doesn't mind being touched, and sometimes
even paws and mouths friendly people like a playful pup --
though quickly backs off when growled at by people who don't
want to play. Rolling over the 175-pound, three-fourths-grown
bear to take her temperature rectally, Dr. Rogers explains
that she is enabling him to gather unprecedented data on bear
metabolism -- a subject of longstanding interest to medical
researchers. During hibernation, for example, bear bone and
muscle tissue is continually renewed to prevent atrophy, a
trick physicians would like to replicate in people with
osteoporosis and other degenerative diseases.
   Gerry also is ideal for the shock-collar study: "If we can
condition this bear to stay out of trouble, we can condition
any bear," says Dr. Rogers. While he has tailed her today,
she has wandered through a pickup basketball game, opened the
door of a government building and sneaked in, flirtatiously
rested a paw on a reporter's leg and unsuccessfully tried to
make friends with a barking dog. (Most of the time, however,
she rambled in the woods doing normal bear things: Tearing
into a hornets nest, resting, climbing trees to get at seeds,
resting, marking her territory with urine and then taking a
long nap.)
   Gerry's sociability originated in cubhood. She was
orphaned when her mother bolted -- freaked out by curious
people who gathered at her den -- and spent several crucial,
formative weeks with Dr. Rogers and other humans as they
scouted for another wild mother to adopt her. They succeeded;
she was raised wild. But she retained fond feelings for
humans.
   Most people in these parts say they adore Gerry. Asked
about her, one resident proudly pulls out a wallet photo of
herself standing next to the bear. But Dr. Rogers fears his
habituated bears would be sitting ducks for visiting hunters,
so last year he organized local volunteers to walk with the
bears through much of the six-week, fall hunting season. This
year, dozens of bear walkers have flown in from across the
U.S. and overseas, sent by a Boston-based group called
Earthwatch, which organizes volunteers to help on scientific
projects. They have served as escorts and helped conduct the
first detailed, round-the-clock study of bear life over many
days.
   But earlier this month, one of Dr. Rogers's
human-habituated bears, a mother of two cubs, wandered
outside her usual territory and was shot by a hunter. It was
a blow to his research -- and something like losing an old
friend.
   Today, Gerry's army is in full force. Pied-piper-like, she
has attracted a small crowd of youngsters, including Dr.
Rogers's two daughters, ages 9 and 10, who have come to see
the shock-collar experiment. With them are Earthwatch
volunteers, watching her every move and madly scribbling
notes. Dr. Rogers leads with the shock controller. After a
few lessons, Gerry bypasses picnic tables and doors, casting
longing glances at them and ruefully whimpering. Finally, a
delighted Dr. Rogers joshingly asks whether he should zap her
for doing cute things that attract people. A shout goes up:
"No]"
</TEXT>
</DOC>
