ID: 191	RANK: 66	SCORE: 9.035512
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911202-0091
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911202-0091.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
   Adorable Pit Bulls, Chimps Who Won't Chat
   ----
   By Jim Holt
</HL>
<DATE>
12/02/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10
</SO>
<LP>
   Authors who write books about animals tend to be a pretty
fruity lot. Vicki Hearne, however, is assuredly the
exception. A veteran dog-trainer, horse poet and sometime
Yale professor, Ms. Hearne is mad, bad and dangerous to know.
Over the years this maverick has deployed her fierce
intellect against a variety of groups that one would have
guessed to be her natural allies -- notably the Humane
Society and the animal-rights lobby. Above all, she has made
herself the shining paladin of the pit bull.
   The pit bull] you gasp. How could anyone with a shred of
humanity defend that notorious mauler of old ladies and
relisher of infant flesh? As countless horror stories
circulated by the media attest, these curs from hell have
viciousness bred into their genes. They are equipped with
doublejointed jaws so they can hold on to their victim with
the front teeth while chewing away with the hind. And they
are found mainly in inner-city ghettos, where their primary
role is to guard dope dens.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   These are among the myths responsible for the "pit bull
hysteria" that seized this country in the '80s and has yet to
let go (Britain is the latest victim). If you take any of
them seriously, you will feel very foolish when you read Ms.
Hearne's latest animal tract-cum-philosophical meditation,
"Bandit: Dossier of a Dangerous Dog" (HarperCollins, 320
pages, $21.95). Ostensibly the story of how the author
rescued a perfectly noble pit bull from imminent liquidation
by the state of Connecticut, this book is chaotic and muddled
and learned and brilliant and wonderful.
   It all started one day in July 1987 in Stamford. An
elderly black man named Lamon Redd was sitting on his porch
with his pit bull Bandit when a hysterical neighbor invaded
the premises and assaulted one of his boarders with a broom.
Being a reasonable beast, Bandit bit the neighbor. For this
he was deemed by state authorities to be an uncontrollable
threat to human life. Six weeks later an order for his
destruction was issued. Mr. Redd hired a lawyer to defend his
dog, whereupon the author was called in as an expert witness.
   Before long Ms. Hearne won possession of Bandit, aiming to
show that with a little training he would emerge a virtual
Rin Tin Tin. What follows is an often hilarious account of
her struggles against a cast of assorted knaves and boobies
determined to do in Bandit, interwoven with fascinating, if
sometimes maddening, reflections on everything from the
nature of poetic language to the philosophy of physics. Ms.
Hearne writes in a giddy, self-indulgent, nonlinear style
that few authors should be allowed to get away with
("Wittgenstein invites us to understand that a dog's
sincerity is not something chosen . . . but he is wrong, for
there is: Bandit, oh, Bandit]"). But such is her intelligence
and brio that this grates only at its most excessive.
   One cannot help coming away from this book with an utterly
transformed understanding of dogs, as its author makes all
sorts of canine propositions that would normally be dismissed
as "anthropomorphic" seem plausible, even true. The pit bull,
in particular, is revealed as a creature of rare power,
restraint, beauty and purity of heart -- a fit symbol of
civilization (the Capitoline wolf responsible for the
founding of Rome, we are informed, was in reality a pit
bull). I must say that upon encountering a rather awesome pit
bull on the street shortly after absorbing the lessons of
"Bandit," I cowered somewhat less than usual.
   Ms. Hearne attributes wide communicative skills to dogs,
as well as some grasp of moral philosophy and metaphysics.
(My little dachshund has shown himself to be something of a
deconstructionist, at least as regards tennis shoes.) But
even she, I think, would admit that dogs cannot be trained to
talk. Nor, for that matter, can apes, chimpanzees or dolphins
-- despite the amusing history of attempts by would-be Dr.
Dolittles that is detailed in Michael Bright's "Barks, Roars
and Siren Songs: How Animals Talk to Us and How We Talk Back"
(Birch Lane, 232 pages, $17.95).
   Not that there haven't been apparent successes -- Washoe
the chimp and Koko the gorilla, most famously. In the '60s,
scientists taught these two celebrated simians to use a
vocabulary of a couple of hundred items in American Sign
Language. They seemed to get positively cocky in their
linguistic behavior, tossing off insults, joking, even lying.
   Then along came Nim Chimpsky (named, of course, after the
linguist Noam Chomsky), another "talking" chimpanzee who gave
the game away. Careful analysis of Nim's signing activity
revealed that language for him was not a method of conveying
information, but merely a complicated system for obtaining
rewards. Moreover he had no grasp of grammar: what looked
like sentences turned out to be little more than random
strings of signs.
   Dolphins do not appear to hold out much hope for
human-beast causerie either, despite our romanticized view of
them as floating hobbits. Mr. Bright does see a bright side
to all this, however. If we could converse with animals, he
points out, we would have a lot of explaining to do for the
terrible way we treat them. To which I would only add that I
am grateful to be spared the classic humiliation of losing an
argument with a talking mule.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
