ID: 252	RANK: 69	SCORE: 6.258371
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910506-0178
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910506-0178.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Law -- Legal Beat:
   U.S. Jury Rejects Most Allegations
   In Northwest Airlines Pricing Suit
   ----
   By Asra Q. Nomani and Christi Harlan
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
05/06/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B10
</SO>
<CO>
   GE NWA RD SC WNEWS
</CO>
<MS>
CONGLOMERATES (CGL)
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
ENERGY (ENE)
FINANCIAL (FIN)
INDUSTRIAL (IDU)
</MS>
<IN>
AIRLINES (AIR)
CONGLOMERATES (CGL)
INDUSTRIAL &amp; COMMERCIAL SERVICES, LEASING, CLEANING (ICS)
LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)
OIL, INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)
PETROLEUM (PET)
SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS (SAL)
INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL SERVICES (SVC)
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
</IN>
<NS>
LAW &amp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)
PERSONNEL ANNOUNCEMENTS, PROMOTIONS, APPOINTMENTS (PER)
ACQUISITIONS &amp; MERGERS, TAKEOVERS, BOARD BATTLES (TNM)
</NS>
<GV>
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)
</GV>
<RE>
ARKANSAS (AR)
CALIFORNIA (CA)
CONNECTICUT (CT)
FLORIDA (FL)
ILLINOIS (IL)
MINNESOTA (MN)
NETHERLANDS (NL)
GREAT BRITAIN (UK)
</RE>
<LP>
   A federal jury rejected most allegations that Northwest
Airlines monopolized markets from its Minneapolis-St. Paul
hub but ruled that the airline had illegally priced some
flights below cost.
   The civil case, brought by a tour operator, represented
the first known legal challenge of a so-called fortress hub,
where one carrier controls so many gates and takeoff and
landing slots that it has a dominant share of the market. On
balance, the case appears to be a setback for airline critics
who charge that some carriers unfairly compete in such hubs.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   International Tour Arrangers, an Eagan, Minn., tour firm,
had claimed that during the summer of 1988 the NWA Inc. unit
successfully sought to monopolize tour-company travel to
certain markets through predatory pricing, a violation of
federal antitrust laws that involves pricing below cost. The
company, among other things, charged that Northwest cut its
lowest round-trip charter fare to Anchorage from Minneapolis
to $329 from $429. On that claim, the St. Paul jury awarded
the tour company $235,000, and under treble damages, the
amount climbed to $705,000.
   In all, the jury ordered Northwest Airlines to pay $2.4
million to the plaintiff, which had sought $55 million. "It
is striking because predatory pricing cases usually aren't
won," said Garret Rasmussen, an antitrust lawyer and partner
at Patton, Boggs in Washington, D.C.
   However, because the jury found in favor of Northwest on
several broader antitrust claims, the carrier said it
considered the result a "big victory." A Northwest spokesman
added, "The larger issue of monopolization and the driving up
of prices was flatly rejected."
   Northwest, which will appeal the part of the case that it
lost, has an estimated 80% market share at headquarters hub
of Minneapolis-St. Paul. Other such fortress hubs for other
airlines include St. Louis, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh and
Atlanta.
   The issue has broader interest. The Justice Department has
been conducting several antitrust investigations into airline
pricing and airport hubs since 1989. A department spokeswoman
said those investigations continue. The airlines also are
facing class-action suits filed following disclosure of the
Justice Department probes.
   International Tour Arrangers also won a claim that
Northwest intentionally defrauded it during the winter of
1986 over terms and conditions for charter aircraft. The jury
awarded the tour company $850,000 for damages, and another
$850,000 for punitive damages.
   ---
   ARKANSAS THRIFT'S former chief counsel found guilty in
thrift-loan case.
   E. Harley Cox Jr., longtime general counsel at the failed
FirstSouth F.A. and a former president of the Arkansas Bar
Association, was convicted of 15 separate federal charges,
including two counts of conspiracy, related to loans that led
to FirstSouth's collapse in 1986.
   The charges, contained in an indictment returned in
February in federal court in Little Rock, Ark., accused Mr.
Cox of helping FirstSouth's officers conceal the thrift's
worsening condition from federal thrift regulators. Some of
those charges involved transfers of overdue loans from the
thrift's books to companies controlled by Mr. Cox.
   Mr. Cox, 60 years old, is the third top official of
FirstSouth to be convicted of crimes related to the collapse
of the thrift, which had $1.86 billion in assets when it
failed. FirstSouth's former chairman, Howard J. Weichern Jr.,
is serving a five-year prison term for concealing a secret
loan agreement from regulators, and the thrift's former
president, Roderick D. Reed III, has pleaded guilty to a
conspiracy charge related to the secret loan agreement.
   An attorney for Mr. Cox couldn't immediately be reached
for comment. A sentencing date hasn't been set for Mr. Cox.
   ---
   ARTIST'S CONSENT ruled necessary before property owners
destroy murals.
   A California appeals court said that paintings on walls
are protected by state statute and can't be destroyed before
giving artists an opportunity to preserve them, if possible.
A state law provides that anyone who creates a work of fine
art "of recognized quality" must be notified if there is some
chance of removing the work before the wall is torn down or
otherwise altered.
   Similar laws exist under the federal government and in
eight other states, but apparently no other court has issued
an opinion about whether murals are covered, lawyers said. In
ruling that they are, Judge Norman Epstein of the California
Court of Appeals explicitly narrowed his order to exclude
graffiti.
   Although the law applies to art that attaches to a
building, it "obviously" doesn't apply to illegal wall
scribblings, which are "hardly classifiable as `fine art,'
and which are the subject of several criminal laws," Judge
Epstein wrote.
   However, lawyers cautioned that as spray-painted insignia
become more accepted as art, property owners may find
themselves facing court challenges from graffiti writers. "If
a graffito rose to the level of recognized art, it would be
protected. If {artist} David Hockney went out with a can of
spray paint downtown, I think you'd have a tough case," said
UCLA law professor Stephen Urice.
   The ruling revives a lawsuit by three Los Angeles artists
against Shell Oil Co., which commissioned a gas station wall
mural in 1980 and knocked most if it down several years later
to make room for a parking lot. Lawyers for the oil concern,
a unit of Royal Dutch/Shell Group, successfully argued at
trial that applying the statute to murals, and not just to
traditional paintings, would be excessively onerous to
property owners.
   Amy Neiman, a Los Angeles attorney who argued on appeal
for the artists, said that the statute "isn't burdensome by
any stretch, because all it requires is for the building
owner to notify the artist and give them an opportunity to
remove the work." If the artist doesn't do so within 90 days,
then the owner may destroy it, she said.
   In this case, the artists had convinced the trial judge
that the mural would have been removable from the wall, using
special chemical processes. That issue wasn't brought before
the appellate court.
   Shell spokeswoman Sherry Ahrens said the company plans to
appeal to the California Supreme Court, and couldn't comment
further.
   ---
   VEHICULAR HOMICIDE CHARGES dismissed in Florida seatbelt
case.
   Ramiro de Jesus Rodriguez of Hialeah, Fla., was criminally
charged in the autowreck death of his 3-year-old daughter,
Veronica, who wasn't strapped into a child-restraint seat.
But on Friday, Circuit Judge Sidney Shapiro of Miami
dismissed the case, saying there was not enough evidence to
convict. The judge issued a decision without submitting the
case to the jury.
   Florida law requires that all children wear a seatbelt or
be strapped into a car seat while traveling in an automobile.
The civil penalty for violating the law is a $37 fine. But
prosecutors sought to convict Mr. Rodriguez of vehicular
homicide, arguing that Mr. Rodriguez's reckless driving and
failure to use the car seat merited criminal charges. He
faced up to five years in prison if convicted.
   Mr. Rodriguez, a Nicaraguan immigrant, said Veronica was
sick and wanted to be held by her mother while they drove to
a store for medicine. The car collided with a van at an
intersection. Veronica died later at a hospital from severe
head injuries.
   The case attracted nationwide attention because Mr.
Rodriguez was believed to be the first parent in the U.S. to
face a criminal trial under such circumstances. Last year,
adverse publicity in a similar case in California led
prosecutors there to drop the charges.
   Reemberto Diaz, a Hialeah attorney for Mr. Rodriguez, said
he believes that the case may discourage other prosecutions
from being brought. He said his client "was relieved that the
case was over with, but he will never be over the pain of the
loss of his child."
   Sally Weintraub, the prosecutor in the case, said she was
disappointed by the judge's decision. She said Mr.
Rodriguez's behavior should not be excused merely because he
was Veronica's father.
   "The public's emphasis was on his suffering and not the
unnecessary loss of life of this three-year-old child in our
community," she said.
   ---
   LAYOFFS, BREAKUPS and merger talks roil Kansas City law
firms.
   Five lawyers were laid off last week in the Kansas City
office of St. Louis-based Armstrong, Teasdale, Schlafly,
Davis &amp; Dicus, leaving 28 lawyers in the outpost established
in January 1989. Armstrong Teasdale said the layoffs
reflected "the contraction of real estate and commercial
transactions in Kansas City."
   Also last week, Kansas City's second-largest law firm,
Stinson, Mag &amp; Fizzell, announced it was dissolving its
six-month-old merger with Gilmore &amp; Bell, a small firm
specializing in municipal bonds. Stinson Mag managing partner
Lawrence Berkowitz said the merger ran aground because of
conflicting client interests and incompatible office leases.
Stinson Mag's eight municipal bond lawyers left the firm to
join Gilmore &amp; Bell, Mr. Berkowitz said.
   Elsewhere in the city, the chairman, president and a third
lawyer from Linde Thomson Langworthy Kohn &amp; Van Dyke
announced they were leaving the firm to join the Kansas City
office of St. Louis-based Bryan, Cave, McPheeters &amp;
McRoberts, the largest law firm in Missouri. Bryan Cave now
has 23 lawyers in its 2 1/2-year-old Kansas City office.
   Meanwhile, merger talks are under way between 70-lawyer
Smith, Gill, Fisher &amp; Butts and 102-lawyer Blackwell Sanders
Matheny Weary &amp; Lombardi. The firms' respective managing
partners, David W. Butts and William H. Sanders Sr., say the
talks have arisen because both firms are strong and growing,
with similar interests in corporate work and litigation.
   ---
   KIRKLAND &amp; ELLIS named Ruben Castillo, regional counsel at
the Mexican American Legal Defense and Education Fund in
Chicago, a partner. Prior to his tenure with the fund, Mr.
Castillo worked as an assistant U.S. attorney. The move is
unusual for Chicago-based Kirkland &amp; Ellis, said partner
Daniel W. Vittum Jr, because "we don't do much lateral
hiring."
   ---
   NOTED: General Electric Co., continuing its efforts to
attract big-firm lawyers to its in-house legal department,
appointed Maura Abeln Touhey general counsel of its GE
Plastics unit. Ms. Touhey, 35 years old, is a partner in the
Miami office of the law firm Baker &amp; McKenzie, where she
heads the office's banking and finance department.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
