ID: 137	RANK: 46	SCORE: 6.208515
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880429-0154 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-04-29-88 1410EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a PM-JetBlast 4thLd-Writethru a0588 04-29 1061</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Jet Blast, 4th Ld - Writethru, a0588,1086</SECOND>
<HEAD>One Person Missing, 60 Injured In Jetliner Explosion</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Inserts 2 grafs after 6th graf, `However, sources ...,' to
UPDATE with comments today by FAA official. Picks up in 7th graf,
`Another passenger ...'</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos MAUX3, HU2, LaserGraphic
NY9</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By BRUCE DUNFORD</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>KAHULUI, Hawaii (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   A mysterious explosion ripped open an
Aloha Airlines jet ``like a convertible'' at 24,000 feet, injuring
60 people and throwing or blowing a flight attendant to her death
before the pilot landed safely.
   ``There was big bang when it happened and everybody looked up
and we were looking at blue sky,'' said passenger Bill Fink of
Honolulu.
   The Boeing 737, with one of its two engines aflame and about 15
to 20 feet of its cabin exposed behind the cockpit and down to the
level of the passenger seats, flew for 25 miles after the blast and
made an emergency landing at Kahului Airport at 2 p.m. Thursday (8
p.m. EDT), airline officials said.
   The cause of the blast on Aloha Flight 243 was unknown Thursday
night, said Kevin Morimatsu, a spokesman for the state Department
of Transportation.
   The National Transportation Safety Board was sending
investigators to the scene and FBI agents were sent from Honolulu
to determine whether the blast was caused by a bomb, said FBI
spokesman Robert Heafner.
   However, sources close to the federal investigation in
Washington said investigators were focusing most heavily on a
possible structural failure that may have been caused by a rapid
decompression and that the force of strong wind at 24,000 feet may
then have ripped away the huge section of fuselage. The sources
spoke on condition they not be identified.
   George Harvey, Federal Aviation Administration area coordinator
for Honolulu, said today he could not confirm whether federal
investigators suspected that a structural failure caused the
fuselage to tear away from the airplane.
   ``It stands to reason that they're checking everything _
structure failure, explosive devices,'' Harvey said. NTSB
investigators will hold their first news conference later today, he
said.
   Another passenger, Alice Godwin of Boulder City, Nev., said she
put on a life jacket and put her head between her knees. ``I sang
all the hymns I knew,'' she said. ``That kept me busy.''
   ``Everybody screamed,'' said Dan Dennin, also of Honolulu.
``However, it was very brief _ the panic. ... The rest of the plane
was intact, and we did not go into any unusual attitudes or
anything like that. I think that people realized the plane was
still flying and they quickly went about the business of doing
whatever they could do to save their lives.''
   Passenger Daniel Westfall, of Novato, Calif., said the plane
``jerked around, up and down.''
   Mark Eberly, a ramp supervisor at the airport, said he dropped
to his knees in shock as he watched the plane land with one of its
engines smoking and the section of fuselage missing. ``I saw hair
flying in the wind and arms dangling,'' he said.
   Craig Nichols of Pocatello, Idaho, said after the plane came to
a stop on the ground, he saw ``some really mangled people,''
including one with an arm almost severed.
   ``It looked like a normal landing with the whole top of the
plane gone,'' he said.
   ``It looked like a convertible,'' said Joe Ronderos of Los
Angeles.
   ``It was like somebody had peeled off a layer of skin. You could
just see all the passengers sitting there,'' said George Harvey,
area coordinator for the Federal Aviation Administration in
Honolulu.
   Officials at Boeing Commercial Airplanes, the primary subsidiary
of Boeing Co., said there were no fuel lines or other potential
sources for an explosion in that part of the plane.
   ``The fuel is in the wing, the engines are in the wing and the
fuel lines are all right there,'' Boeing spokesman Tom Cole said in
Seattle.
   ``To have it just explode in the air is just unheard of,'' Cole
said. ``I think this is a very unusual circumstance that is not
related to any other accidents we have had.''
   Even in the extremely unlikely event that a turbine blade tore
loose from an engine and ripped into the fuselage, it could not hit
forward from the wing, and the effect would be nothing like what
happened to the Aloha plane, he said.
   The plane was one of nine 737-200s delivered to Aloha in the
late 1970s, said Boeing spokesman David Jimenez. The first 737-200
was put into service in April 1968.
   At a news conference in Honolulu, Maurice Myers, president of
Aloha Airlines, said nothing is stored in the area of the the blast.
   Myers cited the ``extraordinary performance'' of pilot Robert L.
Schornstheimer in bringing the 737-200 in safely. Schornstheimer
has flown for the airline for 12 years.
   ``I give credit to the pilot. He brought that plane down so
smoothly. It was just like riding in a Cadillac,'' said passenger
John Lopez, 40, of Hilo.
   ``I've had worse landings in normal aircraft,'' Dennin said.
   Sixty people were taken to Maui Memorial Hospital and 12 were
admitted, two in critical condition and four serious, said Dr.
Charles Mitchell, emergency room director. Injuries included burns,
bruises and cuts, he said.
   The missing flight attendant, identified as Clarabelle B.
Lansing of Honolulu, was probably either ejected by the blast or
blown out of the plane by the wind, said Clifford Hue, another FAA
area manager.
   ``I think the stewardess (Mrs. Lansing) had just picked up the
microphone to start talking'' when the explosion occurred, Fink
said.
   Fink and Dennin said some of the passengers hung on to another
standing flight attendant so she would not be sucked out of the
plane, and they praised the cabin crew for helping calm the
passengers.
   The U.S. Coast Guard mounted a search that included a cutter, a
C-130 search and rescue aircraft and two helicopters, said Coast
Guard spokesman Petty Officer Jeffrey Crawley.
   However, searchers found no trace of Mrs. Lansing, a 37-year
employee of the airline, or the missing section of the plane, he
said.
   The explosion occurred southeast of Maui while the plane was at
an altitude of 24,000 feet, the airline said. It said the 110-mile
flight from Hilo on Hawaii Island to Kahului carried 89 passengers,
five crew members and an air traffic controller from Hilo Airport.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
