ID: 178	RANK: 34	SCORE: 5.534271
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891208-0227 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-12-08-89 1255EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>a a BC-The80s-Reprise Adv16-1stAdd   12-08 0901</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-The 80s-Reprise, Adv16 - 1st Add,0926</SECOND>
<HEAD>$adv16</HEAD>
<HEAD>For Release Weekend Editions Dec. 16-17 and Thereafter</HEAD>
<HEAD>NEW YORK: American farmers.</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   TV evangelists had a devil of a time. Jim Bakker had sex with
Jessica Hahn, lost his PTL ministry and went to jail for fleecing
his flock. Jimmy Swaggart confessed to moral failure with a New
Orleans prostitute.
   On the other hand, Playboy potentate Hugh Hefner made an honest
woman out of one of his Bunnies by wedding her, which some
sociologists said heralded the end to the one-night stand. Go
figure.
   The sheer terror of AIDS, which can be spread through sex, did
its part to modify behavior. Almost 70,000 Americans died of AIDS
during the decade, including Rock Hudson, Liberace, and artists,
athletes and journalists.
   Gambling turned Pete Rose's field of dreams into a baseball
nightmare. The belly-flopping Charlie Hustle broke Ty Cobb's
cherished record for all-time hits. But he was banned for life for
betting on games in the sport's worst scandal in seven decades.
   Michael Jackson moonwalked with a single, sequined glove, and
his ``Thriller'' album sold a record 40 million copies. Material
girl Madonna flashed Marilyn Monroe-style sex appeal.
   American life in the '80s had a deadly side, too.
   Drug wars sizzled as the Cold War thawed. Crack cocaine,
virtually unheard of in 1985, riddled American cities with the
randomness of an assault gun by decade's end.
   Mass murderers stalked a McDonald's in San Ysidro, Calif., a
schoolyard in Stockton, Calif., and a printing plant in Louisville,
Ky. Serial killer Ted Bundy was executed; Seattle's Green River
killer, blamed for over 40 deaths, remained at large.
   Around the world, war broke old yardsticks for barbarity with
modern weapons that killed and maimed with cold efficiency.
   Iran and Iraq fought a $400 billion, eight-year conflict that
cost up to 1 million lives. The ayatollah's boy soldiers carried
their own coffins into battle; Iraq countered human waves with
poison gas.
   Americans, too, killed and were killed in the Persian Gulf. An
Iraqi missile killed 37 sailors aboard the USS Stark, which was
mistaken for an Iranian warship. The USS Vincennes confused an Iran
Air A300 Airbus for a warplane, killing 290 civilians with a
missile, an eerie near-replay of another ``shootdown,'' when a
Soviet fighter blew Korean Air Lines Flight 007 out the sky,
killing 269 people, after the jetliner wandered into forbidden
airspace.
   Beirut got bloodier during a 14-year-old civil war between
age-old religious foes. Two Lebanese presidents were assassinated
seven years apart, the second only 17 days into his tenure.
   All told, Lebanon's casualties mounted to 150,000, mostly
civilians. And again America paid a price. Sixty-three people were
killed in 1983 when a suicide truck bomber leveled the U.S.
Embassy, and 241 U.S. servicemen, serving as peacekeepers, died in
the terror bombing of their barracks.
   In Afghanistan, a civil war between the Soviet-backed government
and U.S.-supported insurgents claimed 1.5 million lives. Gorbachev
called the conflict ``a bleeding wound,' and ended nine years of
intervention by Soviet military forces in 1989. The Soviet toll:
13,310 dead.
   In Ethiopia, a non-stop civil war worsened the suffering of a
killer drought. Casualties from fighting and famine were estimated
at 1 million.
   Assassins felled Egypt's Anwar Sadat, India's Indira Gandhi and
the Philippine opposition leader Benigno Aquino, whose widow,
Corazon, later was elected president and ousted Ferdinand Marcos
and his well-shod wife, Imelda.
   John Lennon was silenced by a bullet. Pope John Paul II, like
Reagan, survived a gunman's attempt.
   Terrorism, some of it government-subsidized, spread insidiously.
   U.S. hostages were freed by Iran on Jan. 20, 1981, the day
Reagan was sworn in and Jimmy Carter exited the White House.
   But more hostages were grabbed by Iran-backed extremists in
Beirut. Eight Americans are still held, including journalist Terry
Anderson, now in his fifth year of captivity.
   Reagan retaliated for a terrorist bombing in West Germany with
an air strike against Libya's Col. Moammar Gadhafi, whom he called
``the mad dog of the Middle East.''
   Terrorists hijacked airplanes and a cruise ship. A bomb downed
Pan Am Flight 103 in 1988, resulting in 270 deaths.
   Terror of a natural sort stalked the globe. Technology gave man
new weapons for tracking storms and predicting disasters. But
Gilbert and Hugo redefined the power and cost of hurricanes.
   An angry Earth blew its top in 1980 at Mount St. Helens, and a
Colombian volcano hatched a 1985 mudslide that killed 25,000. The
ground quaked in Southern Italy, Mexico City, Soviet Armenia and
Northern California.
   These were the '80s, when the Stars and Stripes were burnable,
and the Hammer and Sickle drooped listless in the ill winds, but
both were waved by U.S. sailors at a seaborne summit.
   If the fast-forward blur of change seemed too much, solace could
be found in the durability of democracy's icons: The U.S.
Constitution began its third century; the Statue of Liberty had a
makeover and celebrated its 100th birthday.
   And in the new revolutions, the words of an old revolution,
Jefferson's revolution, rang out.
   ``We hold these truths to be self-evident,'' a brewery worker in
Czechoslovakia declaimed to fellow strikers as the decade closed,
``that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their
creator with certain unalienable rights, that among these are life,
liberty and the pursuit of happiness.''
   Past is prologue. Farewell, 1980s. Hello, 1990s.
   End Advance for Weekend Editions of Dec. 16-17.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
