ID: 178	RANK: 61	SCORE: 5.092454
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900303-0108 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-03-03-90 1738EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a AM-KaifuDeparture-Text 1stAdd   03-03 0815</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Kaifu Departure-Text, 1st Add,810</SECOND>
<HEAD>RANCHO MIRAGE: in Japan.</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   With regard to Japan-US economic relations, the President and I
agreed to continuously enhance our relations with the understanding
that the sound development of economic relations between our two
countries is indispensable to the development of not only our
economies but that of the world economy.
   Although negative aspects of the issues and problems in our
bilateral economic relations tend to be emphasized, as the
President said with profound insight, the two markets are extremely
large for each of us, and our economies are moving in the right
directions, due to the adjustment efforts in the past several years.
   Both the U.S. budget deficit and Japan's current surplus are
being reduced, and their reatios to GNP have been halved. However,
the imbalances are still very large, and we should continue to work
harder.
   The SII is extremely important to consolidate this positive
trend. I am determined to firmly tackle structural reforms of Japan
as one of the top priorities of my new cabinet with a view to
improving the quality of Japanese life, with further stress on the
consumer-oriented economy.
   I hope that the U.S. on its part will promote structural
adjustment, as the President has just said. I told the president of
my determination to maintain such policies as expansion of domestic
demand, improvement of market access, and deregulation.
   The president and I agree that both Japan and the US will make
the maximum efforts for the early solution of pending issues in the
spirit of cooperation and joint efforts between our two countries.
   The President expressed that Japan and the U.S. have worked
closely in dealing with debt problems and economic policy
coordination and reaffirmed his commitment, including cooperation
in exchange markets. The president's statement convinces me to make
maximum efforts for Japan-U.S. cooperation in these areas,
including in exchange markets.
   Having in mind that our solid bilateral relations are
indespensible to the future stability and prosperity of the world,
the President and I share the recognition of the importance of
consolidating our bilateral relations to be the constructive
cooperation. In this context, we share the recognition that it is
important and necessary to further strengthen and expand the
constructive relations in the 1990s, including educational and
cultural exchanges, science and technology cooperation, and two-way
technology transfers.
   U.S.-Japan relations of today, transcending our bilateral
framework, have acquired the significance of a global partnership
with responsibilities for tasks facing the world. The President and
I welcome that the Japan-U.S. global partnership is bearing
specific fruit in such a broad range of fields as response to
regional problems, the management of world economy, economic
cooperation for developing countries, and debt problems,
environment, drugs, and the fight against international terrorism.
   On the problem of drugs, in particular, I highly appreciate the
series of initiatives of the President, and the courageous
determination shown at the Cartegena drug summit. I expressed my
determination to the president that Japan will actively participate
in the international efforts to eradicate illicit drugs.
   I conveyed my intention to the president to promptly implement
concrete measures in support of the democratic government in
Nicaragua and my belief that an early economic recovery is
important for the stabilization of Panama.
   I expressed Japan's position that Japan would look into economic
assistance for the reconstruction of the region as the peace
process in Central America progresses.
   The development of the South Africa situation contains the
possibility towards dismantling apartheid. The president and I
agreed that Japan and the U.S. will continue to consult with each
other on how to eliminate apartheid.
   This year marks the final year of the Uruguay Round. The
president and I agreed that the successful conclusions of the
negotiations is extremely important for the fight against
protectionism and for the construction of the basis for the
continued progress of the world economy as we move toward the 21st
century.
   The president and I reaffirmed our conviction that we should
closely cooperate for the success of the round.
   Japan and the United States are faced with enormous challenges
and opportunities in the strong current of history. Having in mind
the significance of the Japan-U.S. partnership as a foundation for
the stability of the world, I am fully determined to courageously
pave the way, together with the president, toward the 21st century.
Thank you.
   Ladies and Gentleman, I understand that George will stay on here
and have a most wonderful time answering your questions in a press
conference.
   I, however, will have to leave ... in order to return home in
time to answer the questions that will be raised to me in the Diet,
and also in just in time to arrive in Tokyo before the night
landing time limit arrives at 11:00 p.m. in Tokyo.
   Well, I hope that you will not call this night landing time
limit, another structural impediment.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
