ID: 178	RANK: 67	SCORE: 5.069113
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900119-0202 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-01-19-90 1406EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>s w BC-Bush-Chronology Adv21   01-19 0907</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-Bush-Chronology, Adv 21,0952</SECOND>
<NOTE>$adv21</NOTE>
<NOTE>For Release Sunday, Jan. 21, and thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>Chronology of Key Events in Bush's First Year</HEAD>
<HEAD>With BC-Bush's First Year, b0730 of Jan. 16</HEAD>
<DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Here is a chronology of key events in the
first 12 months of George Bush's presidency:
   Jan. 20, 1989: Bush takes the oath of office as the 41st
president.
   Feb. 6, 1989: Bush unveils a proposal to rescue the nation's
savings and loan industry from billions in losses.
   Feb. 9: Bush proposes major revisions in the last Reagan budget,
addresses Congress.
   Feb. 23-27: Bush attends the funeral of Japanese Emperor
Hirohito and visits Beijing, China, and Seoul, South Korea, the
first of 15 foreign capitals he visits this year.
   March 9: Senate rejects the nomination of former Texas Sen. John
Tower as defense secretary; Bush nominates Dick Cheney to the post
the next day.
   March 24: The catastrophic Exxon oil spill in the Gulf of
Valdez; four days later, Bush dispatches Transportation Secretary
Sam Skinner to Alaska to survey damage.
   April 5: Bush sends Congress the ``Educational Excellence Act of
1989,'' boosting federal school funds by $441 million to promote
public school choice, magnet schools and other programs.
   April 14: Bush and congressional leaders agree on a deal to
reduce the fiscal 1990 budget deficit.
   April 18: Bush signs legislation implementing a bipartisan
accord with Congress on Central America.
   May 11: Bush recalls the U.S. ambassador from Panama after
Manuel Noriega throws out election results.
   May 12: Bush, in a speech at Texas A&amp;M University, unveils his
vision for a new relationship between the United States and the
Soviet Union.
   May 15: Bush calls for new anti-crime measures, including
mandatory sentences for firearms offenses and a major expansion of
federal prison capacity.
   May 26-June 2: Bush unveils surprise plan for major reduction in
conventional forces in Europe during NATO summit in Brussels; also
visits Italy, Germany and Britain.
   June 3: Bush ``deeply deplores'' the brutal Chinese crackdown on
pro-democracy demonstrators in Tiananmen Square; two days later he
orders sanctions. A few weeks later he sends National Security
Adviser Brent Scowcroft on a secret mission to Beijing.
   June 12: Bush unveils major revisions to the Clean Air Act,
pledges drastic reductions in urban smog by the turn of the century.
   June 13: Bush vetoes a bill raising the minimum wage from $3.35
to $4.55 an hour, 30 cents more than he wanted.
   June 22: Bush launches a ``Points of Light Initiative'' to
encourage all Americans to volunteer for community service.
   June 27: Bush says he will press for a constitutional amendment
to ban flag desecration.
   June 29: Bush proposes limits on political action committees
sponsored by corporations, unions or trade associations.
   July 7: Bush proposes a 25 percent pay raise for members of
Congress, judges and senior government officials, coupled with a
ban on speech fees for lawmakers.
   July 9-18: Bush visits Warsaw and Gdansk, Poland, and Budapest,
Hungary, promising help for their shift to democracy; also attends
French bicentennial celebrations and the economic summit in Paris
and visits the Netherlands.
   July 20: Bush marks the 20th anniversary of man's landing on the
moon by calling for a return to the moon and, in the next century,
to Mars and beyond.
   July 26: Bush signs legislation decontrolling natural gas prices.
   July 31: Bush cuts short a speaking trip after terrorists
allegedly hanged Marine Lt. Col. William R. Higgins, a hostage in
Lebanon. Four days later, after a flurry of diplomatic maneuvers,
the terrorists lift an execution threat against a second hostage,
Joseph J. Cicippio.
   Aug. 9: Bush signs the savings and loan rescue bill.
   Aug. 19-Sept. 5: Bush vacations in Kennebunkport, Maine. He goes
fishless until the next to last day.
   Sept. 5: Bush unveils his national drug strategy in televised
address to nation.
   Sept. 21: Bush sends U.S. marshals to the Virgin Islands to help
restore order after post-Hurricane Hugo rioting.
   Sept. 27-28: Bush holds education summit with governors in
Charlottesville, Va., agrees to set school performance goals.
   Sept. 29: Bush visits South Carolina to see the damage from
Hurricane Hugo.
   Oct. 3: Bush authorizes roadblocks and air cover for coup
against Noriega that fails.
   Oct. 20: Bush tours earthquake damage in Oakland and Santa Cruz,
Calif.
   Oct. 26: Bush confers ``most favored nation'' trade status on
Hungary.
   Oct. 27-28: Bush attends the Western Hemisphere summit on
democracy in Costa Rica, derides Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega
as ``this little man.''
   Oct. 31: Bush announces Malta meeting with Soviet President
Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
   Nov. 9: Bush offers low-key reaction to fall of Berlin Wall,
saying, ``I am not an emotional kind of guy.''
   Nov. 10: Bush unveils proposals to spur home ownership, aid the
homeless.
   Nov. 13: Bush presents the Presidential Medal of Freedom to
Solidarity's Lech Walesa.
   Nov. 22: Bush begins naming daily ``points of light'' to
underscore his support of volunteerism.
   Dec. 1: Bush authorizes U.S. military aid to help Philippine
President Corazon Aqunio put down a coup.
   Dec. 2-3: Bush meets off Malta in a storm-tossed summit with
Gorbachev.
   Dec. 4: Bush draws plaudits from NATO allies in Brussels on the
summit.
   Dec. 8-10: Bush sends Scowcroft on second mission to China.
   Dec. 20: U.S. troops invade Panama, topple Noriega regime.
   Dec. 24: Noriega seeks refuge in Vatican Embassy.
   Jan. 3, 1990: Noriega surrenders to U.S. authorities, is flown
to Miami to stand trial on drug-trafficking charges.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Sunday, Jan. 21</NOTE>
</DOC>
