ID: 178	RANK: 88	SCORE: 4.948033
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891212-0188 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-12-12-89 2105EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>a a BC-The'80s-Top10Stories Adv16   12-12 0974</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-The '80s-Top 10 Stories, Adv 16,0997</SECOND>
<HEAD>$adv16</HEAD>
<HEAD>For Release Weekend Editions Dec. 16-17 and Thereafter</HEAD>
<HEAD>Editors Vote: Gorbachev, Crumbling Walls Top the News of '80s</HEAD>
<NOTE>EDITOR'S NOTE </NOTE>
<TEXT>
   In addition to its annual poll on the year's top
news stories, The AP this year surveyed news professionals on the
top stories of the decade of the 1980s. Here is a report on the
results.
</TEXT>
<BYLINE>By SID MOODY</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Mikhail S. Gorbachev and the thawing of the Cold War were voted
the story of the 1980s by editors and news directors of member
newspapers and broadcast stations of The Associated Press.
   Other stories in the decade's top 10 were, in descending order:
the AIDS epidemic, Ronald Reagan's tax-cutting presidency, the U.S.
drug plague, explosion of the space shuttle Challenger, the Iran
hostage crisis and other terrorist acts, the nuclear meltdown at
Chernobyl, China's suppression of its democracy movement, the
Iran-Contra affair, and continuing strife in Central America.
   The 306 editors responding to the poll gave 2,593 points to
Gorbachev and his relaxation of the Soviet Union's iron grip in
Eastern Europe. The AIDS story received 1,830 points for second
place, and the Reagan presidency 1,138 for third. A first-place
vote earned a story 10 points and a 10th-place listing one point.
   The stories by ranking:
   1. Gorbachev assumed leadership in the Soviet Union in 1985 with
a policy of reform of a faltering communist system. In a series of
stunning developments in 1989, he withdrew Soviet troops from
Afghanistan and then stood aside as mass popular movements undercut
Communist power in Poland, Hungary, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia and
East Germany. Gorbachev even gave tacit approval in November as the
incarnation of the Cold War, the Berlin Wall, crumbled amid joyous
celebrations by East and West Germans.
   2. AIDS _ acquired immune deficiency syndrome _ first made its
deadly appearance in the United States in male homosexual
communities. It spread relentlessly among heterosexuals and drug
addicts through sexual contact and shared hypodermic needles. In an
age of ``miracle'' drugs, science could not find an antidote to the
plague of AIDS' lingering death.
   3. Republican Reagan was elected in 1980 vowing to trim the
federal government. He cut taxes sharply and shrank social programs
in a fundamental reversal of government trends. Huge defense
outlays during his two terms, however, created enormous deficits
and more than doubled the national debt. The former film star
brought Hollywood techniques to campaigning and the White House,
sent troops to the tiny Caribbean island of Grenada, named the
first woman to the Supreme Court, softened his view of the Soviet
``evil empire,'' survived an assassin's bullet and left office as
popular as when he entered it.
   4. Drug addiction and the crime that comes with it rotted the
core of America's inner cities and spread across the landscape.
Efforts to halt the flow of cocaine from the Andean valleys of
South America were only marginally successful, and some responsible
people debated the legalization of drugs.
   5. In the 1980s, the United States launched reusable manned
spacecraft _ the shuttle. But the explosion of the shuttle
Challenger, just after launch from Cape Canaveral on Jan. 28, 1986,
shut down the U.S. manned space program for two years. All seven
aboard Challenger, including schoolteacher Christa McAuliffe, were
killed. A faulty seal on the rocket shell and unusually cold
weather were blamed.
   6. Terrorism zeroed in on American targets through the 1980s,
most agonizingly in Iran, where 52 Americans _ and with them the
presidency of Jimmy Carter _ were held hostage for 444 days by
followers of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.
   7. An explosion and fire in a nuclear reactor at Chernobyl in
the Soviet Ukraine in 1986 killed at least 31 people, forced the
evacuation of thousands, and spewed radioactive clouds that circled
the globe. It was a severe setback to nuclear energy.
   8. Communist China liberalized its economic system through the
1980s. In 1989, freedom began to blossom with the spring in
Beijing, only to be brutally suppressed when Chinese troops killed
hundreds, if not thousands, of protesting students in Tiananmen
Square.
   9. Lt. Col. Oliver North became a national figure overnight in
1986 when it was learned the United States had sold arms to Iran
and used some of the proceeds to supply pro-American guerrillas in
Nicaragua. Dramatic congressional hearings and prosecutions
attempted to learn who, including President Reagan and Vice
President George Bush, knew what and when.
   10. Washington, haunted by memories of Vietnam, walked a
tightrope all decade long through civil wars in El Salvador and
Nicaragua. Efforts to support democratic government in El Salvador
were embarrassed by right-wing death squads within the military. In
leftist Nicaragua, U.S. assistance for the Contra guerrillas wound
down as President Bush succeeded Reagan, who had called the Contras
the moral equivalent of the Founding Fathers.
   Among other stories receiving votes were the continuing
political and legal showdown over abortion, the U.S. trade deficit,
the Armenian earthquake of 1988, the rise of democratic movements
in the Third World, such as Corazon Aquino's in the Philippines,
the 1987 free fall of the stock market, the continuing U.S. trade
deficit, scandals in the TV ministries of Jim Bakker and Jimmy
Swaggart.
   Further down the list: concern for the world environment, the
homeless on American streets, the deaths of 270 in the explosion of
Pan Am Flight 203 over Lockerbie, Scotland, the deaths of more than
3,000 in the Union Carbide gas leak at Bhopal, India, the
earthquakes in Mexico City and San Francisco, the eruption of the
Mount St. Helens volcano, Hurricane Hugo, continuing troubles in
the Mideast, Pope John Paul II wounded in an assassination attempt,
takeover fever in the U.S. business world, change in South Africa,
the assassination of India's Indira Gandhi.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv Weekend Editions Dec. 16-17 and Thereafter</NOTE>
</DOC>
