ID: 178	RANK: 92	SCORE: 4.939339
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910321-0016
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910321-0016.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   What's News --
   World-Wide
</HL>
<DATE>
03/21/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<LP>
   U.S. JETS SHOT DOWN an Iraqi warplane and forced another
to land.
   The action, which took place near Saddam Hussein's
hometown of Tikrit, underscores the Bush administration's
determination to help rebels fighting the Baghdad government
and force Iraq to adhere to a ceasefire agreement banning
flights by Iraqi military aircraft. The White House, however,
reiterated that the U.S. isn't ready to resume the Gulf war
in order to topple the Iraqi leader.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   April Glaspie, former U.S. envoy to Iraq, told a Senate
panel the administration sent clear signals to Saddam Hussein
not to invade Kuwait. She said, "we foolishly didn't realize
he was stupid."
   ---
   Yugoslavia's Jovic withdrew his resignation as head of the
country's collective presidency, signaling a possible easing
of a constitutional crisis. Jovic, the Serbian delegate to
the presidency, announced last week that he was stepping down
in a dispute with secession-minded republics. The Serbian
Parliament refused to accept his resignation.
   ---
   Moscow's deputy premier warned that price increases
scheduled to take effect next month could spark a wave of
strikes. The Kremlin was moving to soften the blow by handing
out subsidies to students, families and the elderly.
Meanwhile, striking miners in the largest Soviet coal field
agreed to talks with the Ukrainian government.
   ---
   A car bomb in Beirut killed eight people and injured 38
when it exploded near a motorcade carrying Lebanese Defense
Minister Michel al-Murr to a cabinet meeting. The minister
was slightly injured in the attack, the first bombing in
Beirut since the Lebanese army, backed by Syrian troops,
succeeded in uniting the capital in December.
   ---
   Five New York police officers face murder charges after a
Queens man was found to have been beaten and choked to death
during an arrest for car theft. An initial internal police
inquiry decided the officers acted properly. The city's
medical examiner later ruled the death a homicide.
   ---
   NASA plans to cut $8.3 billion from its space-station
project through 1999. Congress had ordered the space agency
to redesign the station, and an agency document showed it
plans to reduce the length by 30%, slash the number of
shuttle flights needed for assembly and delay the start of
construction by eight months.
   ---
   Bush agreed to cancel 70% of the $2.9 billion debt Poland
owes to the U.S., as he welcomed Lech Walesa on the first
state visit of a Polish president to Washington. Bush also
announced other aid initiatives for Eastern Europe and urged
other Western nations, which have agreed to cancel 50% of the
debt Poland owes them, to match the U.S. cut.
   ---
   The new U.S. education chief told colleges and
universities to ignore recent Education Department positions
barring scholarships aimed at minority students until the
issue is reviewed. Lamar Alexander, on his third day in
office, sought to quell a furor touched off in December by
the decision.
   ---
   Cheney decided to allow the Army some relief from troop
cuts through late 1992, but rejected proposals to slow down
personnel reductions scheduled for later years. The Pentagon
chief's decision makes it clear the administration doesn't
intend a major fight on spending cuts imposed by last year's
deficit accord.
   ---
   The State Department said that while the number of new
Israeli settlements in the occupied territories has leveled
off in recent years, Israeli population in the territories
continues to grow by 10% a year and has passed 200,000. The
report also said about 4% of recently arrived Soviet
immigrants have been settled in the territories.
   ---
   The National Football League dropped Phoenix, Ariz., as
the site of the 1993 Super Bowl, citing the state's refusal
to institute a paid holiday for Martin Luther King Jr.'s
birthday. The switching of the site to Pasadena, Calif., is
expected to cost Phoenix $200 million in lost revenue.
   ---
   A Cuban major defected to the U.S. by flying his MiG
fighter jet to a naval air base in Key West, Fla. A Navy
statement initially identified the plane as a late-model
MiG-27, a jet Cuba was not believed to have, but the Pentagon
said the fighter was a MiG-23.
   ---
   The Senate approved new curbs on aid to Jordan despite
White House appeals that the president be given broad
discretion over when to resume military and economic aid to
King Hussein's government. Because Jordan sided with Iraq in
the Gulf war, the administration has already put a hold on
most new aid.
   ---
   Romanian workers hurled bones and rocks at the
presidential palace and Parliament building to protest plans
for price increases. About 15,000 people took part in the
protest called by a trade-union group. Two government
ministers resigned, saying the increases did not go far
enough toward shifting the country to a market economy.
   ---
   Afghan guerrillas said government forces in Kabul have
fired at least 35 Scuds into their positions, and claim
scores of people were killed when some of the missiles fell
on civilian areas in Khost. The government said it had
repelled a recent rebel offensive against the southern city.
Neither report could be independently confirmed.
   ---
   Died: E. Paul Charlap, 67, chairman of Hem Pharmaceuticals
and former chairman of Savin Corp., in Philadelphia, of
cancer.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
