ID: 153	RANK: 100	SCORE: 5.081933
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880930-0066 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-30-88 0756EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i BC-Pope-Women-Excerpts     09-30 1051</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-Pope-Women-Excerpts,1069</SECOND>
<HEAD>Excerpts of Papal Letter on Women</HEAD>
<DATELINE>VATICAN CITY (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Following are excerpts of ``Mulieris
Dignitatem,'' Latin for ``On the Dignity of Women,'' an apostolic
letter issued Friday by Pope John Paul II. They are taken from the
official English-language text.
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   This concise passage (from Genesis) contains the fundamental
anthropological truths: Man is the high point of the whole order of
creation in the visible world; the human race, which takes its
origin from the calling into existence of man and woman, crowns the
whole work of creation; both man and woman are human beings to an
equal degree, both are created in God's image.
   The woman cannot become the ``object' of ``domination'' and male
``possession.''
   The revealed truth concerning the creation of the human being as
male and female constitutes the principal argument against all the
objectively injurious and unjust situations which contain and
express the inheritance of the sin which all human beings bear
within themselves.
   In the name of liberation from male ``domination,'' women must
not appropriate to themselves male characteristics contrary to
their own feminine ``originality.'' There is a well-founded fear
that if they take this path, women will not ``reach fulfillment,''
but instead will deform and lose what constitutes their essential
richness.
   The personal resources of femininity are certainly no less than
the resources of masculinity; they are merely different. Hence, a
woman, as well as a man, must understand her ``fulfillment'' as a
person, her dignity and vocation, on the basis of these resources,
according to the richness of the femininity which she received on
the day of creation and which she inherits as an expression of the
``image and likeness of God'' that is specifically hers.
   Jesus enters into the concrete and historical situation of
women, a situation which is weighed down by the inheritance of sin.
One of the ways in which this inheritance is expressed is habitual
discrimination against women in favor of men.
   How often ... the woman pays for her own sin (maybe it is she,
in some cases, who is guilty of the ``other's sin'' _ the sin of
the man) but she alone pays and she pays all alone! How often is
she abandoned with her pregnancy, when the man, the child's father,
is unwilling to accept responsibility for it? And besides the many
``unwed mothers'' in our society, we also must consider all those
who, as a result of various pressures, even on the part of the
guilty man, very often ``get rid of'' the child before it is born.
   Motherhood implies from the beginning a special openness to the
new person: and this is precisely the woman's ``part.'' In this
openness, in conceiving and giving birth to a child, the woman
``discovers herself through a sincere gift of self.''
   It is the woman who ``pays'' directly for this shared generation
(of a child), which literally absorbs the energies of her body and
soul. It is therefore necessary that the man be fully aware that in
their shared parenthood he owes a special debt to the woman. No
program of ``equal rights'' between women and men is valid unless
it takes this fact fully into account.
   This unique contact (of a mother) with the new human being
developing within her gives rise to an attitude towards human
beings _ not only toward her own child, but every human being _
which profoundly marks the woman's personality. It is commonly
thought that women are more capable than men of paying attention to
another person and that motherhood develops this predisposition
even more.
   The Gospel puts forward the ideal of the consecration of the
person, that is, the person's exclusive dedication to God by virtue
of the evangelical counsels: in particular, chastity, poverty and
obedience .... In this wider context, virginity has to be
considered also as a path for women, a path on which they realize
their womanhood in a way different from marriage.
   In calling only men as his Apostles, Christ acted in a
completely free and sovereign manner. In doing so, he exercised the
same freedom with which, in all his behavior, he emphasized the
dignity and the vocation of women, without conforming to the
prevailing customs and to the traditions sanctioned by the
legislation of the time. Consequently, the assumption that he
called men to be apostles in order to conform with the widespread
mentality of his times does not at all correspond to Christ's way
of acting.
   Since Christ, in instituting the Eucharist, linked it in such an
explicit way to the priestly service of the Apostles, it is
legitimate to conclude that he thereby wished to express the
relationship between man and woman, between what is ``feminine''
and what is ``masculine.''
   It is the Eucharist above all that expresses the redemptive act
of Christ the Bridegroom toward the Church the Bride. This is clear
and unambiguous when the sacramental ministry of the Eucharist, in
which the priest acts ``in persona Christi,'' is performed by a man.
   When the author of the Letter to the Ephesians calls Christ
``the Bridegroom'' and the Church ``the Bride,'' he indirectly
confirms through this analogy the truth about woman as bride. The
Bridegroom is the one who loves. The Bride is loved; it is she who
receives love, in order to love in return.
   The moral and spiritual strength of a woman is joined to her
awareness that God entrusts the human being to her in a special way
.... A woman is strong because of her awareness of this entrusting
.... This awareness and this fundamental vocation speak to women of
the dignity which they receive from God himself, and this makes
them ``strong'' and strengthens their vocation. Thus the ``perfect
woman'' becomes an irreplaceable support and source of spiritual
strength for other people.
   In our own time, the successes of science and technology make it
possible to attain material well-being to a degree hitherto
unknown. While this favors some, it pushes others to the edges of
society. In this way, unilateral progress can also lead to a
gradual loss of sensitivity for man .... In this sense our time in
particular awaits the manifestation of that ``genius'' which
belongs to women, and which can ensure sensitivity for human beings
in every circumstance.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
