ID: 153	RANK: 15	SCORE: 6.585508
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920303-0091
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920303-0091.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- The Gallery:
   MoMA Gets Former CBS CEO's Art Trove
   ----
   By Jack Flam
</HL>
<DATE>
03/03/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   New York -- The late William S. Paley, founder and
longtime chairman of CBS, was widely considered to be about
as tough as they come. But he was also an enthusiastic
collector of modern paintings and an avid supporter of the
Museum of Modern Art -- and in those areas of his life he
seems to have given rein to his gentler and more generous
impulses. "The William S. Paley Collection," in which the
more than 80 works that he recently bequeathed to MoMA are
being shown together publicly for the first time, provides a
double reason for celebration.
   The first reason is that this extraordinary collection
contains a number of important and beautiful works that will
complement and fill out the museum's own permanent collection
in significant ways. The second is that Mr. Paley had the
generosity, good sense and good taste to allow the museum to
display his collection as it sees fit. Unlike a number of
other major collectors, who insist that their collections be
exhibited intact regardless of the best interests of the
institutions that receive them, and who even bargain with
museums on that basis, Mr. Paley made his bequest with no
strings attached. This kind of generosity reaffirms the
viability of MoMA's admirable policy of not dividing its
permanent collections into little monuments to big egos, by
refusing to accept collections that come with the proviso
that they must be displayed separately forever and for all
time.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But then again, Mr. Paley was a very particular kind of
collector who had a very special relationship to MoMA. He
became a trustee of the museum in 1937, when it was only
eight years old, and he served on its board for many years
before he went on to become president in 1968, and eventually
chairman, during the museum's crucial years of expansion
between 1972 and 1985. When he died in 1990, he was chairman
emeritus.
   Moreover, although he put together an exceptional
collection, Mr. Paley was not a collector in the usual sense.
He began to buy modern pictures in 1935, at a time when doing
so was not particularly fashionable, and he bought them by
following his own tastes and enthusiasms rather than by
pursuing some ideal "wellrounded" or "comprehensive"
collection. He once stated his rule of thumb for collecting
as "Don't buy it unless you can't live without it." And
indeed, most of the pictures in his collection seem to
reflect the more passionate preoccupations of the man who
acquired them. They tend to be richly painted and rather
intimate in scale and feeling-contemplative rather than
dramatic, and sensuous rather than showy. In the fullest
sense, his collection was part of his private, rather than
his public life. He shunned publicity related to it, was
reluctant to lend works from it, and got most of his ego
gratification in places other than the art world.
   William Rubin, director emeritus of MoMA's Department of
Painting and Sculpture, has installed the Paley collection
with great sensitivity to its particular strengths. The works
are thoughtfully arranged in a setting that is at once
spacious but intimate, and that is as attentive to the rich
physical presence of the pictures as to the ideas and
historical lessons implicit in them. As a result, little gems
like Renoir's delightful "Strawberries" or Manet's tiny but
electric rendering of "Two Roses on a Tablecloth" come across
as vividly as the larger and historically more important
pictures, such as Derain's brilliantly colored "Bridge Over
the Riou" of 1906, which is a significant addition to the
museum's fauve collection.
   The tone of the exhibition is nicely set by the first work
you see, Gauguin's beautifully painted "The Seed of the
Areoi." In it, a nude Tahitian woman holds in her hand a
flowering seed, a potent symbol of her own sensuality and
procreative force, which is further reinforced by the
resonant colors and rich visual textures of the picture as a
whole. As in many other paintings in the show, the
wonderfully fresh surface offers a further delight to the
eye. Similarly, the haunting poetry of Picasso's famous "Boy
Leading a Horse" of 1905-06 is wonderfully intensified by its
matte surface, which emphasizes the picture's seductive
combination of austere idealization and insistent
physicality. In Picasso's lessknown but almost equally
impressive "Nude With Joined Hands" of 1906, the fresh,
shimmering pinks of the background envelop the woman's body
in an incandescent glow.
   Both Picasso and Matisse considered Cezanne to be a god of
painting, and the master of Aix might well be considered
MoMA's household deity. It is thus especially gratifying to
see the museum finally acquire a self-portrait by Cezanne,
bearded and sporting a rather jaunty straw hat. The museum's
already fine Cezanne collection will also be markedly
enhanced by the addition of a grand and richly painted
L'Estaque landscape and of a powerfully composed and
vigorously painted still life.
   Although MoMA has one of the best Matisse collections in
the world, it has been surprisingly weak in works from the
socalled Nice Period, from 1918 to 1930. The Paley collection
includes four Matisses from this period. A small 1918
landscape, which has the freshness of a colored drawing, and
a charming little 1923 "Woman With Anemones" are fairly
typical of Matisse's somewhat low-key work during this
period. But the two others are among the most impressive
pictures Matisse did during the 1920s. The vibrant "Odalisque
With a Tambourine" of 1926 is painted with an extraordinary
combination of virtuosity and abandon, while the enigmatic
"Woman With a Veil" of 1927 combines the ambition and
pictorial complexity of Matisse's earlier, more abstract
works with the directness and sensuality that he cultivated
at Nice.
   From such heights, Mr. Paley's collecting trailed off
after World War II, and his holdings in more recent American
art are distinctly less significant than those in earlier
French art. Nonetheless, there are some pleasant surprises.
Chief among these is the unexpectedly painterly "Homage to
the Square in Green Frame" by Joseph Albers, which is one of
that rather chilly artist's least impersonal works. Even in
the cool world of geometrical abstraction, Mr. Paley was able
to find at least a tremor of sensuality.
   "The William S. Paley Collection" is accompanied by a
thorough and informative catalog written by William Rubin and
Matthew Armstrong. The exhibition will be on view at MoMA
through April 7. After that, it will travel to Indianapolis,
Seattle, Los Angeles, San Diego, Baltimore and New Orleans
before it returns to New York to be integrated into the
museum's permanent collections in the spring of 1994.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
