ID: 153	RANK: 75	SCORE: 5.255739
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910404-0080
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910404-0080.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
   Soviet Storytellers
   ----
   By Cathy Young
</HL>
<DATE>
04/04/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   On a train home from the front at war's end, a woman is
passionately wooed by a chance companion; as they part, he
tearfully begs her to marry him -- and, having been rebuked,
grabs her suitcase and makes off with it. A man jailed for
disparaging an official versifier and a warden in the prison
camp find a bond in their shared love of poetry. A woman
blackmailed into becoming a secret-police informer warns
co-workers not to say too much in front of her, and is
promptly reported by other office stoolies.
   The scene, of course, is 20th-century Russia. These and
other episodes -- moving, terrifying and sometimes amusing --
come from eyewitness accounts collected in "Russia Speaks: An
Oral History From the Revolution to the Present"
(Harper-Collins, 400 pages, $25) by Richard Lourie, a
novelist and translator who writes frequently on Soviet
affairs.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The point of view shifts constantly from one storyteller
to another in a natural flow, with Mr. Lourie stepping in to
provide a thoughtful running commentary -- though either the
writer or the editor should have taken better care to
separate his own voice from those of his narrators, and
differentiated more clearly among the latter. With so much
already written about Russia's past and present, particularly
since the start of glasnost, little of the material here is
very surprising (except, perhaps, for an exotic bit about the
lifestyle of Soviet gypsies). And yet how could any
well-written book on a subject so rife with both tragedy and
farce fail to be riveting?
   While some narrators appear only briefly, several men and
women are present throughout the book, the unquiet history of
Soviet Russia reflected in their lives: Ilya Jaffee, a
lifelong fighter for the communist faith; Natalya Viktorovna,
the daughter of an aristocratic-born communist mother who
grew up to reject communism; Ivan Vrachov, a staunch Leninist
who challenged Stalin and somehow lived to tell the tale;
Ruth Bonner, a teenage revolutionary enthusiast and then the
imprisoned wife of "an enemy of the people" (and, later
still, the mother-in-law of Andrei Sakharov, who also appears
in a lovingly sketched family setting). They and the other
protagonists, different people in many ways, are all united
by one thing: Each is, in Mr. Lourie's fine phrase, "a
patriot of survival."
   Death dominates this volume, recalling those medieval
paintings in which the Grim Reaper invades the world for an
awful orgy. Death in the civil war and the Red Terror, death
from famine during collectivization, death by firing squad or
in labor camps under Stalin, death at the front in World War
II, death from wartime hunger and disease. What saves "Russia
Speaks" from utter gloom is the mordant wit of many
raconteurs and their conviction that in the worst of times,
"rare instants of beauty and kindness" remain a saving grace:
"A joke, a sunrise, a line of poetry, the touch of a hand,
not only helped keep body and soul together but helped keep
the soul itself alive," notes Mr. Lourie.
   The inhumanity of the system seeps from page after page,
from the "horrible perversion" of communal apartments ("You
open your door and you're in Red Square," fumes a young
mother) to the Soviets' attitude toward their own war
casualties (a commander's decision not to fight for a town
the Germans are about to leave anyway has to be hushed up,
"as if he had committed a horrible crime, sparing human
life"). Yet Mr. Lourie's storytellers help explain
communism's lasting appeal to many who came of age in the
first years of Soviet power. Not only did it answer their
need for faith; it also made them feel important. In the
"immense updraft of the revolution," boys and even some girls
from the wrong side of the tracks found themselves in key
military and government posts, and became their own living
proof that the system worked.
   While these delusions may merit some sympathy, Mr. Lourie
seems too respectful at times of Bolshevik enthusiasm. When
Mr. Jaffee rhapsodizes about his selfless labor on the
Dneprostroi dam in the 1920s, Mr. Lourie comments, "No one
can understand communism's defilements without first
understanding its purities." (Substitute "Nazism" here and
see what happens.)Remorseful over signing a virtual death
warrant for five peasant families in the mistaken belief that
they were rich, Mr. Jaffee still assumes that those who were
rich deserved their fate.
   The Russia that speaks in this book is represented by
voices chosen somewhat selectively: Nearly all belong to the
intelligentsia. Why are two old women once driven to the city
by collectivization briefly introduced but never given a
chance to talk about their experience? Why is 1920s Russia
shown only through the eyes of communists of different
stripes fighting over the country's future?
   These flaws notwithstanding, Mr. Lourie has written a
passionate book, rich in the kind of detail that makes
history come alive. (What do you do when a guest at your home
has a fit and you can't call an ambulance because he is
screaming curses against the still-reigning Stalin?)
   his "oral history" begins and ends with glimpses into a
bleak, brutal Soviet present, epitomized by the scene of a
bedraggled drunk couple walking down the street: "Without
breaking stride he punches her in the face and without
breaking stride, without flinching, she accepts it. A few
heads turn . . . but people are too busy keeping alive for
even this distraction."
   ---
   Ms. Young is a Soviet-born free-lance writer.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
