ID: 153	RANK: 76	SCORE: 5.251934
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910822-0114
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910822-0114.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Film: Ballrooms for Outcasts
   ----
   By Julie Salamon
</HL>
<DATE>
08/22/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10
</SO>
<LP>
   "Paris is Burning," a documentary about black and Hispanic
drag queens and their psychic survival through costume balls,
became a cult hit in New York last spring. National
distribution was stymied by a dispute over music rights.
That's been settled and now the picture has opened
coast-to-coast, quickly becoming both a box office draw and
the object of boycott threats by an organization called the
Christian Film and Television Commission (the CFTC is not to
be confused with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission,
which regulates the futures markets and has the same
abbreviation).
   I called CFTC headquarters in Atlanta to find out exactly
why the organization, a lobbying group, was urging a boycott
of the documentary. An operater answered my call with a
cheery, "Good news," and told me the group's leader, Ted
Baehr, would have to answer the question and he would speak
to me when he returned from lunch.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   As it turned out, the CFTC's objection was to the $25,000
grant the film received from the National Endowment for the
Humanities. The CFTC's Mr. Baehr, who did call after lunch,
said he objected generally to government funding of the arts,
and particularly to the funding of a "propagandistic" movie
such as "Paris is Burning" which "pushed a particular world
viewthat we get over homophobia." Even so, his reaction to
the movie when he saw it was that it was "a good film,
extremely depressing, but well-made."
   My reactions to "Paris is Burning" weren't altogether
different from Mr. Baehr's, except that I think getting over
homophobia is a good idea. The picture, directed by a young
white woman named Jennie Livingston, is well-made and de
pressing as it explores a subterra nean world populated by
transves tites and transsexuals who enter tain and sustain
themselves by means of elaborate competitions f dance and
costume. (The "Paris" of the title is one of the clubs where
these competitions take place.) The people in the film are
out side the mainstream of society in almost every way. They
are poor, black or Hispanic, and they are gay men who like to
dress and be have like a certain kind of fantasy woman
(though some like to mimic straight men, dressing like
businessmen or military men).
   For the most part, however, their fantasy lives are
modeled on the women they see in the pages of Vogue magazine
and on television soap operas. Within the confines of these
clubs they can pretend to feel certain that if they wear the
right clothes and jewelry, and walk the right way, they could
"pass." Others create their own fashion statement, in many
cases with astonishing acrobatic and choreographic ingenuity
and skill.
   Ms. Livingston, a product of Beverly Hills High and Yale,
took her camera to the clubs, then backstage, where she
interviewed the performers. Some of them, like the aging drag
diva Pepper, are perceptive about their lives and how they've
chosen to live them. (With the weary humor of a fading
Southern belle, Pepper says he may dress like a woman but he
always knows that he is a man playing a woman and doesn't
really want to be anything else.)
   The film's more obvious points -- are we defined by how we
look and dress -- are its least interesting ones. Ms.
Livingston seems to accept the view of her subjects, that if
only they were white, heterosexual women (instead of
transvestite, black and Hispanic men) they would
automatically be privileged, taken care of. When she turns
her camera on the "real" world, she focuses only on lavishly
dressed women marching in and out of bastions of affluence
such as Elizabeth Arden.
   But maybe that's part of the point. Her film's subjects
are outcasts. They need to imagine that being a woman will
solve all their problems. For example, Octavia, a slinky,
beautiful person who looks very much like an exotic fashion
model -- a female fashion model -- dreams of becoming
Christie Brinkley. The truth is that Octavia isn't very
different from a great many white heterosexual women (and no
more interesting), who might dream of becoming Christie
Brinkley, or Erica Kane. These men, who work so hard at
making themselves look like women, only emphasize the
perversity of that longing. "I would liked to be a spoiled,
rich white girl," sighs Venus Xtravaganza, a skinny bleached
blonde hustler.
   The film is repetitious and seems much longer than its 78
minutes because many of its subjects don't have much to say
once they've described their fantasies. Ms. Livingston
presents their pathos without always bringing to it a
widening insight. Still, her excursion is fascinating and
entertaining as well. The club subculture, after all, is
built on entertainment. This is the place where "voguing,"
the dance created out of runway model movements popularized
by Madonna, got started. Stumbling into this world was a
startling experience, like accidentally tuning into the
international ballroom dancing competition on cable
television and realizing that there are people who devote
their lives to perfecting the rhumba. There's a deep sadness
to the distorted dreams that run through "Paris is Burning,"
but a kind of fleeting exhilaration as well.
   ---
   VIDEO TIP: For an emotionally powerful view of another
side of street life, take a look at "Street Wise," the 1985
documentary about homeless kids living on the streets of
Seattle. Their despair is so overwhelming you wish they could
escape to a makeshift ballroom for a few hours to dream.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
