ID: 283	RANK: 2	SCORE: 20.275667
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910703-0176
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910703-0176.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Quilt Art: Breaking Out of the Bedroom
   ----
   By Gail King
</HL>
<DATE>
07/03/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A5
</SO>
<LP>
   Athens, Ohio -- Quilts-as-art stayed an American bedroom
secret for more than two centuries. They had four strikes
against them in the art world as it used to be. American
quilts generally were designed and executed by women; they
were useful; they were used in the bedroom -- and they were
American.
   Twenty years ago the Whitney Museum of American Art hung
an exhibition of quilts as art, the first time quilts had
been officially recognized as anything other than folk art or
needlework. Then, as various American Bicentennial projects
put a spotlight on old quilts, a new generation began to
produce quilts. While many new-generation quilters stuck to
traditional patterns, increasing numbers of fabric artists
began to push beyond traditional patterns and techniques.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "Five of us started meeting here {in Athens} in 1975,"
Nancy Crow remembers. "We were doing contemporary quilts and
all the juried shows were traditional. There was no place in
the nation for us to exhibit." Ms. Crow and her friends
jumped at the chance to help develop a cultural arts center
in an old dairy barn on the outskirts of Athens. Here, in
June 1979, with 56 quilts picked from 390 entries, they
opened Quilt National, the nation's first juried art quilt
show.
   This biennial show has developed into the premier
international showcase for contemporary quilts. (And Ms. Crow
has become one of the best known quilters and teachers in the
nation.) Almost 1,200 entries came this year from all over
the U.S and 12 foreign countries. The award-winning quilts by
Rise Nagin, Carol Gersen and Pamela Studstill demonstrate
several trends in contemporary quilt art.
   Ms. Gersen's "Squares and Bars" won the craftmanship award
for demonstrating mastery of the greatest number of
techniques being used by quilt makers today. She used
hand-dyed fabrics, piecing and both machine and hand-quilting
to execute a symmetrical design of 16 abstract American
flags. The flags (each made of 140 thumb-sized squares and
five stripes) are set in a black print and patched
background.
   "When traditional quilters looked at our first shows, they
sneered a bit ," says Hilary Fletcher, who has been involved
with the project since its inception and now serves as Quilt
National coordinator. "They felt that our artists were more
interested in creating designs than in executing those
designs with traditionally accepted expertise. Now we've
bridged that gap; `Squares and Bars' is a fine example of the
fact that technical skills have caught up with design
skills."
   Quilts still haven't caught up with the rest of the art
market in terms of prices, however. Few commercial galleries
show fiber art, and still fewer concentrate on quilt art. So
far, the market has depended on personal taste and there is
not yet an aftermarket. Most contemporary art quilts remain
in the hands of the original owners.
   Pamela Studstill's award-winning "Quilt 91," her 91st
quilt, has a price tag of $8,500, about the middle range for
quilts exhibited here. Ms. Studstill hand-painted many of the
tiny squares and triangles that make up "Quilt 91." Like most
other artist-quilters, Ms. Studstill is a trained artist:
she's not interested in using fabric straight off the bolt.
   This urge for a full palette has given rise to hand-dying
as a cottage industry and to a great deal of manipulation and
embellishment. Elizabeth Busch's predominantly red, precisely
symmetrical, startlingly modern "Last Picture Show" is a
masterpiece of hand-dyed and hand-painted fabric, embellished
with dramatic swaths of embroidery floss. Roxana Bartlett's
paint-on-felt cows stand in a painted cloth field swarmed by
painted crows.
   There is not an award for embellishment (the judges
thought that might institutionalize it as an official
innovation). But such an award might have gone to Janet Burch
Cochran, whose splashy quilts have been part of several Quilt
Nationals. Ms. Cochran apparently has access to an excess
button supply in her hometown of Rabbit Hash, Ky. She is not
subtle in her use of them -- actually she's not subtle about
anything, and the result is a wonderful, flamboyant
exuberance that strangely echoes antique album and crazy
quilts.
   Best of show here went to a more modern quilt, or at least
its message was trendy. Rise Nagin's "Exile House and
Mountain" is part of a series of quilts that, she says,
concern "domesticity, shelter, security, loss of innocence,
betrayal and patterns of power in relationships between men
and women and children."
   Such politically correct quilts are in vogue now. The ones
in Quilt National '91 demonstrate impressive artistic and
technical ability, not universal qualities in politically
correct art, quilted or otherwise.
   Robin Schwalb's "Babel," a black and white juxtaposition
of old-fashioned Log Cabin design, silk-screened text and
skyscrapers on fabric, and Dee Ann Todd Teague's red and
green and yellow and purple nine-patch "Rainforest" (one
patch is a 15-inch frog's eye) deliver their messages with
delightful good humor. Erika Carter's "Dedication" -- winter
trees against a strippatched background -- is a more subtle
tribute to nature.
   What's next in this fast-evolving world? Nancy Crow says:
"It took quilters all the '80s to learn basic skills. In the
'90s people are going to filter out into areas like
nontraditional materials and computerized sewing machines
that make hand work more and more obsolete -- and yet we'll
see more hand-stitchery and applique and hand-dying as people
relearn {more complex} traditional techniques."
   ---
   Quilt National leaves the Dairy Barn at the end of July.
The traveling version will open in St. Louis in November,
then go on to several locations in Japan before reaching
venues in Alaska and Colorado. Exact dates and a superb
catalog ("The New Quilt 1," $21.95) are available from The
Dairy Barn, Athens, Ohio, 45701.
   ---
   Ms. King is a free-lance writer based in Henderson, Ky.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
