ID: 283	RANK: 5	SCORE: 18.842281
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910508-0142
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910508-0142.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Quilting: Grandma's Patterns Updated
   ----
   By Gail King
</HL>
<DATE>
05/08/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10
</SO>
<LP>
   Paducah, Ky. -- Dianne Hire of Belfast, Maine, did not win
a prize at the Paducah Quilt Show last month. That was a
great oversight: The judges should have demanded a new
category, Quilts With Meaningful Titles, and named this quilt
the winner (it's called "This Is Not My Grandmother's Wedding
Ring . . . It Is a New Generation of Quilts]").
   Wedding Band, Log Cabin, Texas Starthese traditional
American quilting patterns are still around, but more and
more they are to be seen in shops that sell antique quilts.
Antique quilts on the market today are generally from the
1920s and '30s, priced from $100 to $900. The big news (and
big bucks) in quilting today is new quilts, and this is the
place to see them.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The annual American Quilter's Society juried show hangs
400 quilts and distributes $58,000 in prize money. The quilts
this year came from 49 states and 10 foreign countries, and
the quilters came in droves. In Paducah, population 27,000,
this is "our show": An army of red-coated volunteers answer
questions, direct traffic and guard cameras or purses;
residents open their homes to overnight guests; shopkeepers
drape quilts around everything from diamond rings to
motorcycles; civic and church organizations sponsor
specialized quilt shows; and everybody smiles with gracious
Southern hospitality at the thought of the $7 million this
four-day event brings to the area.
   Nancy Ann Sobel of Brooktondale, N.Y., took best of show
with "Dawn Splendor," a magnificent flowered design in muted
mauves, blues and greens. With combined techniques of
embroidery, applique and piecing, it was the first
"old-fashioned, pretty" quilt to win in several years, but it
really is not an old-fashioned quilt. Grandma would never
have sprinkled her brand-new quilted flowers with embroidered
ants and spiders as Mrs. Sobel has, and the subtle colors,
silver-threaded spider webs and extensive use of stippling
(tiny, closely spaced stitches that give a crinkly effect)
are not part of American quilting's mainline tradition.
   "Dawn Splendor" brought Mrs. Sobel $12,000 in prize money.
It will join her "A Midwinter's Night's Dream," which won the
workmanship award last year, as a part of the permanent
collection of the American Quilter's Society Museum, which
opened last week in a brand-new built-for-quilts $2 million
facility here.
   Even so, the most beautiful creation in the show to me
(indeed, the most exquisite textile art I've ever seen) was
"Arabesque," an ivory one-color, whole-cloth quilt by Annabel
Baugher. Mrs. Baugher, a 70-year-old who lives on a farm
outside Galt, Mo., learned fine sewing from her mother and
grandmothers, but didn't start making quilts herself until
about 15 years ago. She adapted her medallion-centered design
from an old French print, a Mother's Day card and the border
around a magazine ad. She hand-stitched all of this work, but
she has no misgivings about using modern materials and
techniques. She's particularly fond of polyester blends and
washing machines: "If my grandmother had had the things I
have, she'd have used them."
   "Arabesque" won second place ($800). It is one of many
quilts in this show that money can't buy; it belongs to Mrs.
Baugher's grandson. (The price tags on the ones money can buy
sometimes top $10,000; custom-made works by professionals can
run $150-$200 per finished square foot.)
   Three judges chose the 400 exhibited quilts from more than
800 entries and then picked winners in 12 categories. The
greatest crowds -- and controversy -- clustered around the
winners for applique-amateur. The quibbling involved which
place should have gone to which quilt; there was no argument
about these three being masterpieces. First place went to
Jonathan Shannon, a bearded hulk from California who defies
all quilter stereotypes. His "July," complete with mammoth
sunflowers and marbleized/dyed fish, would have given Grandma
of the Wedding Band a conniption fit.
   The second-place quilt, "Mary's Garden," was the
sentimental favorite of the entire show. Made by Mary Johnson
from an original pattern designed by her daughter as her 75th
birthday present, the quilt has pictures (with applique,
embroidery, piecing and fantastically detailed quilting) of
plants and critters (bees, bunnies, butterflies and a fly or
two) that have flourished in Mrs. Johnson's Indiana garden.
   Third place went to Patricia L. Styring of St. Augustine,
Fla., for "Baltimore Album Nouveau With Angels," a lush
modern version of a traditional style called Baltimore Album.
   How does an old style become modern? By bending tradition
a bit. Perspective and dimension have always been important
to quilting. Many very old American quilts in patterns like
Tumbling Blocks and Log Cabin give illusions of depth. Today,
techniques that emphasize depth, movement and isometric
perspective (floating in space) seem to be the coming thing
in quilting. The squares, rectangles, circles and stars of
many antique designs are being stretched into innovative
forms.
   Other in things are stippling (now possible to do on
machines, in which case it's called "meandering"); the
"ROLLnRULER" (for $16 it is a ruler, protractor, T-square and
more -- it will even do ovals and ellipses); handpainted or
marbleized materials; photographic techniques; and ecology
themes. There were several "green" quilts with a printed
cloth label sewn on the reverse side: "With this Green Quilt
I send into motion my love for the Earth for the healing and
balancing of our Home. May it blend with the affirming energy
sewn into all Green Quilts." ("Oh fiddle," said at least one
grandmotherly viewer.)
   "Ancient Directions" by Allison Goss, a 41-year-old
quilter who lives in Delaware, won the best wall quilt award
($5,000). It is a green quilt inspired by designs of Pueblo
Indian pottery. "I've been imbued with environmentalism for
years, but it's in the background of my life now," she says.
Ms. Goss teaches contemporary quilting, helping people "to
move their work from traditional patterns into new artistic
expressions." Designed in a mirror perspective of slithers of
blues, reds and yellows, set in a "sky" of marbleized cloth
and machine quilted with monofilament (fine fishing line),
"Ancient Directions" got a lot of studied second looks. And
nobody said, "It looks like something my grandmother made."
   ---
   Ms. King is a free-lance writer based in Henderson, Ky.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
