ID: 243	RANK: 19	SCORE: 16.966642
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920106-0141
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920106-0141.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   TECHNOLOGY
   ----
   By John R. Wilke
</HL>
<DATE>
01/06/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   INTC
</CO>
<MS>
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)
SEMICONDUCTORS, INTEGRATED CHIPS (SEM)
</IN>
<NS>
SCIENCE &amp; TECHNOLOGY (SCN)
</NS>
<GV>
POSTAL SERVICE (POS)
</GV>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
MASSACHUSETTS (MA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PENNSYLVANIA (PA)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Parallel Computing
   Finds Mainstream Uses
                                                                                                       

</LP>
<TEXT>
   PARALLEL-DESIGN supercomputers, once reserved for esoteric
research applications, are being put to more commercial uses.
   At Prudential Securities, a powerful parallel
supercomputer gives quick risk analysis for mortgage-backed
securities, while clients are on the line. Previously, the
analysis took several minutes on conventional computers --
too long to keep clients on the phone, and long enough for
market prices to change, sometimes rendering the analysis
obsolete.
   Now, with parallel machines -- which use dozens, or even
hundreds, of processors working on different aspects of a
problem at the same time -- customers get answers in as
little as 30 seconds. Parallel processors, which can range
from $300,000 to $3 million, offer supercomputer power at far
less cost. They provide a clear strategic advantage over
traditional systems, says David Audley, research director for
Prudential's financial strategies group, which has used an
Intel parallel machine for about a year.
   Indeed, with increasingly arcane derivative securities
requiring time-sensitive computations, supercomputer-class
horsepower may become a cost of doing business for
financial-services companies, says George Lindamood, a
consultant with market researcher Gartner Group.
   Other emerging markets include credit-card companies and
retailers. American Express just bought two Thinking Machines
computers for its travel-services operation, while Kmart is
using a Teradata parallel computer to coax new sales
strategies from the mountain of transaction information
collected by all of its stores each day.
   Kmart had long noted that some stores sold lots of
confetti around Easter. The parallel machine analyzed sales
data and other information for every store and pinpointed the
reason: Confetti sells best in or near Hispanic
neighborhoods, where it is used in traditional holiday
celebrations.
                                                                                                       

   U.S. Bobsled Drivers
   Take Simulated Ride
                                                                                                       

   MOUNTAIN VIEW, Calif., a sunny Silicon Valley city, might
not seem the best place for the U.S. Olympic bobsled team to
train. But the team's drivers will be there today to practice
on a computer simulation of the Olympic bobsled run in La
Plagne, France, for next month's games.
   With the margin of victory in this high-speed event
measured in hundredths of seconds, familiarity with the run
could give the U.S. team an edge. So every twist and turn of
the mile-long course has been recreated on a computer
simulator by researchers at the University of California at
Davis working with Silicon Graphics of Mountain View.
   Team members will pilot an actual bobsled whose steering
control is connected to a powerful computer, which projects a
lifesized, three-dimensional simulation of the course on a
screen in front of the sled. Every tug at the steering is
instantly reflected in the simulation, which projects the
sled's flight down the icy track by calculating aerodynamics,
gravity, friction, steering and weight 30 times a second. The
run takes about a minute to complete.
   "You can see your mistakes without crashing," says Randy
Will, a driver on the U.S. team who took a trial run Friday.
"We were skeptical at first, but the visual aspect is very
real. All that's missing is the cold."
                                                                                                       

   Vanishing Ink Stymies
   Invisible Bar Codes
                                                                                                       

   INVISIBLE bar-code technology might already be on the
market, but for the problem of disappearing ink.
   Researchers at Battelle Memorial Institute developed the
new bar-code technology for the U.S. Postal Service -- which
uses bar codes to automate letter-sorting -- and licensed it
last year to AccuSort Systems, a bar-code equipment company
in Telford, Pa. Accu-Sort envisions all kinds of potential
uses, including on cash, ID cards and passports to prevent
counterfeiting. In law enforcement, detectives could use the
invisible bar codes on cash to track the flow of money
following an illegal transaction.
   The problem is the invisible ink, which after a few weeks
becomes invisible even to the infrared photocell designed to
read it, an Accu-Sort researcher says. "There are still some
technical hurdles, but we expect to get it worked out soon,"
says Michael Hrabina of Accu-Sort.
                                                                                                       

   Tiny Electronics Help
   Give Life to Microrobots
                                                                                                       

   SILICON "ants" might one day sweep up radioactive dust
from hard-to-reach laboratory corners, purge diseased cells
from blood or even be used by spies to bug a room.
   Such microrobots are becoming feasible with advanced
materials and microscopic electronics. For his ant, inventor
Johannes G. Smits of Boston University has devised
micromotors three millimeters long and the width of a human
hair to drive the tiny machine's legs and pincer. The motors
work without gears: Chromium-gold electrodes under varying
electric charges cause zinc oxide coatings on tiny silicon
rods to expand and contract, in turn making the rods move.
   The ant would walk as its electrically charged silicon
legs flex up and down, and its pincer would work the same
way. The device, still under development, would be powered by
a solar cell and controlled by a microprocessor brain
responding to acoustic signals.
   Prof. Smits, who recently received a patent for the ant
design, says other micromotor designs usually depend on tiny
gears turning in response to rapidly changing electrical
fields. But such moving parts can get clogged with dust and
are more likely to break down, he says.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
