ID: 243	RANK: 21	SCORE: 16.675499
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910107-0057
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910107-0057.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Cost of Mailing First-Class Letter Likely
   To Climb to 29 Cents Early Next Month
   ----
   By Albert R. Karr
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/07/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A4
</SO>
<GV>
POSTAL SERVICE (POS)
CONGRESS (CNG)
</GV>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- Mailing a first-class letter likely will
cost 29 cents starting early next month, but it probably will
cost only 27 cents to mail some bill payments.
   Postmaster General Anthony Frank said a new two-level,
first-class rate scheme recommended by the Postal Rate
Commission is acceptable to the Postal Service. Although the
agency had proposed boosting the rate to 30 cents from its
current 25 cents, he expressed "relative satisfaction" with
the commission's recommendations and said the postal Board of
Governors probably will accept them when it votes later this
month. If so, the new rates will go into effect Feb. 3.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The commission's rate schedule would bring in to the
postal service an estimated $6.2 billion in additional
revenues a year, only about $100 million below the amount
sought by the service.
   The recommended new approach would set a 29-cent
first-class rate. But it would let people pay only 27 cents
to mail bill payments using return envelopes with bar codes
provided by many firms. The bar codes enable post offices to
use automated equipment for more efficient processing.
   Mr. Frank did say, however, that it will take "quite a bit
more thinking" to put the two-tier plan into effect.
   The proposed new charges are part of a package of
recommendations disclosed over the weekend by the commission.
While recommending that the increase in the first-class rate
be held to 16%, the commission urged a 25% increase in the
rate for third-class bulk mail sent by advertisers. The
service had proposed a 17% increase.
   By the commission's calculations, the Postal Service's
rate proposal would boost revenue from first-class mail to
135% of the cost of handling it from 120%, while trimming
revenue from third-class mail to 79% of its costs from 84%.
By contrast, the commission said its plan would lift the
first-class burden to 124% of a fair share of costs and the
third-class portion to 93%.
   A postal users group formed last year by consumer advocate
Ralph Nader applauded the commission's emphasis on reducing
the relative burden on first-class mailers. But the group
said the commission should have frozen all rates at current
levels to "squeeze" the postal agency to become more
efficient. The American Bankers Association said the
commission's rollback of the Postal Service proposal was "a
wonderful victory."
   Third-class mailers, for their part, were even more
unhappy with the commission recommendations than they were
with the Postal Service's proposed rate rises. Gene Del
Polito, executive director of the Third Class Mail
Association, called the new recommendations "a disaster" and
the product of "political ratemaking." The Direct Marketing
Association, another mailer group, said businesses will be
"seriously hurt" by the recommended third-class rate
increases.
   The commission endorsed the postal agency's plan to give
deeper discounts for volume mailers when they pre-sort or
barcode their letters, including use of the four extra digits
in addition to the five-digit ZIP codes for more precise
distribution for delivery. But the commission modified the
service's proposed schedule of discounts.
   The postal Board of Governors has little practical
alternative to accepting the recommendations, though it could
try to rebuff them.
   To be sure, the board could reject them and send them back
to the commission for further review, or the board could let
them go into effect under protest and still return them for a
second review. But in either case, the board could only spurn
the commission's ultimate recommendations and put its own
plan into effect by a unanimous vote of its five board
members -- and only on the ground that the commission plan
wouldn't provide adequate revenue.
   By law, the Postal Service must break even over a period
of years. George Haley, the postal commission's chairman,
said Congress has saddled the postal agency with new budget
burdens since its rate filing in March 1990, and he noted a
worsening forecast for the impact of the economy on postal
revenue. But "significantly better" Postal Service financial
performance, which the agency has ascribed to a reduced work
force and more automation, slightly outweighs the negative
factors, he said.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
