ID: 243	RANK: 25	SCORE: 16.122225
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910220-0114
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910220-0114.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Enterprise:
   U.S. ZIP-Code Conversions Zap Postal-Service Firms
   ---
   Rivals Give Stamp of Disapproval to
   Government's Free Nine-Digit Lists
   ----
   By Eugene Carlson
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/20/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B2
</SO>
<IN>
INDUSTRIAL &amp; COMMERCIAL SERVICES, LEASING, CLEANING (ICS)
</IN>
<GV>
POSTAL SERVICE (POS)
</GV>
<LP>
   Small postal-service companies are accusing the U.S.
Postal Service of taking the zip out of their ZIP-code
business.
   Among other services, these companies update business
mailing lists by converting five-digit ZIP codes to newer
nine-digit numbers. The companies complain that the Postal
Service is stealing their customers by offering to do the
conversions free.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "It's got an entire industry outraged," says Gene Del
Polito, executive director of the Third Class Mail
Association of Washington, D.C. The Postal Service has
started aggressively marketing the conversion service in the
last several months.
   The several hundred private postal-service companies and
letter shops complain that the gargantuan Postal Service, the
nation's largest civilian employer, is beating up on small
business. Many of the companies have invested heavily in
computers and software to perform the very mailing-list
updates that the government's postal agency is now offering
at no cost.
   The private firms charge anywhere from $2 to $6 per
thousand names for providing "ZIP-plus-four" codes, which
qualify bulk mailers for postage discounts and are supposed
to speed delivery. The customer provides computer disks of
ZIP-coded addresses, which the service company runs through a
computer program that adds the four additional digits.
Usually within a few days or a few weeks, the customer is
given back revised disks with the new codes.
   The nine-digit ZIPs, when scanned by high-speed
optical-character readers, identify addresses down to a
specific city block or apartment-house floor. Machines can
also apply bar codes to envelopes with up-to-date ZIP codes,
which makes sorting quicker.
   The Postal Service has been offering free conversion for
small mailing lists for several years, but the criticism from
private industry didn't surface until last fall. That's when
local postal officials began actively soliciting much larger
lists. The timing reflects new Postal Service employee
performance guidelines that tie salary bonuses for postal
managers with the number of addresses they convert to
ZIP-plus-four.
   The Postal Service says it's providing the free
conversions to help cut postal costs and hasten a fully
automated mail system. It says it will quit when it thinks
private companies can satisfy market demand. "We only want to
stay in coding activity until there's enough software and
technology to handle the tens of billions of addresses out
there," says Robert Krause, director of the Postal Service's
office of address information systems.
   The Postal Service says that once companies see the
benefits of updating their mailing lists, they will do it
regularly with private mail shops. "It's like dope; if you
get hooked, you'll use it," agrees Ronald Friedman, president
of Group 1 Software Inc., a Greenbelt, Md., maker of
mailing-list software.
   The aim is a fully automated mail system by 1995. To meet
that goal, the Postal Service says it must persuade some
eight million small businesses and professional firms, most
of which spend less than $50,000 annually in postage, to
update their address lists.
   Small mailers that send out a couple of hundred monthly
invoices, or the occasional newsletter, typically handle
their own mailing chores and seldom patronize mail-service
companies. But the private service firms say the government's
increasingly aggressive marketing of free ZIP-code conversion
is beginning to attract junk mailers and larger first-class
mailers that are the bread-and-butter of their business.
   Charles Thompson, president of Ace Mailing Services Inc.,
Smyrna, Ga., says the Postal Service is servicing a
186,000-name mailing list of W. S. Badcock Corp., a Mulberry,
Fla., furniture and appliance retailer that had been an Ace
client for eight years. Mr. Thompson says he has no quarrel
with the postal agency's attempts to reach small mailers that
don't use ZIP-plus-four, but adds: "Rather than selling to
people who have sloppy lists, they're taking on the major
accounts."
   Dick Wendel, Badcock's data processing vice president,
says the Postal Service's address-improvement offer was too
good to pass up. "Sure you're going to use the free service,"
he says.
   Todd Butler, president of Butler Business Services Inc.,
St. Marys, Ohio, says local postal officials assured him they
were targeting address lists of no more than 3,000 names.
Then he discovered that the Cincinnati post office was
offering free ZIP-code conversion to lists with 80,000 names.
"Lists that size are my baby," Mr. Butler says.
   Last fall, the Postal Service's southern division sought
bids on a contract that would offer ZIP-plus-four updating to
lists of as many as 15 million names. "So `small lists' went
from 3,000 to 15 million," Mr. Butler complains.
   Postal officials argue that automated mail will help stem
postage-rate increases. But Mr. Butler says postal customers
are underwriting the costs of the free conversion service in
the form of software and payments to private companies that
perform the conversion for the Postal Service.
   "If they charge their costs out, I'll compete and blow
them away," Mr. Butler insists. "But free, I can't compete."
   Mail-service company owners and trade-association
executives say they have argued their case through technical
committees set up to iron out postal users' problems. They
say they continue to complain, but the government isn't
showing much sympathy. "We protested this all the way up to
{Postmaster General Anthony} Frank, and all we get is lip
service," says Lee Epstein, president of Mailmen Inc., a
volume mail service in Hauppauge, N.Y.
   Mr. Krause says the Postal Service wants to cooperate. He
says local postmasters are instructed to inform customers who
ask about free ZIP-code conversion that private concerns will
do the same work, albeit for a price. He says mailing lists
must be updated every six months to qualify for discount
rates; post offices will do only one free conversion for most
customers. "No business customers should be led to believe
they can rely on the Postal Service long-term for their
address-improvement needs," he says.
   But even now, the industry insists it could handle all the
work. Mr. Friedman of Group 1 Software says the Postal
Service should put its efforts into promoting the concept of
ZIP-code conversion and leave the actual work to private
enterprise. He says, "We need more money out there selling
the religion. We'll deliver the Bibles."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
