ID: 243	RANK: 47	SCORE: 13.973790
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910103-0048
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910103-0048.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LAW
   ----
   By Ellen Joan Pollock
</HL>
<DATE>
01/03/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   MANA LABOR
</CO>
<IN>
LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)
SOFTWARE (SOF)
CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)
COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)
</IN>
<LP>
   Next Stage, No Doubt:
   Court Checkout Lines
                                                                                                       

</LP>
<TEXT>
   BAR CODE scanners, familiar to most supermarket shoppers,
may become common in courthouses too.
   Courts in a growing number of states are experimenting
with bar code technology to improve efficiency in
administration and record keeping. And bar codes may soon
find a place in courtrooms.
   A state court in Plymouth, Mich., will be installing bar
code technology in its courtrooms early this year. The codes
will be used in the disposition of cases, says Judge James N.
Garber. Adjournments, prison sentences and other verdicts
will be recorded on computer by simply running a penshaped
scanner over a series of codes, says Judge Garber. The
Michigan court will use a system developed by Manatron Inc.,
Kalamazoo, Mich.
   "Hopefully it's going to simplify things and cut out the
necessity of someone on the other side of the building
repeating what I do on the bench," says the judge.
   Trial courts in Maryland are using bar code technology to
improve efficiency in a variety of administrative tasks. Bar
codes are used to record arrests and process fines. "It saves
a lot of time and it saves a lot of errors," says James R.
Demme, the director of judicial information systems in
Maryland.
   Mr. Demme says that starting early next year, bar code
technology also will be used in courtrooms to record verdicts
and other orders and produce forms to implement them.
   The total cost of implementing the technology in
Maryland's district courts will be approximately $1.6
million, Mr. Demme says.
                                                                                                       

   Sign on Dotted Line
   About Going Part Time

   SAN FRANCISCO law firms are promising to try to offer
parents parttime work schedules -- in writing.
   The Bar Association of San Francisco is asking law firms
to sign a statement committing them to the organization's
policy on alternative work schedules for lawyers raising
children. The policy asks that law firms, if at all possible,
allow parents to work part time. It states that lawyers
should be paid on a pro-rata basis, based on hours worked,
and that associates on alternative work schedules continue to
be eligible for partnership.
   "Although it is sex-neutral, the real intent of this
policy is to afford women really full participation in the
profession and overcome what has been a major barrier to
that," says Drucilla Stender Ramey, the bar's executive
director and general counsel. She said that six large law
firms have already signed on, and that about 20 other major
legal employers are "on the brink of adopting" the policy.
   Bars in other states have adopted similar policies, but
none have asked law firms to commit themselves in writing,
according to Linda G. Marks, a consultant who worked with the
San Francisco bar.
   She says that law firms often make ad hoc arrangements,
but that many mothers have trouble making career plans. "This
way . . . people really are going to know what's going to
happen," Ms. Marks says.
                                                                                                       

   Lawsuits Could Affect
   Pension-Plan Structure
                                                                                                       

   SEVERAL lawsuits recently filed on the West Coast may
change the way some union pension plans determine eligibility
for retirement benefits.
   Most of the suits were filed in the wake of a verdict in a
class-action suit in federal court in Seattle last summer.
Hotel and restaurant workers, who had been employed on the
Alaska Pipeline construction project, won a
multimillion-dollar verdict from their union pension trust. A
judge ruled that the Alaska Hotel and Restaurant Workers
Pension Plan was structured so that most plaintiffs ended
their work on the project before they became eligible for
retirement benefits.
   Laurence Walner of Chicago, who represented the workers,
said the trustees "knew that almost no one would get a
benefit. They knew there would not be enough jobs around to
cover the required years of vesting." The case is being
appealed.
   In the past six months, other suits have been filed
against pension trusts on behalf of carpenters, electrical
workers, laborers and Teamsters who worked on the pipeline
project.
   Pension lawyers say similar cases could be filed by
workers on other big projects against pension plans with long
vesting periods.
   But Bruce McKenzie of Seattle, who represented the hotel
and restaurant workers pension plan, says, "What's disturbing
about the decision to date is the trusts are having to
provide benefits to people for whom no funds were set aside."
                                                                                                       

   Divorce Expert Warns:
   Look Before You Split
                                                                                                       

   DO YOU REALLY want a divorce? That was the title of a
seminar sponsored recently by the Cuyahoga County Bar
Association in Cleveland.
   Five two-hour workshops were offered to educate nonlawyers
about how to deal with divorce lawyers and the financial
implications of divorce. The seminars were also designed to
help spouses figure out whether they really wanted to file
for divorce.
   C. Terrence Kapp of the bar's Family Law Section called
the workshops "a preview of how harsh divorce can really be."
   Jan L. Warner, who conducted the seminars, is a former
divorce lawyer whose firm specializes in providing practical
information about life transitions through seminars,
publications and videotapes. Mr. Warner says he advises
people to "think, before they run to a lawyer and pull that
final trigger," and to "be your own policeman."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
