ID: 243	RANK: 75	SCORE: 11.709430
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910123-0117
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910123-0117.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Mailers Address Problem of Postage Rise
   ----
   By Albert R. Karr
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/23/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   TWX DJ
</CO>
<IN>
BROADLINE RETAILERS, DEPARTMENT STORES (RTB)
SPECIALTY APPAREL RETAILERS (SAP)
SPECIALTY RETAILERS (OTS)
INDUSTRIAL &amp; COMMERCIAL SERVICES, LEASING, CLEANING (ICS)
AIR FREIGHT (AIF)
</IN>
<GV>
POSTAL SERVICE (POS)
</GV>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- It's going to cost Publishers Clearinghouse
a lot more to put Ed McMahon in your mailbox.
   With approval yesterday of the second sharp rise in
junk-mail rates in three years, the Port Washington, N.Y.,
company says its postage bill will go up "millions of
dollars" for its mailings of magazines and such
prize-promotions as the one in which TV personality Mr.
McMahon declares that you may have already won big bucks in
its cash giveaway. "We've finally reached the breaking
point," says Thomas Lagan, vice president, operations.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Junk mailers scream that they are hit harder than anyone
by the package of rate rises approved yesterday on an 8-1
vote by the Postal Service board of governors. And mail-order
catalog-sales firms, already feeling the effects of the
recession on their bottom lines, will be hurt. But emerging
private mail-delivery companies may benefit from the higher
postal rates.
   The board accepted modifications proposed early this month
by the separate Postal Rate Commission to the Postal
Service's original recommendations. The new rates will take
effect Feb. 3.
   The first-class rate will rise to 29 cents from 25 cents
for a one-ounce letter. The Postal Service board also
accepted, but put off putting into effect, a 27-cent rate for
return envelopes printed with an address bar code provided by
utilities, banks and other businesses.
   While the overall first-class rate rise will be 15%,
increases will be greater for other mail: an average 18% for
parcel post; an average 22% for second-class mail, such as
newspapers and magazines; and an average 25% for third-class
mass mailings. The new third-class increase follows an
average 25% rise in 1988.
   The Postal Service board said it was accepting the
increases under protest and is sending them back to the
commission for further review to see if the package really
provides enough postal revenue. The board wants the
commission, among other things, to explain how it reached its
25%-increase figure for third class. But the effective date
of the rises won't be affected.
   Catalog mailers will be especially socked, with their
mailing rates climbing about 40%. "I'd be willing to wager
there will be casualties in the catalog industry in the very
near future," with "at least hundreds" of catalog titles
disappearing, says David Hursh, president of Miles Kimball
Co., an Oshkosh, Wis., catalog company owned by Torstar
Corp., parent of the Toronto Star.
   Joan Cook Inc., Fort Lauderdale, Fla., which sells gifts
and housewares by mail-order catalog, faces $1.4 million in
added yearly costs from combined postal and United Parcel
Service rate increases, says Harold Schwartz, president.
Anticipating higher mailing expenses, he has already laid off
20 of his work force of 130 people. Because of the recession,
"this is the wrong time to raise prices" as a way to cover
increased mailing costs, he says. Business mailers say their
revenues have been off sharply since last summer.
   Rate rises for third-class mail especially have forged
ahead of those for other classes since 1985. When the rate
commission issued its recommendations this month, it widened
the increase for third-class bulk mail to the average 25%
from the Postal Service's proposed 17%. The commission
acknowledged that the "substantial" rises "are likely to be
quite painful to certain mailers." But it said the business
mailers don't share enough of the postal agency's overhead
costs.
   The mailers disagree. Richard Barton, a senior vice
president of the Direct Marketing Association, complains that
third-class mail gets a back seat in postal handling, costs
the Postal Service far less and, even then, suffers from poor
service.
   Robert Setrakian, chairman of the board of governors and
the lone dissenter in the vote for the increases, said the
majority decision will "price elements of third class into
bankruptcy." He said he was "incensed by the cavalier
approach" of the commission, which he accused of "attempting
to kill off a whole industry by an exorbitant rate increase."
   Even Postmaster General Anthony Frank worries that the
size of the commission -- urged third-class-rate rise that
his agency is adopting will have a "potential negative impact
on third-class volume in light of current market conditions."
The Postal Service had forecast that under its proposal, bulk
third-class-mail volume would rise to 54 billion pieces in
fiscal 1991 from 51.5 billion pieces in fiscal 1990. But with
the bigger, 25% boost that is now set, the rate commission
estimates fiscal 1991 volume at only 50 billion pieces, or
even below the fiscal 1989 level.
   The forecast for a drop may be well-founded. Some new
ventures have sprung up lately, trying to siphon away more
distribution of second-class and third-class mail from the
Postal Service, just as such companies as Federal Express and
UPS have grabbed off big chunks of express mail and
small-package business.
   The new rate rises will give the direct-delivery people a
big boost, says Gene Del Polito, executive director of the
Third Class Mail Association. "If they can't make gravy out
of this increase, they'll never be able to," he says.
   Rates charged by Alternate Postal Delivery, Grand Rapids,
Mich., are now the same as or a bit above the Postal
Service's for the samples, ad circulars, magazines and
catalogs that it delivers. But with the coming increases, its
rates will be as much as 20% below the Postal Service, says
Stan Henry, chairman. He adds that the postal-rate rises
changed the word for APD's outlook "from `survive' to
`thrive.'"
   Mr. Henry says he's getting 15 to 20 calls a day from
companies showing interest in switching. APD delivers in 16
cities, to more than 300 ZIP codes, and in the past six weeks
has contracted to deliver in 900 more code areas, boosting
total markets to 42, he says. New APD customers include
Capital Cities/ABC publications, Gannett Co. and Times Mirror
Co., Los Angeles.
   Publishers Express, a new venture of Time Inc., a unit of
Time Warner Inc., is "positioning to expand" a similar
service from the two suburban Atlanta counties where it now
delivers, says Howard Rosen, its president. The postal-rate
boost "makes economic reality {of the expansion plan} that
much closer."
   The postal-rate rise offers Dow Jones &amp; Co. "an
opportunity to deliver more" publications through its private
National Delivery Service operation, says Michael Sheehan,
circulation-services director. NDS, besides delivering about
half of the subscription copies of The Wall Street Journal, a
Dow Jones newspaper, delivers 11 non-Dow Jones trade
publications and other magazines in 17 cities. "We're
optimistic," Mr. Sheehan says, after talking to other
prospects who are "concerned about the rising costs of postal
distribution."
   Consumer advocate Ralph Nader, who lobbied against any
first-class-rate rise, is unsympathetic to the business
mailers. "They're beginning to feel what it's like to have
the benefits of their cross-subsidy reduced," he says.
   ---
   Corrections &amp; Amplifications
                                                                                                       

   ED MCMAHON is featured in prize promotions by American
Family Publishers. Yesterday's edition incorrectly stated
that the television personality is connected with Publishers
Clearinghouse promotions.
   (WSJ Jan. 24, 1991)
</TEXT>
</DOC>
