ID: 243	RANK: 84	SCORE: 11.253322
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920113-0020
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920113-0020.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Computer Buffs Compete Via Technology
   To Give New Freedom to the Disabled
   ----
   By Raquel Santiago
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/13/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), NO PAGE CITATION
</SO>
<MS>
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)
</IN>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   BALTIMORE -- Three years ago at the age of 41, free-lance
journalist Yael Hana Bethiem thought her career was over when
a severe form of arthritis left her immobilized and with
little use of her hands. But today, thanks to new technology,
Ms. Bethiem can type 40 words a minute, using her voice to
control a computer from her bed.
   With DragonDictate-30K, Ms. Bethiem simply speaks into a
microphone attached to her computer, and everything she says
is transcribed onto the screen. "This has allowed me to have
a life. Instead of just surviving, I now feel like I'm
participating," she says.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The machine is one of the entries in the Johns Hopkins
University 1991 national search for technology to aid the
disabled. Some 1500 students, computer professionals and
amateurs entered the quest and participated in one of 10
regional fairs held in December.
   Thirty of the top entries will compete in a national fair
at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, Feb. 1-2, where
the winner will receive $10,000.
   Paul Hazan, associate director for advanced computing at
the university, says the real winners "are the users who are
going to get the benefit of all this technology." With a
grant from the National Science Foundation, Mr. Hazan
directed the first national search in 1981. "It was like
throwing a match on a bomb," he says of the explosive
response. Some of the winning entries in 1981 were an
eyetracking system paraplegics use to activate synthesized
speech, a printer that utilizes a bicycle inner-tube to print
in Braille and a computer for the blind that describes what
appears on screen.
   This year, entries range from a system that enables
paraplegics to control appliances by using their eyes to
operate a computer, to a headset that allows the deaf to
enjoy live theater.
   Andrew Mitz says he used a new computer chip and "a few
thousand dollars of my own" to design WeeTalk, a device to
help his severely retarded six-year-old son develop
expressive language. The device consists of two
switch-activated, tape-recording channels that a parent or
therapist can use to record the name of two objects. Here's
how it works: The therapist mounts a picture of each object
on the corresponding recorder, and the child activates the
recording by touching the picture. The goal is for the child
to use the system to express what he or she wants.
   "As a parent, you give your child every possible chance,
and that's why I built (WeeTalk)," says Mr. Mitz, who won
first place at the regional fair here at the Johns Hopkins
Applied Physics Laboratory.
   John Barrus, a Ph.D. student in mechanical engineering at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, is giving the
disabled an opportunity to shop from home with a system he
and two other students originally created for the elderly.
The patent-pending Stylus consists of a box with a speaker
and a bar-code scanner that users plug into their phone-jack.
Shoppers can phone in grocery orders by scanning a bar-code
filled catalog.
   "I think we'll be successful because (Stylus) is so
simple," says Mr. Barrus, a fifth-place finalist at the
regional fair in Boston.
   Some of the entries already are being marketed. Janet M.
Baker, president of Dragon Systems Inc., says she has sold
several of the $9,000-DragonDictate systems. "If it allows
them (the disabled) to go for a job or school, the system
pays for itself very quickly," she says of Dragon Dictate,
which adapts to users' pronunciations and recognizes up to
30,000 words.
   With another voice-operated entry, VOQUEST, a computer can
process verbal commands such as "open hand" and send
electrical stimuli to muscles that respond and execute the
orders. VOQUEST, which stands for voice-operated quadriplegic
electrical stimulation, "originally set out to give
quadriplegics the ability to open and close their hands,"
says Dr. Edwin Cooper, an orthopedic surgeon in Kinston,
N.C., who helped biomedical engineers at Duke University
design the device.
   Although use of VOQUEST is still in developmental stages,
Dr. Cooper is conducting research at the Caswell Center in
Kinston on how electrical stimuli can be used to "awaken"
severely retarded and brain-injured patients. "If this thing
works out, we would help mentally and moderately disabled
people be less dependent on others," says Di Hahn, a
rehabilitation engineer at the Caswell Center.
   Mr. Hahn, who is pursuing further advances in the device,
won second place in Atlanta for his design of a portable
VOQUEST.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
