ID: 298	RANK: 29	SCORE: 16.124945
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910529-0137
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910529-0137.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Abreast of the Market:
   Industrials Climb 44.95 as Investors
   Overcome Doubts; Trading Quiet
   ----
   By Howard Hoffman
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
05/29/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C2
</SO>
<IN>
STOCK INDEXES (NDX)
NYSE GENERAL MARKET COMMENTARY (NYS)
STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
U.S. STOCK MARKET STATISTICS (STT)
</IN>
<NS>
STOCK AND OTHER INDEXES (NDX)
STOCK &amp; OTHER MARKET NEWS (STK)
</NS>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- The stock market overcame technical resistance
and some fundamental doubt to mount a substantial, if quiet,
rally on the first day of the summer trading season.
   The Dow Jones Industrial Average finished at 2958.86, a
gain of 44.95 points, or 1.5%, for the day. Broader averages
also were strong. The Standard &amp; Poor's 500-Stock Index rose
4.45 points, or 1.2%, and the New York Stock Exchange
Composite Index added 2.21 points, or 1.1%.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Volume totaled 161,945,000 shares.
   Traders said the industrial average's climb past
resistance at the 2925 level prompted many investors to
abandon their fears of an imminent correction.
   Many investors returned from the Memorial Day weekend
waiting for the market to consolidate. But as prices crept
higher in the afternoon, traders said, skepticism was tossed
aside and replaced with "buy" orders instead.
   "There is a feeling the market already has had its
correction," said Thomas Gallagher, managing director for
trading at Oppenheimer &amp; Co.
   Investors may also have found strength in market leader
International Business Machines' ability to resist bad news.
Smith Barney, Harris Upham cut its 1991 earnings outlook for
IBM to $6 a share from $7.50. IBM shares gave some ground
early, but rallied through the afternoon to close unchanged
at 105 while convincing some that the market's leaders aren't
ready to capitulate.
   Blue-chip issues led the way up as investors rotated their
portfolios toward stocks that lagged behind recent advances.
   Investors sought out shares of auto makers such as General
Motors, up 3/4 to 40 5/8, and Ford Motor, up 1 1/4 to 34 5/8;
aluminum companies such as Aluminum Co. of America, up 3 to
70 3/4, Reynolds Metals, up 3 1/8 to 61 1/4, and Amax, up 2
1/2 to 25 1/8; and financial services concerns such as
Bankers Trust, up 2 1/8 to 52 3/8, J.P. Morgan, up 1 3/4 to
54, and American Express, up 1 1/4 to 25.
   The 45-point rally seemed suspect to some analysts.
   Charles Clough, chief investment strategist for Merrill
Lynch &amp; Co., said the emphasis on cyclical stocks in the
aluminum and automobile sectors while economic fundamentals
remain poor suggests more bottom-fishing for bargains than
bull market conviction.
   "We're probably somewhere in a correction," Mr. Clough
said. "Each rally has had a little less substance to it."
   Others are more hopeful.
   Ralph Acampora, director of technical research at
Prudential Securities, said the market's ability to close
with the Dow industrials above 2950 is even more significant
than surpassing resistance at 2925. Mr. Acampora expects
stocks and bonds to take strength from one another.
   Traders said the stock market has been taking cues from
the bond market. The 30-year Treasury ended the day 1/8 point
higher.
   New York Stock Exchange advancing issues held almost a
2-to-1 edge on decliners.
   Potlatch shares fell 4 1/4 to 41 1/2 as doubt crept into
speculation that Potlatch would consent to a takeover offer.
Richard Madden, chief executive officer, said Friday Potlatch
isn't for sale. Analysts questioned the viability of any
hostile offer and said Potlatch shares are overpriced if no
friendly offer emerges.
   Other forest and paper product companies showed good
gains. International Paper, viewed by many as the likely
suitor for Potlatch, saw its shares move 1 5/8 higher to 65
3/8. Georgia-Pacific was up 2 1/4 to 50 3/4. Westvaco jumped
1 7/8 to 34 1/8. Bowater was 1 1/4 higher to 27 3/8.
   L.A. Gear climbed 1 1/4 to 11 3/4 on news the
athletic-shoe maker would receive $100 million of new capital
and submit to certain restrictions on future business.
   Trefoil Capital Investors Limited Partnership, a fund
managed by Shamrock Capital Advisors, agreed to buy $100
million of L.A. Gear convertible preferred stock. Those
shares carry a 7.5% dividend and are convertible into common
stock at $11.94 a share. Trefoil will be entitled to name
three of nine directors on an expanded L.A. Gear board. A
dissenting vote by all three of those directors would prevent
L.A. Gear from taking important corporate actions such as
declaring a common stock dividend and selling assets.
   Newmont Mining gained 2 3/4 to 36 1/8 on news the company
is considering a merger with American Barrick Resources.
Newmont and American Barrick are discussing a transaction
that would exchange 1.8 shares of American Barrick for each
Newmont share. American Barrick shares rose 1 to 20 3/8.
   Sears Roebuck leaped 1 3/8 to 39 7/8. The New York Times
reported that analysts like Sears's prospects despite a
prolonged slump in its retail operations. The analysts said
the value of Sears's retail, financial services, insurance
and real estate components exceeds its stock price and makes
Sears an attractive investment.
   Knogo added 1 to 9 3/8. Knogo said it was selected to be
the primary supplier of electronic article surveillance
systems for Hallmark Cards' 12,000 stores nationwide.
   Sundstrand was down 1 3/4 to 32 on a weak outlook for its
industrial and aerospace businesses. Sundstrand said
second-quarter earnings will be "significantly lower" than
the 59 cents a share it earned from continuing operations in
the 1990 second quarter, and 1991 earnings won't match its
1990 level.
   Ameritech edged 1/2 higher to 58 3/4. Ameritech
definitively agreed to purchase Cybertel Financial for $512
million in cash. The acquisition would give the Chicago-based
telecommunications company control of cellular communications
services in the St. Louis area and paging services in St.
Louis, Minneapolis and parts of Illinois.
   General Housewares rose 1 1/2 to 16 1/8. It was named on a
CNBC-FNN broadcast by USA Today columnist Dan Dorfman as a
possible takeover candidate.
   Computer Sciences slipped 1 7/8 to 65 3/8 on heavy volume
of 273,600 shares. The company told Dow Jones Professional
Investor Report that an unidentified offshore investor sold
174,100 Computer Science shares.
   Dataram added 2 1/4 to 12 1/8 in active American Stock
Exchange trading. An article in this week's Barron's magazine
cites the computer equipment maker's prospects for revenue
and earnings growth after a recent refocusing.
   The Amex's Market Value Index closed at 364.45, up 1.91.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
