ID: 298	RANK: 44	SCORE: 13.185838
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910610-0047
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910610-0047.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Commodities:
   Some Wood-Product Prices Hit Highs, Sparked
   By Spotted Owl Litigation, Low Lumber Output
   ----
   By Chip Johnson
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
06/10/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C12
</SO>
<MS>
BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)
</MS>
<IN>
COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)
FOREST PRODUCTS, PRODUCERS OF WOOD AND LUMBER (FOR)
PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS)
</IN>
<NS>
COMMODITIES MARKET (CMD)
</NS>
<LP>
   Some wood-products prices soared to record highs last
week, reflecting a speculative frenzy sparked by efforts to
save the spotted owl from extinction and low lumber
production.
   A composite index of nine framing-lumber products, tracked
by Random Lengths Publications Inc., hit $303 per 1,000 board
feet Friday, exceeding the previous record of $300 Aug. 24,
1979. Similarly, an index of plywood products climbed to $282
per 1,000 square feet, one of the highest levels recorded but
not a record. The figures haven't been adjusted for
inflation. Prices of specific products have jumped in the
past two weeks. Two-by-fours have risen 17.5% and half-inch
plywood, 19.2%.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Some wood-products companies believe the surge reflects
the beginning of a long cycle of improved prices and profits
for the industry, after last year's severe slump. But others
caution that real demand, as evidenced by a strong recovery
in construction, is needed to sustain the rally. So far, the
recovery is very tentative.
   Lumber companies and analysts said the major impetus has
been more the fear of impending shortages, rather than actual
demand-supply imbalances. Last month, a federal judge
prohibited the federal government from selling any more
timber on 66,000 acres of forests in California, Oregon and
Washington, pending the outcome of litigation to protect the
habitat of the spotted owl. Meanwhile, the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service is working out details of its recent owl
proposal, which could limit logging on some or all of the
11.6 million acres it regards as prime owl habitat. Previous
court decisions regarding the owl also limited cutting.
   The ban removes about 77% of all the land identified by
the National Forest Service for timber harvest in the
Northwest, according to an agency spokesman. Companies can
still harvest 4.77 billion board feet under current contract,
an estimated 18-month supply, but no new contracts are being
issued.
   "The short-term effects of that decision are a little
scary," said Richard S. Schneider, an analyst with Kidder,
Peabody &amp; Co. "Some of the concern is reasonable, but part of
the price rise comes from people scrambling for product so
they won't be left without raw materials."
   Many speculators and traders have concluded that
environmentalists have gained the upper hand in the
Northwest. In a similar dispute in the 1970s, regional
politicians obtained an exemption of the snaildarter fish
from the endangered-species list so that construction of
Tennessee's Tellico Dam could proceed. But this is a
different era. Northwest politicians face a less receptive
audience in Congress. While a compromise may yet occur, it is
still expected to limit cutting significantly.
   "The timber under contract is fine for now, but for the
future, those areas could be lost or greatly reduced by 50%
or more," said George A. Haloulakos, an analyst with Dain
Bosworth Inc. in Seattle.
   The psychological effect of the spotted-owl decision has
been compounded by other events limiting supply, such as
heavy rains in the South and reductions in milling capacity
in the Northwest. Overall, Northwest lumber production is
already down 19% from last year.
   Adding fuel to the speculative fire is a seasonal
resurgence of demand related mainly to remodeling and
new-home construction. FW Dodge, the market research division
of McGraw Hill &amp; Co., reported a 12% rise in construction
activity in April. Housing starts in particular turned up
slightly this spring from near-record lows.
   Walter C. Minnick, chairman and chief executive officer of
TJ International, a custom lumber maker in Boise, Idaho, said
he put aside fears of a continued recession when orders
doubled in March from the rate of preceding months. "We saw
the bottom of the trough in December, and now we're at the
start of an upward cycle that could last for about five
years," he said.
   "Order activity for wood windows and housing related
materials is up," said Mr. Haloulakos, the Dain Bosworth
analyst. "Lower interest rates, higher levels of consumer
confidence, and after all the uncertainty from the war, a
little pent-up demand is starting to emerge," he said, adding
that he believes the forest products industry is poised for
"a multiyear move" toward bigger profits.
   Forest-products companies with big timber holdings, such
as Weyerhaeuser Co., Louisiana-Pacific Corp. and Potlatch
Corp., are expected to benefit from the price surge because
they can avoid increases in raw-material costs while charging
more for finished wood products. Weyerhaeuser's stock has
jumped 45% from its low in January, while Louisiana-Pacific's
stock increased 58% and Potlatch's stock has risen 51%.
   But construction, particularly of new homes, apartment
houses and small retail structures, is still deeply
depressed, causing some veteran lumber executives to doubt
the sustainability of the price rally. Peter P. Pope,
chairman and chief executive officer of Pope &amp; Talbot Inc.,
Portland, Ore., says a recovery in housing starts to roughly
1.5 million is needed to prop up high prices. In April, the
seasonally adjusted annual rate of housing starts was
slightly more than one million.
   If such a housing recovery does occur, a real shortage
looms, according to L. Penn Siegel, the director of
Potlatch's wood-products division. "I don't think we have
enough timber when you reach a level of 1.3 million to 1.4
million {annual} housing starts," he said.
   Looking ahead to commodity markets this week:
                                                                                                       

   Grains and Soybeans
                                                                                                       

   Traders will continue to watch for signs that the White
House is inching closer to granting Moscow $1.5 billion in
export credit guarantees.
   The White House has been mulling the widely expected aid
package to the cashstrapped Soviet Union for several weeks.
According to analysts, U.S. grain exports will continue to be
depressed until Moscow gets financial backing to resume its
food purchases. The Soviet Union had been one of the biggest
buyers of U.S. grain until its economic troubles.
   This week analysts will also watch whether farmers in
waterlogged Iowa and Minnesota are able to complete the
planting of their corn crop. The deadline for planting corn
is generally early June. Traders are particularly concerned
about the delays in Iowa because its flat black land is some
of the most productive in the world.
   The warm wet spring is also causing problems with the soft
red winter wheat crop in states such as Illinois. A fungus
outbreak is reducing potential yields and damaging the
quality of the crop.
   After the close of trading tomorrow the Agriculture
Department is slated to release its update of the total
winter wheat harvest, which is already under way in some
states.
   Dale Durchholz, an analyst at AgriVisor Services Inc.,
said he expects the government to predict a winter wheat crop
of 1.49 billion bushels, which is little changed from the
government's May estimate.
                                                                                                       

   Precious Metals
                                                                                                       

   Traders will be watching the silver market to determine
whether last week's rally has any steam left in it. "The
performance of the market early this week will be critical,"
said William O'Neill, futures strategist at Merrill Lynch.
   Silver for July delivery surged 24.5 cents an ounce
Thursday and jumped an additional 21 cents to a high of $4.64
Friday before ending at $4.47, up four cents.
   Much of Thursday's activity was said to be short-covering,
or traders buying contracts to offset previous bets the price
would fall. Short-covering reduces the number of outstanding
contracts, but this figure, called "open interest," rose
Thursday by 11,738 to 111,167, indicating new buying, said
Mr. O'Neill.
   A rising open interest during a period of heavy trading is
usually a bullish indicator, he said. But if the price begins
to fall, he warned, these new investors may bail out quickly,
adding to the selling pressure.
   Bernard Savaiko, senior metals analyst at PaineWebber,
finds the rise in open interest troubling, especially if
funds were buying and producers were selling. Funds buy and
sell based on technical reasons, while producers base trades
on fundamental factors, he said. If technical indicators
dictate the funds stop buying, and producers continue
selling, silver "could come down like a house of cards," Mr.
Savaiko said.
   In that case, the price could easily drop to $4.25 to
$4.35 an ounce, and even as low as $4, he said.
   The market needs to hold onto its gains this week, "or it
could be in trouble from a technical viewpoint," Mr. O'Neill
said.
                                                                                                       

   Coffee
                                                                                                       

   Coffee futures fell sharply Friday on technical factors.
Coffee for July delivery fell 2.4 cents a pound to 85.60
cents.
   Talk about possible cold weather in Brazil sparked a small
rally last week, said Celeste Georgakis, senior analyst at
Cargill Investor Services.
   But when the July contract failed to rise above 89 cents,
an important resistance level, speculators and funds began
selling, said Ms. Georgakis. The fall was accelerated as the
price hit levels that triggered standing sell orders.
   Judith Ganes, senior analyst at Merrill Lynch, added that
prices fell in spite of news that unions at a Brazilian port
had gone out on strike. Although the two strikes don't affect
coffee exports significantly, they suggest that negotiations
under way at major coffee ports might also break down, she
said.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
