ID: 298	RANK: 54	SCORE: 12.407287
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910107-0176
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910107-0176.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Forest-Product
   Companies Had
   Lower Earnings
   ---
   Net Fell for Most Canadian,
   U.S. Firms in 4th Period;
   Industry Outlook Grim
   ----
   By G. Pierre Goad
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/07/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B6B
</SO>
<CO>
   CANDA WY CHA BCC TIN GP MEA ABY T.A
</CO>
<IN>
FOREST PRODUCTS, PRODUCERS OF WOOD AND LUMBER (FOR)
RAW AND FINISHED PAPER PRODUCTS (PAP)
CONTAINERS &amp; PACKAGING, BAGS, CANS, BOXES (CTR)
</IN>
<LP>
   Most U.S. and Canadian forest-products concerns will
report sharply lower earnings for the fourth quarter and the
immediate outlook is grim, company officials and analysts
said.
   The product mix of individual companies varies widely in
the forest industry. However, prices for wood, paper and
packaging products were mostly flat to weaker in the fourth
quarter with producers of building materials and pulp hit
particularly hard by sliding prices.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   While a year-old cyclical industry slump is expected to
continue well into the second half of 1991, profits are
expected to bottom out in the fourth quarter or the first
quarter of 1992, company officials and analysts said.
   Mark Diverio, analyst at Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc.,
said that as a group he expects 18 U.S. companies he tracks
to report that fourth-quarter earnings tumbled 30% to 35%
from a year earlier, excluding nonrecurring items. He said
some companies, such as Weyerhaeuser Co., Boise Cascade
Corp., Georgia-Pacific Corp., Mead Corp. and Champion
International Corp., will report declines of more than 50%,
excluding nonrecurring items.
   For the full year, earnings for the group of 18 companies
he follows fell 30% to 35% from 1989 levels, Mr. Diverio
said, and this year earnings should decline 10% more.
"Nineteen ninety-one still looks horrible" because markets
for many products must digest major capacity increases in the
middle of an economic slowdown he said. "The world is going
to be awash in pulp over the near term," Mr. Diverio said.
Pulp is used to make a variety of paper, sanitary and other
products. Prices for coated papers, used for magazines,
catalogs and brochures, and uncoated papers such as photocopy
paper don't yet reflect capacity increases, he said. Prices
for container board, used for packaging, could weaken and "I
don't think realistically the industry has a chance at a
{price} increase before the fall," he said.
   "Nineteen ninety-one is going to be another down year" for
earnings, said George Adler, analyst at Smith Barney, Harris
Upham &amp; Co. New capacity will put downward pressure on prices
for many paper grades and pulp prices "are going into the
tank," he said.
   A newsprint price rise "isn't guaranteed" to hold, Mr.
Adler said. Though the about 5% increase did take effect Jan.
1, many analysts and newsprint buyers don't expect it to
stick because demand is flat, several large Canadian mills
that were shut by strikes are now returning to full
production, and capacity will again increase this year. About
10% of North American newsprint capacity was idled by strikes
during much of the fourth quarter.
   Canadian forest-products concerns, with their operations
concentrated at home, are generally in worse shape than their
U.S. counterparts. The continued strength of the Canadian
dollar, which ended the quarter about where it began at just
over 86 cents U.S., has a major impact on earnings because
most forest and paper products are priced in U.S. dollars.
The many U.S. companies with mills in Canada are also hurt by
the strength of the Canadian currency.
   Raymond Kilroy, analyst at Nesbitt Thomson Deacon Inc.,
said the fourth quarter was "the worst quarter this year" for
Canadian companies and earnings are "somewhat worse than
people are expecting." A survey of this newspaper showed that
for the first nine months of 1990 the combined earnings of 18
Canadian forest-products concerns fell 89% from a year
earlier.
   A few companies, such as Abitibi-Price Inc., may report
earnings gains because the year-earlier period included
nonrecurring items, Mr. Kilroy said. A spokeswoman for
Toronto-based Abitibi-Price declined to comment but said that
"obviously this isn't a great time for the industry." Mr.
Kilroy said further dividend cuts by Canadian companies are
possible. Several Canadian concerns chopped or suspended
their dividends in 1990; Canadian Pacific Forest Products
Ltd. cut its dividend twice. However, the dividends of U.S.
forest-products companies aren't in danger, analysts said.
"U.S. companies' cash flow is still quite strong," said
Shearson's Mr. Diverio.
   The fourth quarter was especially bleak for U.S. and
Canadian companies that produce lumber, plywood and particle
board. The slowdown in home construction walloped markets for
those products. Several companies said their building
products businesses operated at a loss in the quarter.
   Among the U.S. companies Shearson's Mr. Diverio expects to
report 50% or greater declines in fourth-quarter earnings,
Weyerhaeuser, Champion International and Boise Cascade all
produce building materials, among other things.
   A Weyerhaeuser official said estimates of 25 cents to 30
cents a share for fourth-quarter earnings are "probably
pretty close to reality." A year earlier, Weyerhaeuser had
earnings before extraordinary items of 67 cents a share.
After nonrecurring items final loss was 65 cents a share.
   Champion International warned its shareholders early in
December that it expected fourth-quarter net income to drop
sharply from third-quarter net of 59 cents share. In 1989
Champion had fourth-quarter net of $1.08 a share.
   Boise Cascade said it expects to report close to
"break-even" results for the fourth quarter compared with net
income of $1.28 a share a year earlier.
   Temple-Inland Inc. is one of the few forest-products
concerns that expects to report higher fourth-quarter net.
But the increase doesn't have anything to do with its main
paper and wood products businesses, where it expects
operating earnings to drop 30% to 40%. That decline will be
more than offset by improved results in its savings and loans
business and by a related tax benefit, company officials
said. Temple-Inland expects to report fourth-quarter net of
83 to 90 cents a share compared with a restated net of 80
cents a share a year earlier.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
