ID: 298	RANK: 68	SCORE: 11.692147
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910520-0016
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910520-0016.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Abreast of the Market:
   Despite Setback, Many Consider
   Stocks the Investment of the 1990s
   ----
   By Douglas R. Sease and Craig Torres
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
05/20/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C1
</SO>
<IN>
STOCK INDEXES (NDX)
NYSE GENERAL MARKET COMMENTARY (NYS)
STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
U.S. STOCK MARKET STATISTICS (STT)
</IN>
<NS>
STOCK AND OTHER INDEXES (NDX)
STOCK &amp; OTHER MARKET NEWS (STK)
</NS>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- Look closely enough at all those bears
snuffling around the stock market these days, and you'll see
some of them sprouting horns.
   A lot of analysts and money managers are braced for stock
prices to retreat in the short term. Some figure it will be
the payback for all that bullishness of a few weeks ago.
Others think the retreat will be based on economic
fundamentals.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But underneath the facade of gloom that has gathered since
last week lurk lots of long-term bulls -- and by long-term
they mean years, not months. Many market experts are
identifying stocks as the investment of the 1990s. If they're
right -- and it will take patience to find out if they are --
a Dow Jones Industrial Average of 5000 by 1995, maybe
earlier, is in the cards.
   That outlook is based largely on projected increases in
personal savings rates and expectations of lower inflation in
the years ahead. "Basically, we're talking about the flip
side of the excesses of the 1980s," says Edward Yardeni,
chief economist at C.J. Lawrence and an outspoken optimist on
the stock market's long-range performance. He predicts an
inflation rate of only 3% annually for the coming decade,
with long-term bond yields falling to 5% from 8.3% currently.
All these factors, he says, make such once-attractive assets
as real estate and art anathema to investors looking for big
gains.
   "We have a five-to-10-year deflation problem in real
estate, the art market has played out, and on a global basis
capital isn't willing to speculate on real assets," he says.
   Beyond that, demographic trends will make more money
available to the stock and bond markets, which he believes
will be the investment vehicles of choice. Mr. Yardeni
estimates that there are 75 million "baby boomers" entering a
stage of life in which saving will become more important to
most of them than spending. "They're going to want to stash
money away in the form of financial assets," he predicts.
   A.C. Moore, a portfolio manager at Argus Investment
Management in Santa Barbara, Calif., argues that even bonds
won't be very attractive in the next few years, leaving
stocks as the investment choice "by default." He says that
investors have become hooked on getting double-digit returns
on their investments and that stocks will be the only vehicle
with any chance of providing that kind of return.
   "Bond yields are well short of double-digit returns," he
says. "Historically they have only outperformed stocks in
very limited periods of time."
   But he cautions that investors shouldn't become so
enamored of stocks as the market rises that they forget basic
rules of value. He says he's already seeing signs that
investors are ignoring traditional valuation benchmarks, such
as price-earnings ratios, and the temptation to do that is
likely to grow.
   "Stocks are a financial asset; they're not tulips," Mr.
Moore says, alluding to the kind of mania that sometimes has
lured incautious investors into big losses. "There's a way to
measure the value of stocks, and it would be unwise to ignore
those values."
   No problem, says Stefan Abrams, chief investment
strategist at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co. While corporate earnings
have historically risen at a 6.1% annual rate, Mr. Abrams is
looking for earnings increases to soar far above that rate
for the next few years. In fact, while strategists are
expecting 14% growth in profits among companies in the
Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index for 1992, Mr. Abrams
suggests that 20% is a more likely target.
   His reason: U.S. companies are lean and mean, after
several quarters of cutting costs sharply ahead of an
economic slowdown that most of them saw coming. "They moved
quickly and aggressively to remove head count and to take
write-offs and to do the divestitures of businesses that were
not performing," Mr. Abrams says.
   Now, as the economy muddles through a recession, it's
difficult to see the effects of those cutbacks, he says. But
when demand picks up next year, expenses will stay under
control while profit margins skyrocket.
   However, skeptics abound. Predicting the stock market's
long-range performance is fraught with pitfalls, says Hugh
Johnson, chief investment officer at First Albany Corp. "I
realize that there are some positive forces that suggest
stocks would be the investment of choice over the long term,"
he says, "but it's oversimplified. A lot can go wrong between
now and then."
   He says one potential impediment to a surging stock market
is the high debt levels that will continue to be a drag on
the economy for years. "If the economic recovery is going to
be anemic, it's hard for me to make a case that stock prices
can go to 5000," he says.
   Another problem is that the stock market historically
tends to follow a pattern in which a decade of
overperformance is followed by two decades of lackluster
performance. The 1920s, 1950s and 1980s were clearly the
decades of overperformance, he says. "The rhythm of the
market and common sense suggest that we're going to have
something less than exciting in the stock market of the
1990s," he concludes.
   Still, even he can't rule out a big surge in stock prices.
"I don't discount the possibility that we could have a period
of speculation that borders on lunacy," he says. "But you
can't predict that something like that will occur."
   ---
   Friday's Market Activity
                                                                                                       

   A surging bond market left share prices limping along with
modest losses.
   The Dow Jones Industrial Average slipped 7.38 points to
2886.63 in active trading. Volume on the New York Stock
Exchange totaled 174,210,000 shares. Declining issues on the
Big Board were ahead of gainers, 813-684. For the week, the
industrial average lost 33.54 points, or 1.15%.
   A late rally in bonds failed to prompt any interest in
stocks, though the bond market's slide earlier last week was
blamed for the stock market's lackluster performance then.
Traders said the expiration of stock index futures had little
effect on prices.
   Technology stocks were mixed. International Business
Machines fell 3/8 to 103 3/4, Hewlett-Packard was up 1/8 to
48 1/8, and Compaq Computer, battered earlier by disclosures
that second-quarter earnings wouldn't meet expectations, was
unchanged at 35 3/4.
   Airline stocks posted losses after a Smith Barney analyst
cut his earnings estimates on three big carriers. AMR, parent
of American Airlines, lost 1/8 to 61 1/8, Delta Air Lines was
down 1 to 69 7/8, and UAL, parent of United Airlines, fell 4
to 147 3/4.
   Potlatch climbed 1 1/8 on speculation that International
Paper is considering a $60-a-share takeover bid. A Potlatch
official refused to comment. International Paper fell 1/8 to
62 7/8.
   Lowe's skidded 7/8 to 29 1/8 after reporting sharply lower
first-quarter earnings.
   Outboard Marine tumbled 3/4 to 12 7/8. Analysts said the
outlook for the marine industry is grim and that Outboard
Marine's excess production capacity, high inventories, large
position in the slow-growth outboard motor market and
negative cash flow make it particularly vulnerable.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
