ID: 298	RANK: 83	SCORE: 11.234937
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910522-0010
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910522-0010.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Abreast of the Market:
   IBM's Tumble Reduces the Gain
   By Dow Jones Industrials to 13.86
   ----
   By Craig S. Smith
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
05/22/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C2
</SO>
<IN>
STOCK INDEXES (NDX)
NYSE GENERAL MARKET COMMENTARY (NYS)
STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
U.S. STOCK MARKET STATISTICS (STT)
</IN>
<NS>
STOCK AND OTHER INDEXES (NDX)
STOCK &amp; OTHER MARKET NEWS (STK)
</NS>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- Once again, International Business Machines
spoiled the stock market's party when the computer giant's
shares took an afternoon tumble.
   The market performed beautifully for most of the day,
climbing sharply in the morning and holding its gains through
midafternoon.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Shortly after 2:30 p.m. EDT, however, Lehman Brothers
analyst Don Young told his firm's sales force that Wall
Street estimates for Big Blue's earnings over the next three
quarters are still too high. As word of Mr. Young's comments
spread through the market, IBM began to fall, dragging the
rest of the market down.
   The Dow Jones Industrial Average, which had flirted with
the 2920 level through the afternoon, lost all of its gains
in about half an hour.
   On March 19, the Dow Jones industrials plummeted more than
62 points after IBM stunned investors when it said
first-quarter earnings would be about half of what many
analysts were estimating at the time.
   But the market has learned to isolate IBM's problems, and
yesterday some investors stepped in to pick up bargains as
the market fell. The industrials rebounded at the session's
close, ending with a 13.86 point gain at 2906.08.
   IBM lost 1 3/4 to 101 1/2, accounting for a loss of more
than three Dow Jones industrial points.
   Standard &amp; Poor's 500-Stock Index gained 3.07 to 375.35,
the New York Stock Exchange Composite Index added 1.53 to
205.60, and the Dow Jones Equity Market Index rose 2.87 to
350.32.
   Advancers beat decliners, 984 to 578. Trading volume
recovered to a respectable 186,860,000 shares from Monday's
anemic 109,510,000 shares.
   Robert S. Robbins, technical analyst and market strategist
at Robinson-Humphrey, says that until IBM took its dive, the
market's major averages had spent most of the day well above
their 10-day moving averages -- a bullish technical signal.
   Mr. Robbins is convinced that the market is preparing to
take off in a summer rally that could push the Dow Jones
industrials to 3200.
   "May is traditionally the departure point for a summer
rally," says Mr. Robbins. Normally, a summer run would take
market averages up about 8%, he says. But this year Mr.
Robbins is looking for more -- about a 12% rise from its
recent closing lows -- because he believes the market is
still in the early stages of a bull market.
   Trading volume was inflated a bit by a 10.2 million share
block of USX-Marathon Group. The block, representing 4% of
the USX-Marathon shares outstanding, was crossed by Salomon
Brothers, Goldman Sachs and Lehman Brothers. The block is
part of the stake sold by Carl Icahn last week, traders say,
and was bought yesterday by several institutions.
USX-Marathon eased 1/8 to 25 1/8 on volume of 12.3 million
shares.
   Alcan Aluminium added 1/8 to 19 3/4 on more than 6.1
million shares as some investors swapped stock to capture the
company's 28-cent dividend, payable to stock of record
yesterday.
   Caterpillar slid 1 3/8 to 48 1/8 after the heavy equipment
maker said the outlook for sales and profits in the second
quarter has deteriorated, and that a loss in the quarter is
possible. The company earned 46 cents a share in last year's
period.
   India Growth Fund, a publicly traded mutual fund, dropped
1 5/8 to 11 on news of former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi's
assassination. That means the fund's shares are now at a 25%
discount to the fund's last reported portfolio value of
$14.71 a share.
   But Michael Porter, an analyst with Smith Barney, Harris
Upham, says the fund isn't a bargain. He notes that over the
past year India Growth's discount has been as large as 31%.
In addition, he says, "there's a likelihood that the {Indian
stock} market will tank on this news."
   Triton Energy added 1/2 to 18 1/8. Morgan Stanley
initiated research coverage of the stock with a "buy" rating
for risk-oriented investors. Triton is also expected to begin
full-scale production testing this week of the Cusiana 2a
exploratory well in Colombia. Some analysts have speculated
that the well could have one billion to two billion barrels
of oil equivalent. Triton owns a 24% working interest in
Cusiana 2a, while British Petroleum, the operator, owns 38%.
France's Total Cie. Francais de Petroles also owns 38%.
British Petroleum added 1 7/8 to 69 3/4.
   House of Fabrics gained 2 3/8 to 26 3/4. The company
earned 28 cents a share in the first quarter, up from 17
cents a year ago.
   Potlatch surged 4 5/8 to 44 on continuing rumors that
International Paper is readying a $60-a-share bid for the
company. International Paper added 3/8 to 62 7/8. Both
companies declined to comment.
   Cabletron Systems rebounded 2 1/4 to 33 after losing 1 3/4
Monday. Merrill Lynch reaffirmed estimates for Cabletron's
first quarter ending in May, adding there is an opportunity
for an upside surprise.
   Minnesota Mining added 7/8 to 89 1/8. Late Monday, the
company said its directors authorized the repurchase of as
many as six million shares, or 2.7% of the stock outstanding.
   Vigoro Corp. ended unchanged at 14, which is where the
company's initial public offering was priced late Monday.
   Cummins Engine dropped 1 5/8 to 36. The company's board
cut its per-share dividend to five cents from 55 cents.
Cummins also said, however, that it expects to report a
second-quarter operating loss narrower than the $34.3 million
operating loss in the first quarter. The company earned $6.1
million in the second quarter last year.
   Orion Pictures lost 1 5/8 to 7. The company disclosed a
restructuring of $285 million of debt, or about half of its
total debt. Orion also reported a loss of $2.14 a share for
the fiscal fourth quarter, compared with year-earlier profit
of 29 cents a share.
   Home Depot added 1 7/8 to 60 3/4. The company earned 41
cents a share, up from 32 cents a year earlier and at the
high end of analysts' estimates.
   Advanced Micro Devices gained 5/8 to 12. Lehman Brothers
and Smith Barney, Harris Upham both made positive comments
about the stock ahead of the company's annual meeting today.
   The American Stock Exchange Market Value Index rose 0.97
to 359.13. Volume totaled 9,540,000 shares, compared with
7,940,000 Monday. There were 283 issues advancing, 249
declining, and 254 unchanged.
   Scandinavia Co. added 3/8 to 3 1/2. The closed-end fund
said it agreed to conduct a cash tender offer open to all
shareholders for as many as 952,500 shares at 116% of the
stock's market price up to a maximum of $5.25 a share.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
