ID: 187	RANK: 45	SCORE: 8.268150
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP881001-0185 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-10-01-88 1237EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>a a BC-SPE--Cars:1staddNewModels     10-01 0926</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-SPE--Cars: 1st add New Models,0942</SECOND>
<HEAD>BC-SPECIAL EDITION</HEAD>
<HEAD>CARS: 1st add New Models</HEAD>
<HEAD>DETROIT: disc player.</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   Ford introduced another 1989 model, the Mazda-engineered and
Mazda-built Ford Probe, in May. The two-door hatchback has a
standard three-valve-per-cylinder, four-cylinder 2.2-liter engine
with an optional turbo-charged 2.2-liter GT version. Transmission
is five-speed manual or four-speed automatic. The GT also has
automatic adjustable suspension, fog lamps and optional anti-lock
brakes and CD player. This reasonably priced car has been sold out
for months and Mazda is squeezing all it can from its Flat Rock
assembly plant.
   Ford also will offer a high-performance version of its Taurus
midsize sedan later in the year. The Taurus SHO _ for Super High
Output _ will have a 24-valve, 3.0-liter, 220-horsepower
fuel-injected V6 engine developed by Ford and Yamaha, five-speed
manual transmission, standard air conditioning and other touches.
   Ford has restyled its Ranger compact pickup and Bronco II
compact sport-utility vehicle for 1989. Both get standard rear
anti-lock brakes and a new 2.3-liter dual-spark plug engine.
   LINCOLN-MERCURY: The 1989 Mercury Cougar shares all features of
the Thunderbird, and like the Super Coupe, the high-performance
Cougar XR7 is supercharged. The 1989 Lincoln Continental luxury
sedan will be the first domestic-made car with airbags on both the
driver and passenger side. The '89 Lincoln Mark VII coupe has a
5.0-liter, 225-horsepower V8, anti-lock brakes and keyless entry
system.
   CHRYSLER=
   CHRYSLER-PLYMOUTH: After nearly a decade, Chrysler is replacing
its venerable, stodgy, fuel-efficient front-wheel-drive K-car with
the more updated Plymouth Acclaim. Acclaim is a roomy, if sparse,
four-door family sedan with a 2.5-liter four-cylinder base engine
and optional 2.5-liter turbo or 3.0-liter V6 with four-speed
automatic transmission. Acclaim's styling is smoother and more
rounded than the K-cars but still conservative. Its suspension
includes gas struts and provides increased control and comfort.
   Chrysler also adds an optional turbo-charged four-cylinder
engine for is Voyager minivan along with the existing optional V6
by Mitsubishi.
   Plymouth's Mitsubishi import, the Colt, is completely restyled
for increased aerodynamics. The two-door Colt hatchback has an
optional turbo-charged engine.
   Plymouth also will get a sporty, Probe-fighting Laser subcompact
coupe during 1989. Laser will be made at Diamond-Star, a joint
venture between Chrysler and Mitsubishi.
   DODGE: Dodge's version of the Acclaim is the Spirit. Dodge also
shares the Colt and sells it under the same name. Like Voyager, the
Caravan minivan gets an optional turbo engine. Most Dodge trucks
get standard rear anti-lock brakes. A new 5.9-liter, in-line
6-cylinder Cummins diesel engine is optional on many 1989 full-size
Ram trucks. The Mitsubishi-built Raider sport-utility vehicle gets
an optional six-cylinder engine. The Dakota midsize truck also gets
a more powerful engine for 1989.
   JEEP-EAGLE: The Mitsubishi-built Summit sedan (a version of the
Mitsubishi Mirage) joins the Eagle lineup. For 1989, Jeep Cherokee
and Wagoneer have optional four-wheel anti-lock brakes, while
Wrangler comes in a new Islander version that offers bright new
colors and a 2.5-liter four-cylinder or 4.2-liter six-cylinder
engine. Jeep-Eagle also will get a version of the Plymouth Laser,
possibly in 1989.
   NISSAN: Two new models will allow Nissan to re-enter the
competition. The rear-wheel-drive 240SX sports coupe has a
multi-valve four-cylinder engine and comes in notchback and
fastback versions. The upscale Maxima sedan gets a V6 engine and a
Nissan-Bose sound system, optional on some versions. Both offer
options including heads-up display, which projects critical
dashboard information such as speed onto the windshield so the
driver doesn't have to refocus by looking from the road to the
gauges.
   MAZDA: 1989 offerings include a rear-wheel-drive minivan.
   MITSUBISHI: Chrysler's Japanese partner will sell two all-new
products through its own dealerships. The 1989 Mirage is a
subcompact sedan that has an optional turbo-charged, 16-valve
four-cylinder engine. The Galant is a compact upscale sedan; its
top model has a 16-valve engine and electronically controlled
suspension, along with optional anti-lock brakes. In early 1989,
Mitsubishi will introduce its Diamond-Star Eclipse sporty coupe as
a 1990 model.
   Mitsubishi's new four-door Montero compact sport-utility vehicle
has a V6 engine and four-wheel-drive. It is longer and wider than
its two-door predecessor, which also gets a the 3.0-liter V6 that
Mitsubishi shares with Chrysler.
   PEUGEOT: The French automaker is fighting for a U.S. comeback
with two luxury-oriented models, the new front-wheel-drive 405
midsize sedan and the larger, restyled 505 sedan and station wagon.
Engines on the 405, Europe's Car of the Year for 1988, include a
four-cylinder multi-valve version. The 505 comes with
four-cylinder, V6 or turbo-charged four-cylinder engines. Anti-lock
brakes are standard on most 505 models and optional on some 405s.
   PORSCHE: The German luxury-sports car maker adds anti-lock
braking, Blaupunkt digital cassette stereo, electric-tilt removable
sunroof, central locking and alarm system and electric seat
adjustment as standard equipment on its 944, 944 S2 and 944 Turbo
models. The alarm system and other touches also come on 911 and 928
models.
   VOLKSWAGEN=
   AUDI: Audi replaces its 5000 luxury sedan line with the 100 and
200 series, both available in a Quattra all-wheel-drive version.
All have five-cylinder engines, with a 130-horsepower version on
the 100 and 162-horsepower edition on the 200. All Audi models,
including the smaller 80 and 90 sport sedans, now come with the
``Audi Advantage,'' a package that includes a three-year
bumper-to-bumper warranty, free routine maintenance for three years
and guaranteed trade-in value.
   VOLKSWAGEN: VW brings three new models from Europe during 1989.
The aerodynamic, all-wheel-drive Passat midsize family sedan and
wagon, the wide-track GTI Rally specialty performance hatchback and
the Corrado, a $20,000 sports car all will reach these shores
during 1989 but probably sell as 1990 models.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
