ID: 187	RANK: 61	SCORE: 7.796963
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910222-0131
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910222-0131.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Politics &amp; Policy:
   Washington's Mayor Dixon Has Some Problems
   Unique to the Governmental Entity She Heads
   ----
   By James M. Perry
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/22/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
</GV>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- Sharon Pratt Dixon, the District of
Columbia's new mayor, knew she would be facing daunting
challenges -- but she didn't anticipate rotary phones,
bookkeeping still being done by hand and an agency that
leases space in nine separate buildings, each office grinding
out the same paperwork as all the rest.
   "The nature of this beast," she says, "resists change."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The 47-year-old Mrs. Dixon is a reformer by necessity as
much as by choice. An upset winner who ran with no clearly
defined political base, she now hopes to make this city work
again after 12 years of tempestuous rule by former Mayor
Marion Barry, who is currently appealing his misdemeanor
conviction for possession of cocaine.
   In her first six weeks in office, Mrs. Dixon, faced with a
$300 million shortfall in revenue, has deferred $63 million
in salary and wage increases, directed city agencies to trim
$136.3 million in spending and eliminated more than 2,000
vacant jobs.
   "It frustrates and disappoints me that I've had to spend
my first weeks in office exercising nothing but restraint,"
the mayor says. "You've got to have something more than
restraint."
   Unfortunately, it is restraint that Congress, keeper of
the district's purse strings, is looking for. "The more she
brings down the size of her government," says Frank Raines,
the mayor's economic adviser, "the more she'll get from
Congress. It's tied together."
   The fact that she is bright, hard-working and willing to
grapple with the city's problems is helping already. And if
she can improve services and cut costs, and demonstrate she's
turning this showcase city around, the personal rewards could
be immense. Mrs. Dixon would automatically become one of the
nation's leading black politicians and a major force within
the national Democratic Party.
   The District of Columbia is a governmental aberration --
part city, part county, part state, and still part federal
colony. It raises most of its own revenue through taxes, but
still counts on an annual federal payment -- $430 million in
fiscal 1991 -- to meet its obligations. The payment is
supposed to make up for the costs to the district of being
the seat of the national government.
   To balance the books, Mayor Dixon is asking for an extra
$100 million in the federal payment to the city this year,
and $200 million more in the payment for the fiscal year that
begins Oct. 1. Her first priority is convincing skeptical
lawmakers that she and her city-state deserve it.
   "What we get from the federal government," the mayor says,
"is not a handout. It's a reimbursement for the services we
provide, and it's never enough to cover our losses. All we
are asking is that the government honor its basic commitment
to the District of Columbia."
   The mayor notes some little-known facts: More than half of
the real property in the district is owned by the federal
government or diplomatic missions, and is exempt from
district property taxes. More than half of the goods and
services sold in the district are bought by the federal
government, which is exempt from paying district sales tax.
And, finally, 60% of all the income earned in the city is
pocketed by people who live in the suburbs, and they are
exempt from paying the city's income tax.
   What the mayor would most like is a commuter tax; it would
raise an estimated $1.2 billion annually. But that's
politically out of the question. So what she will fight for
is legislation to create a fixed formula that would peg the
federal payment at 25% of the revenue raised by the city. As
things stand now, that would mean an increase in the payment
to $630 million a year from about $430 million.
   For now, she'll settle for an increase in payment this
year and next, though even that may be tough to collect in a
year when Congress is looking for ways to cut spending.
   Mrs. Dixon (she's divorced, with two grown daughters) is a
native Washingtonian, a lawyer and a former treasurer of the
Democratic National Committee. "She's a shrewd little lady,"
says newly elected District Council Chairman John Wilson.
   But Mr. Wilson has ambitions of his own that include
making the council more influential than it was in the Barry
years. The other day, for example, the council unanimously
slapped down Mayor Dixon's proposal to phase out funding for
the District of Columbia School of Law. The shrewd Mr. Wilson
denies he harbors thoughts about becoming mayor himself four
years from now, but others aren't so certain.
   For his part, Mr. Wilson predicts that Mrs. Dixon will be
opposed by both the Rev. Jesse Jackson, now the district's
"shadow" senator, and former Mayor Barry. The mayor, though,
insists that Mr. Jackson has "a call" to run for president
and that Mr. Barry is "a part of the past."
   But, in a way, Mr. Barry lives on in the city's
bureaucracy. Before his fall, he built an empire here. He
padded the district payroll with his supporters -- and
silenced his critics by giving them jobs. "He'd hire 2,000
people every year, and 4,000 every election year," says Mr.
Wilson. "Most of them are still there, layer after layer of
them, just waiting to put anything {Mayor Dixon} wants to do
through the wringer."
   One other thing Mr. Barry did before leaving office was to
appoint a commission headed by Brookings Institution
economist Alice Rivlin to study the city's economic and
budget woes. The Rivlin report called for the elimination of
more than 6,000 management jobs. Mrs. Dixon eliminated 2,000
vacant positions and created a task force to see how
unproductive employees could be fired and productive ones
retained.
   Chairman Wilson says he'll know she's serious when "she
begins eliminating live bodies" from what he concedes is a
"bloated" city payroll. It won't be easy. "Many of Barry's
people are now locked in under civil service," Mr. Wilson
says. "Maybe all you can do is keep paying them $50,000 a
year, or whatever they get, and put them in a room with
nothing to do. That won't bother them much; they probably had
nothing to do in the first place."
   The Rivlin commissioners found bloat and waste almost
everywhere they looked. The district, for example, spends
$165 a night to house a homeless family; Cleveland spends
$21. It is perhaps the only major city in the country that
still maintains two-engine, five-firemen companies (the rest
have gone to one engine and four firemen). Congress passed a
law to keep it that way.
   In its most controversial conclusion, the commission
reported that even the police department was severely
overmanned, and called for the elimination of 1,605 police
positions. Mrs. Dixon responded by passing up the chance to
hire 200 more police authorized by Congress and announcing
she was studying better ways of deploying police officers.
"We've got to get them out of their patrol cars and out of
their desk chairs and back on the streets," she says.
   Mrs. Dixon says her biggest surprise has been the extent
to which the district government and its services are so out
of date. "We have rotary phones all over the {District}
Building," Washington's version of a city hall. "Information
systems go back to 1950. So much of the city's work is still
done manually."
   As the woes pile up, there is one consolation: People are
sympathetic. Sometimes, she laughs, they come up to her and
say her pictures in the paper make it look like she's been
crying. Then they tell her to hang in there.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
