ID: 187	RANK: 69	SCORE: 7.646141
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910912-0011
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910912-0011.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Our Cars Are Alive
   With the Sound
   Of (Irksome) Music
   ---
   Auto Makers Try to Tune
   Cars' Tires and Engines
   To Produce Pretty Noise
   ----
   By Bradley A. Stertz
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
09/12/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<CO>
   F GM J.MZD NCTI
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
AUTO PARTS AND EQUIPMENT INCLUDING TIRES (AUP)
AUTOMOBILES (AUT)
INDUSTRIAL TECHNOLOGY &amp; PRODUCTION, QUALITY CONTROL (ITC)
</IN>
<RE>
CONNECTICUT (CT)
FAR EAST (FE)
JAPAN (JA)
MICHIGAN (MI)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   DETROIT -- John Penfold sits hunched in front of his
personal computer, gazing at a graph that displays each note
of his prized composition. By electronically weeding out
discordant keys, he says, he'll soon complete a symphony of
"fluid transitions and harmonic content that is pleasing to
the listener."
   Plenty rides on his work, though it will never make it to
Carnegie Hall. In fact, Mr. Penfold isn't even a musician.
He's a Ford Motor Co. "sound quality" engineer trying to make
a car's engine and muffler sound just right. Could this
become "Next Generation Taurus in E flat"?
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Sound has long been important to car buyers. Hot rodders
thrill at hearing an engine roar, while rich folks prefer
cars that purr. But only recently have engineers turned to
high-tech to produce basso-profundo sedans and mezzo-soprano
minivans.
   Their tools include high-speed computers, studio-quality
tape decks, recording dummies shaped like human heads and
human subjects wired to record their sensory reactions to
different noises. Engineers debate "psychoacoustics" -- the
effect sounds have on the mind -- along with the typical
topics of horsepower, torque and legroom. And marketing men
discuss how to tout a car's low NVH, which is car talk for
noise, vibration and harshness.
   "Deciding the sounds people find pleasing is one part art,
one part science and a lot of black magic," says Ralph
Hillquist. He's a former General Motors Corp. engineer who
has become an automotive noise consultant in a field that is
now, well, booming.
   Producing sounds pleasing to drivers wasn't always this
complicated. Muscle cars of the 1960s sounded powerful
without trying. They got their legendary rumble by gulping
air through their carburetors, and from the deep combustion
resonance in their huge engines. Luxury cars of that era were
quiet because auto makers could slap on the weight of extra
insulation without worrying about fuel economy.
   Moreover, manufacturers had no way to accurately measure a
vehicle's acoustical "fingerprint," as sound engineers now
call the noise a passenger hears while riding in a car. The
best that GM researchers could do back in the '60s and '70s
was to put a microphone in a test car and a 250-pound
reel-to-reel tape recorder inside a trailing chase car. The
test-car driver sat as still as he could and tried not to
sneeze.
   In the past three years, however, car noise technology has
advanced rapidly. This year's "noise and vibration" meeting
of the Society of Automotive Engineers included a seminar on
harmonious door slams. Other sessions were devoted to
diagnosing gear rattle, vibration due to piston slap and the
sound-absorption qualities of the materials that line a car's
interior. Even in translation, the paper presented at the
meeting by Chinese scientists was somewhat mysterious:
"Torsional Vibration Exciting Harmonics for Rotation Bodies
Under Certain Circumstances."
   To real musicians, the idea of people trying to make a car
sing is like someone trying to play a Mozart concerto on a
kazoo. "I wouldn't go out of my way to buy a car where the
chief feature is to be in harmonic balance musically," says
Leonard Slatkin, conductor of the St. Louis Symphony
Orchestra. Yet Mr. Slatkin himself concedes that a whistle
from the poorly fitting top of his 1985 Mercedes-Benz
convertible throws his driving off-key.
   Auto makers believe a car's noise is so important that
they're constantly looking for new ways to analyze it. Ford,
which is building an $80 million facility to house its
sound-improvement efforts, has engineers read music theory
texts and deconstruct classical symphonies and operas.
Researchers with Isuzu Motors Ltd. of Japan hired a musician
to replicate on a synthesizer the sounds that pleased him
while riding in a test car. Nissan Motor Co. recently
finished videotaping commuters to learn when sounds from the
road and a car's stereo combined to put drivers into a
pleasurable "flow state" -- a psychological plateau that some
athletes reach during key games.
   Hoping to get the right pitch for its Miata convertible's
exhaust, Mazda taped and compared noises from mufflers on 100
different sports cars. Its choice for the Miata: a sound
reminiscent of 1960s British roadsters.
   Tuning mufflers is only part of Mazda's push to identify
and recreate sounds that buyers want to hear. In Yokohama,
Japan, Mazda has built a soundproof chamber where subjects
sit with monitors attached to different parts of their
bodies. The subjects listen to such noises as the opening of
a car's electric sunroof while white-smocked Mazda
technicians record and analyze tiny reactions in pulse,
breathing and perspiration.
   Tracing noise sources through thousands of parts and
altering the sound is easy compared with getting people to
agree on descriptions of good and bad sounds.
   Most car companies rely on juries of listeners to steer
them in the right direction. But even then, "one man's rattle
is another man's grind," says Robert Hand, general manager of
a private Michigan testing laboratory. Isuzu and other
companies have tried limiting listeners to 24 words -- such
as shrill, empty or unpleasant -- to describe what they
heard. The companies then use complex mathematical formulas
to average out the responses.
   Soon, auto makers expect to go beyond blending noise from
their models into harmonic sounds. They hope to invent sounds
that their vehicles ordinarily wouldn't emit. So, for
example, a Ford Taurus could sound more like a Mercedes or
even a Ferrari. This will be achieved, engineers explain,
with electronic systems that send computer-generated tones
and "anti-noises" through a car's stereo speakers. Noise
Cancellation Technologies Inc. of Stamford, Conn., and GM's
Lotus Engineering in the United Kingdom, among others, are
developing such systems, although they're still too costly
for widespread use.
   In fact, given the cost of this effort, it's easy to
wonder why auto makers are going to all the trouble. Why not
use the money to help reverse last year's huge losses or cut
the price of cars?
   Those are questions you don't want to ask a sound
engineer. "Sound quality directly affects sales," says James
Piontek, a Ford engineer. "When people take their cars back
to the dealer because the sound's wrong, it's important for
us to understand how to bring those notes in tune."
   Chrysler Corp. engineers found that people actually
dismiss a car as a weakling if they're irritated by the noise
coming from the engine and transmission. "Drivers thought the
cars weren't fast when, in fact, they never fully opened the
throttle because the sound wasn't good," says Ross Vorpagel,
manager of Chrysler's noise and vibration efforts.
   Nissan says its studies with a University of Chicago
psychology professor showed that two of three Americans claim
to do their best thinking while driving. If the engine and
road noise wasn't annoying, their opinion of the car rose.
   Steven Barnett, a former anthropology professor whom
Nissan hired as a product planner, sees even greater
pressures to refine automotive noise in the future. "The game
now," he says, "is to find some competitive advantage by
entering the neurons of the customer's mind."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
