ID: 187	RANK: 99	SCORE: 7.207283
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900822-0207 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-08-22-90 1350EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>a a BC-BehindtheWheel Adv01-02   08-22 0832</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-Behind the Wheel, Adv01-02,0849</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv01</NOTE>
<NOTE>$Adv02</NOTE>
<NOTE>For Release Weekend Editions, Sept. 1-2, and Thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>Porsche 911: Power, Tradition in This Sports Car Package</HEAD>
<NOTE>With LaserPhoto, Graphic</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By ANN M. JOB</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>For The Associated Press</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   It's difficult to test a Porsche 911 without feeling sentimental.
   This is the car that retained its fluid, round-nosed shape from
the 1960s while the others in the auto world tinkered first with
box-like designs, then aerodynamic forms.
   This is the car that retained its big, round headlights, rear,
air-cooled, six-cylinder engine and little dashboard gauges while
others added pop-up headlights, digital speedometers and overhauled
their engines.
   This is a car that still turns heads and brings out the racer in
people. Pull up to a stoplight and watch the driver in the next
lane give you a glance and rev his Mazda engine. Deep down, he
knows he won't beat the Porsche's 0-60, 5.5-second performance, but
he wants to try anyway.
   The Carrera 2 Tiptronic that I drove included new features as
well as the old, revered ones. There are now airbags for both the
driver and front seat passenger. Anti-lock brakes are standard. So
is power-assist steering.
   But perhaps the most intriguing new feature for 1990 was the
Dual Function Tiptronic transmission, which offers urban drivers
the option of automatic shifting or clutchless manual shifting.
   The driver simply puts the gearshifter on either the automatic
or manual side of the gearbox after shifting out of ``Park'' or
``Neutral.'' In automatic, the car behaves as if it has an
automatic transmission; it shifts itself.
   On the manual side, the car waits for the driver to move through
the four gears. Just push the shifter forward at appropriate times,
and a red light on the dashboard will move from one number to the
next to indicate what gear you're in. The driver downshifts by
pushing the gearshifter toward the back of the car. There's no
clutch.
   I'll admit this took some getting used to. Early on, I kept
putting my left foot down on the floor as if there was a clutch,
and I wasn't always picking the best times to shift.
   But once I got the hang of it, I found how fun this car could
be. In second gear, my head snapped back into the headrest and the
front of the car came up as I accelerated. In manual, I could
manipulate the gears to get the maximum power, and sweep up behind
another car to pass with ease.
   The 3.6-liter, six-cylinder engine was simply superb, and at 247
horsepower, the most muscular ever in a 911. Gas mileage might not
be the greatest _ at 16 miles per gallon in the city _ but you
don't get a $60,000-plus car like this and then count pennies at
the fuel pump.
   There is a back seat, if you want to call it that. But don't
expect it to carry anything more than a briefcase and some clothes.
I was so scrunched sitting back there _ even sideways, sitting
alone, I couldn't stretch out my legs, and my head was nearly in my
lap. It's best to plan on pulling the seat down and using the area
for storage space.
   And be sure to get used to riding low to the ground. The Porsche
911 set me at eye level with the bottom half of the license plate
on a Misubishi Montero in front of me. While this can be somewhat
unnerving in city traffic, the low, squat design of the 911 helps
the car really hug the road and corner beautifully.
   In the test car, the spokes on the steering wheel sometimes
blocked my view of those red, lit numbers on the dashboard that
indicated what gear I was in. I also noticed considerable noise as
the tires worked the roads, and I had to keep pushing a button to
get the rear-window wiper to keep the back window clear in a
downpour. The wiper only takes a couple swipes, then turns itself
off.
   But those mild complaints matter little to the 911's serious
fans, identified by company spokesman Hal Williams as independent,
entrepreneur types with average annual household income of
$140,000. Three-quarters of purchasers are men, average age 42.
   The 1990 model year was the first for the Tiptronic
transmission, and Porsche planned to make just 650 of the 911
Carrera 2 Tiptronics for the U.S. market. Williams said that as the
model year was winding down, nearly all Tiptronics already had
buyers.
   Now, the 1991s are beginning to arrive at Porsche's Charleston,
S.C., port. They are identical to the 1990s except that some new
colors have been added and the base price has climbed 3.8 percent,
from $61,280 for a 1990 model to $63,650 for a 1991. The new colors
include a vivid cobalt blue metallic and a super-bright coral red
metallic.
   Consumer Reports magazine does not list owner complaints on the
Porsche 911.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Weekend Editions, Sept. 1-2</NOTE>
</DOC>
