ID: 204	RANK: 17	SCORE: 13.738805
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920129-0010
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920129-0010.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Law:
   Billionaires Battle Over Rockettes Accord
   ----
   By Laurie P. Cohen
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/29/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   J.MIB
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
INDUSTRIAL (IDU)
</MS>
<IN>
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
HEAVY MACHINERY, FARM EQUIPMENT (MAC)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)
LEISURE TIME SERVICES AND PRODUCTS (REQ)
</IN>
<RE>
FAR EAST (FE)
ILLINOIS (IL)
JAPAN (JA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Last month, as the Rockettes strutted their stuff at Radio
City Music Hall's Christmas Spectacular in New York, lawyers
for two of America's wealthiest families were fighting over
the dancers in Delaware.
   The ongoing legal battle pits the Pritzkers of Chicago
against the Rockefellers of New York -- families whose
fortunes are estimated at more than $4 billion apiece. The
fight began in October 1989 when cash-strapped Radio City, a
Rockefeller Group company, sought help in funding an "Easter
Extravaganza" modeled on its popular Christmas show.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The Pritzkers were naturals as investors. Radio City
relies on the Pritzker-controlled Ticketmaster Corp. to sell
seats for its performances. Ticketmaster's chairman, Fred
Rosen, and Radio City's president, James McManus, have known
each other for years.
   After brief negotiations with Mr. McManus, Pritzker-owned
Red Sail Co. and a group led by New York-based Delphi Capital
Corp. together pledged $5 million for a partnership with
Radio City that was to last 14 years. For that money, the
partnership got rights to a substantial portion of the
profits from the Easter show at Radio City and won permission
to tour Rockette shows and sell Rockette souvenirs.
   John Pritzker, Red Sail's chairman, saw endless
possibilities for profiting from the troupe. At the outset,
the partnership says, Radio City's Mr. McManus estimated the
returns from the Easter show alone at $130 million over 14
years. There would also be Rockette dolls, sweatshirts,
leotards and hosiery. And the partnership looked forward to
taking the Rockettes on tour, particularly in Japan.
   "It's easy to sell Rockette stuff in Japan," Mr. Pritzker
says, adding, "It's like selling water to somebody who hasn't
had any in a week."
   But four days after the contract was inked, Rockefeller
Group announced that Mitsubishi Estate Co., a member of
Mitsubishi Group, had bought a controlling interest in it --
and thus in its Radio City unit. The Pritzkers say in a
lawsuit filed last year in Delaware that by early 1990, when
Rockefeller Group executives finally learned about the deal
Radio City's Mr. McManus had signed with the Pritzker group,
they told the Pritzkers to forget about the contract. With
well-heeled Mitsubishi in the picture, they wouldn't be
needing the Pritzkers' money. Mitsubishi, the partnership
says it was told, wanted to tour the Rockettes in Japan by
itself.
   In court papers, Jonathan Green, Rockefeller Group's
general counsel, acknowledges the accord with the Pritzkers
had become "an embarrassment" to Rockefeller Group and
Mitsubishi.
   The Pritzker partnership says that almost from the start,
Rockefeller Group has made life miserable for it by "padding"
the show's budget with undocumented expenses for overtime and
costumes. Radio City, it says, has also refused to tour the
Rockettes, and Rockefeller Group executives won't return its
calls.
   "I don't want people to be of the impression that we're
trying to shake down the Rockefellers," says Mr. Pritzker,
the 38-year-old scion of Jay Pritzker, the Chicago magnate.
"It won't change our lifestyle dramatically if we win this
case," he adds, "but these guys have been absolutely
unconscionable. We'd all like to get out of this thing, but
we're not going to walk away."
   A Rockefeller Group spokesman confirms that there is
litigation but declines to comment beyond that. A lawyer for
Mitsubishi Estate declines to comment.
   The Rockettes, for their part, seem unaware of the fuss.
One breathless dancer, rushing out of an evening performance,
says, "I don't know what you're talking about." Bruce
Michael, the Rockettes' producer, says, "I have no knowledge
of any of this." Nor does he care, he says, because "the
Rockettes are doing very, very well" as is.
   Indeed, the 50 or so Rockettes are doing fine. Since the
dancers made their debut in St. Louis in 1925, they have
become the best-known precision troupe in the world.
   But Mr. Pritzker says he thinks the Rockettes could do
much better. Touring the Christmas and Easter shows, he says,
would give the women more work and make his group and Radio
City millions. And he believes that the combination of Radio
City, the Rockettes and the Pritzker family's holdings should
make this "one of the great marriages of all time."
   The Pritzkers are a close-knit family that has built one
of the world's most successful business empires over the last
three decades. Their holdings include Hyatt Corp., the hotel
company, and Ticketmaster, the nation's largest computerized
ticketing service whose biggest client is Radio City. They
also own a group of arenas where the Rockettes might perform
and a merchandising company that could make and sell
Rockettes dolls.
   Much of the Rockefeller's family fortune went into
Rockefeller Group. When the family needed cash in the
mid-1980s, it sold a 60% interest in Rockefeller Center to
the public. Then, in 1989, it sold a 51% interest in
Rockefeller Group to Mitsubishi. Last year the Japanese
conglomerate boosted that stake to 80%.
   In April 1990, the Easter show returned to Radio City
after an 11-year hiatus. The 90-minute show opened to rave
reviews. Variety said that it could be called "the greatest
show on earth" -- if, that is, "the expression didn't already
belong to someone else." In its first year, the show had a
profit of $550,000.
   But behind the scenes, the legal battle was flaring. At a
meeting in April 1990, Mr. Pritzker says that Rockefeller
Group's Mr. Green threatened to sic "a battery of lawyers" on
the Pritzker group if it didn't voluntarily relinquish its
14-year rights to the Easter show and to touring the
Rockettes. Mr. Green says in a deposition he doesn't remember
issuing that warning.
   The next month, Mr. Pritzker and his father, Jay, met with
David Rockefeller, Rockefeller Group's chairman, to discuss
the matter. "Dad and I were in awe" of the family's current
patriarch, the younger Mr. Pritzker says. "The Rockefeller
persona was bigger than life." He says Mr. Rockefeller was
"very gracious" and assured the Pritzkers that the situation
would be "taken care of."
   It apparently wasn't. The Pritzkers say that Rockefeller
Group is now using "scorched earth" tactics to send them
packing. Last year's budget, they say, was nearly twice as
high as expected; they say that they were charged some
$162,000 for new costumes, even though a Radio City spokesman
concedes that none were purchased, and that $147,000 was
allocated for overtime last year, compared with none in 1990.
Radio City has refused to allow the Rockettes to tour the
Christmas and Easter shows, the Pritzkers say, and hasn't
contacted them at all about this year's show.
   In the worst blow of all, last November Radio City
withheld all but $79,000 of the $522,000 of profit from the
1991 show to which the Pritzkers believe their group is
entitled. Rockefeller Group, they say, told them that the
money was needed to cover legal expenses related to the
lawsuit. In the lawsuit, the Pritzker Group is asking that
Rockefeller Group be ordered to live up to the terms of the
agreement and pay unspecified damages.
   In the meantime, nearly two dozen lawyers in New York and
Delaware are involved in the case. Although the partnership
has offered to take $20 million to settle the suit,
Rockefeller Group has refused.
   "If someone called to ask if they should be partners with
the Rockefellers, I'd stay away," Mr. Pritzker says.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
