ID: 204	RANK: 27	SCORE: 12.255048
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910806-0123
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910806-0123.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Heard on the Street:
   New York Real Estate Slump May Catch Up
   With Rockefeller Center Soon, Hurting RCP
   ----
   By Roger Lowenstein and Neil Barsky
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
08/06/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C2
</SO>
<CO>
   J.MBS RCP
</CO>
<MS>
FINANCIAL (FIN)
</MS>
<IN>
HEARD ON THE STREET (HRD)
REAL ESTATE INVESTMENTS (REA)
STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
</IN>
<NS>
HEARD ON THE STREET (HRD)
STOCK &amp; OTHER MARKET NEWS (STK)
</NS>
<RE>
FAR EAST (FE)
JAPAN (JA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- Like the fabulous collection of buildings they
represent, shares in Rockefeller Center Properties have been
solid. Amid a real estate bust in New York, shares in the
real estate investment trust -- sold to the public at 20
apiece in 1985, during the height of New York's property boom
-- have given ground only grudgingly. They closed yesterday
at 18 1/2 on the New York Stock Exchange, and investors have
in part offset their losses with a steadily rising dividend
-- last year totaling $1.89 a share.
   But now, according to analysts, investors' luck may be
running out. Many real estate experts say it's only a matter
of time before the depressed New York market catches up with
Rockefeller Center. And the time they have in mind is 1994,
when leases covering about half of the art deco midtown
Manhattan office complex expire.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Back in 1985, these lease expirations were seen as an
opportunity to cash in on what seemed certain to be an
ever-inflating market. Now they're a ticking bomb, as rents
on many New York properties are being renegotiated severely
downward.
   RCP says the Center, even in the current slump, has been
re-leasing space at more than $40 a square foot -- well above
its current average rent of $33.98. Thus, it's possible that
revenue will rise -- not fall -- in 1994.
   But New York is mired in a continuing recession, with
midtown rents averaging about $31 a square foot a year today,
according to Lloyd Lynford, president of the real estate
research firm REIS Reports. He and some other analysts doubt
that Rockefeller Center will be able to fetch anything close
to $40 in 1994. One tenant, Chemical Banking, recently
announced a merger with Manufacturers Hanover for the express
purpose of cutting costs.
   Rockefeller Center Properties doesn't own the Center;
rather, it holds a $1.3 billion loan it made to the
property's owners. The buildings and land are owned, via
partnerships, by Rockefeller Group -- which once belonged to
Rockefeller family members and now is owned 80% by Mitsubishi
Estate Co. and 20% by the family.
   The Center, built in the Depression and famous for its
architecture and Christmas tree, is known to tourists as the
home of Radio City Music Hall and an outdoor skating rink.
But most of its 6.2 million square feet are offices, prized
for their prime location and for the efforts of managers to
keep the property as up to date technologically as possible.
In 60 years, none of that has changed.
   What has changed is that New York City, like other areas,
has plunged into one of the worst real estate slumps in
history. Midtown vacancies, 5% at the time of the offering,
have surged to 17% or so. And while vacancy at the Center is
far lower, it has climbed, ominously, to 4.1% from 1.7% in
1985.
   "When they put their projections out in 1985, everybody
was expecting office rents to reach $50, $60 or $70 per
square foot by 1994," says Kenneth Campbell, president of
Audit Investments. "That's not going to happen."
   Thus far, shares of the REIT have been propped up by the
dividend. Cornelius Sewell, of Argus Research, recommends
RCP, yielding about 10.4%, as "a good income stock." And
investors have tended not to pay too much attention to the
Big Apple's realty slump because, for the moment, the value
of the REIT is tied only indirectly to the value of
Rockefeller Center.
   Since its dividends are backed by the mortgage payments,
the REIT has been treated like a bond with a rising coupon.
But in the year 2000, stockholders in the REIT have the
option of converting their shares into a 71.5% ownership of
the property.
   "When you bought it six years ago it was a bond," says
Mike Kirby, a principal in Green Street Advisors, an
institutional research firm that recommends selling RCP. "As
time passes, it becomes more like a stock. People will
suddenly wake up one day and say what's the property worth?"
   Though the year 2000 isn't exactly around the corner,
leases that are resigned in 1994 are likely to influence the
property's value for years to come. A spokeswoman for the
REIT agrees, saying 1994 "is the critical year. That will
really drive the dividend."
   The REIT, which is managed by a unit of Rockefeller Group,
was underwritten by Goldman Sachs and was structured from the
start to rely on future growth. The REIT was scheduled to get
a big jump in interest from the property as soon as the
Center's revenue exceeded $312.5 million-forecast in the
prospectus for 1995. By that year, the prospectus forecast,
dividends would jump to anywhere from $3.10 to $5.02 a share.
   The chances of that coming true now seem remote. As of
now, neither earnings nor cash flow from operations is enough
to cover even the current dividend. And in 1995, the interest
rate on $240 million of the REIT's own debt is scheduled to
jump to 13% from 8%. Thus, in that year, some analysts expect
the dividend to be cut -- not raised. Moreover, given that
the REIT has about $850 million of its own debt, investors
may increasingly have to worry not only about yield -- but
about their principal.
   "You should never underestimate Mitsubishi Estate's and
the Rockefellers' desire and ability to bring value to the
property," says Wertheim Schroeder &amp; Co. managing director
Bradford Klatt. "They have a heavy incentive to make it
work." True, but in a sinking market not even Rockefellers
can hold up prices.
   As the original prospectus said, "Unless the Property
appreciates significantly by 2000, little or no value will
remain for holders of common stock." A spokeswoman says that
remains true, adding, "If you're in real estate you've got to
be optimistic."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
