ID: 204	RANK: 30	SCORE: 11.987500
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880520-0147 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-05-20-88 1444EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r w PM-SenateDisclosures 4thLd-Writethru a0625 05-20 1130</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Senate Disclosures, 4th Ld-Writethru, a0625,1100</SECOND>
<HEAD>Senators Expose Personal Finances to Public View</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Subs graf 14, Sen. Quentin, to CORRECT Burdick's state.</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By HARRY F. ROSENTHAL</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Senators exposed their personal finances to
public view today _ sort of _ disclosing such minutiae as $2,000
speech fees, a $60 refund for football tickets and the gift of a
``Lenox Octagonal Server.''
   There were the usual disclosures of millionaire status for many
members of what has been called the world's most exclusive club,
but Majority Leader Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia was not among
them. His assets were reported to be between $22,000 and $70,000.
   Every member of Congress is required to file an annual
disclosure form listing honoraria, gifts, assets, income and
liabilities. In most cases, members need only report the finances
in broad dollar ranges, such as $15,001 to $50,000. They are not
required to list their homes or furnishings.
   The wealthiest men in the Senate include, as usual, three with
the best-known names: John D. Rockefeller IV, D-W.Va., an heir to a
vast oil furtune, Edward M. Kennedy, D-Mass., and John Heinz,
R-Pa., of the ketchup family. Another is John C. Danforth, R-Mo., a
member of the family that formed the giant Ralston-Purina company.
   Among the others in the well-populated millionaire's club in
1987 were William Armstrong, R-Colo.; Alan J. Dixon, D-Ill., Lowell
Weicker, R-Conn.
   At the opposite end of the scale, Sen. Paul Sarbanes, D-Md.,
listed as his only assets the cash value _ less than $5,000 _ of a
life insurance policy and $7,037 retirement equity earned as a
member of the Maryland House of Delegates.
   Although he was not required to do so, Sarbanes listed the value
of his Baltimore residence in the $100,000 to $250,000 range and
disclosed he owes less than $10,000 on the 20-year, 7.75 percent
mortgage he placed on it in 1970.
   Also among the least rich, Sen. Spark Matsunaga, D-Hawaii,
listed assets of $19,000 to $70,000 and liabilities of $10,000 to
$15,000. Sen. Robert W. Kasten Jr., R-Wis., had assets of $21,000
to $45,000 and liabilities in the $20,000 to $30,000 range.
   One of the senators who usually is in the millionaire's group,
former astronaut John Glenn, D-Ohio, asked for an extension of time
for his filing for the second straight year.
   Sen. Alan Cranston, D-Calif., appeared eligible for membership
based on the reports, which are only guideposts to actual wealth.
Cranston listed assets of $901,507 to $1.229,496 but his
liabilities _ also listed in ranges _ were $65,002 to $150,000.
   Kennedy listed at least $596,747 income but not his assets. He
also listed no honoraria.
   Sen. Terry Sanford, D-N.C., filing his first report, had assets
in the range of $1.9 million to $3.3 million and liabilities of $1
million to $1.8 million. He listed income of $681,488 to $694,488.
   Sen. Bob Graham, D-Fla., put down assets in the range of $1.2
million to $2 million and liabilities of $590,000 to $1.1 million.
Assets in the names of his dependent children totaled $1 million to
$1.3 million and more.
   Sen. Quentin N. Burdick, D-N.D., listed assets of $457,000 to
$1.2 million with no liabilities; Ernest F. Hollings, D-S.C.,
listed asets in the $900,000 to $1.9 million range with liabilities
of $375,000 to $565,000. Richard Shelby, D-Ala., had assets of $1.2
million to $1.6 million and higher and liabilities of $165,000 to
$400,000.
   Senate Republican leader Robert Dole of Kansas did better than
his Democratic counterpart, Byrd. Dole reported assets of between
$275,290 and $579,277, mostly invested in mutual funds, Keogh plans
and rental property in his hometown of Russell, jointly owned with
his daughter.
   Dole, who had been a contender for the Republican presidential
nomination until he quit the race in April, reported income between
$310,310 and $329,995, including his $99,500 Senate salary.
   He was popular on the speaking circuit, even while running for
the presidential nomination, taking in $106,050 for nearly four
dozen speeches, three articles and a videotape. He kept $26,050 and
gave $80,000 to charity.
   Dole also received $50,000 royalties from a joint autobiography
with his wife, Elizabeth, and $30,000 for a daily radio talk show
with Sen. Edward Kennedy. Mrs. Dole, a former Secretary of
Transportation, had income between $221,538 and $301,025, received
more than $100,000 from a blind trust and $50,000 from the book.
   Byrd's outside income consisted mostly of honoraria for
speeches, most of them at the $2,000 limit, but also one to a
Baptist church for $200 and one to a high school for $100. He alwo
wrote an article for the Los Angeles Times that brought him $250.
   Byrd receives a salary of $99,500 a year. His income for
speeches and the article totaled $41,050. He gave $2,043 to
charity, putting him just under his personal limit of $39,800. The
rest of his income was from interest in checking, savings and IRA
accounts.
   He listed a single gift, the Lenox server. Sen. Thad Cochran,
R-Miss., also listed a single gift: a framed illustration of the
Battle of Corinth worth $175, from the Chamber of Commerce of
Corinth, Miss. Sen. Sanford put a $275 silver statue from the
Durham Chamber of Commerce on his form.
   Former presidential candidate Paul Simon of Illinois, a
Democrat, listed assets of $361,978 and liabilities of $219,243.
His income for the year was $121,850, of which $22,826 was in
honoraria.
   His filing included a $3,000 expense reimbursement from his
campaign, a $1,250 reimbursement from Northwest Airlines for lost
luggage, a $60 ticket refund from the Chicago Bears of the National
Football League and royalties of $478 from 11 books he has written.
   One of the Senate millionaires is Alan Dixon of Illinois, whose
income was $143,141 to $191,324. His assets include $487,000 in
real estate _ homes in Washington and Belleville, Ill., a lot at
Rose Hill Plantation in South Carolina and half-interests in a
Florida condominium and land at Lake Kinkaid in southern Illinois _
as well as stocks, bonds, notes, mortgages, three cars and savings
of nearly $317,000.
   Rockefeller, the senator with the oil-plated name, listed at
least $390,000 as income, assets of at least $882,008. But as an
heir to the Standard Oil fortune and one of the richest men in
Congress, Rockefeller is far wealthier than these numbers suggest.
Most of his wealth is held in three trusts. Two were established by
his grandfather, John D. Rockefeller Jr. The other is a blind trust
Rockefeller established when he became governor of West Virginia.
   Rockefeller's wife _ Sharon Percy Rockefeller, the daughter of
former Sen. Charles Percy, R-Ill. _ also is wealthy. Her income is
listed as at least $258,115, with assets of at least $617,010.
Their four children are beneficiaries of trusts worth at least
$1,045,010.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
