ID: 204	RANK: 37	SCORE: 11.158554
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP881023-0095 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-10-23-88 0153EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u p BC-APElectionService 17thadd   10-23 0990</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-AP Election Service, 17th add,1,030,1029</SECOND>
<HEAD>UNDATED: state representative.</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   
   
   6. NORTH CAROLINA _ Republican James G. Martin, of Raleigh, was
born Dec. 11, 1935.
   Term: 4 years.
   First elected: 1984.
   Election history: In 1984, Martin, as a six-term congressman,
overpowered Democrat Rufus L. Edmisten, the state's attorney
general, gaining 54.3 percent of the vote and winning election as
North Carolina's second GOP governor in this century. Incumbent
Gov. James B. Hunt Jr., serving a second term, North Carolina's
legal limit, was required to retire from office. Before running for
governor, Martin had been elected to the U.S. House in 1972 and won
new terms in 1974, 1976, 1978, 1980 and 1982.
   
   
   7. NORTH DAKOTA _ Democrat George A. ``Bud'' Sinner, of
Bismarck, was born May 29, 1928.
   Term: 4 years.
   First elected: 1984.
   Election history: In 1984, Sinner, a state legislator and
farmer, who had lost a 1964 campaign for a U.S. House seat, emerged
the winner of a tough and often bitter fight for governor. Sinner
drew 55.3 percent of the vote, defeating Republican Gov. Allen I.
Olson. Sinner had failed in 1972 to receive his party's endorsement
to run for governor; instead, the Democrats picked Arthur A. Link,
a congressman, as their nominee, and Link was elected governor in a
close race against Republican Lt. Gov. Richard Larsen. Link won a
second term in 1976, but was beaten by Olson in 1980.
   
   
   8. RHODE ISLAND _ Republican Edward D. DiPrete, of Cranston, was
born July 8, 1934.
   Term: 2 years.
   First elected: 1984.
   Election history: In 1984, DiPrete, after many years in Cranston
government including service as mayor, was elected governor with 60
percent of the vote, giving the GOP a rare victory in Rhode Island
gubernatorial races in the period since World War II. DiPrete
whipped Democrat Anthony J. Solomon, the state's general treasurer,
for the office given up by Democratic Gov. J. Joseph Garrahy, who
retired. DiPrete, drawing 64.7 percent of the vote, picked up a
second term with his victory in 1986 over Democrat Bruce G.
Sundlun, a broadcast executive. Before becoming governor, DiPrete
was elected Cranston's mayor in 1978 and won re-election in 1982.
   
   
   9. UTAH _ Republican Norman H. Bangerter, of Salt Lake City, was
born Jan. 4, 1933.
   Term: 4 years.
   First elected: 1984.
   Election history: In 1984, Bangerter, following a decade in the
Utah Legislature including duty as House speaker, attracted 55.9
percent of the vote and won election as the state's first
Republican governor in 20 years. Popular Democratic Gov. Scott M.
Matheson retired instead of seeking a new term, and the party
picked Wayne Owens, a former congressman, as its gubernatorial
candidate. Bangerter, meantime, emerged with the GOP nomination by
beating Dan Marriott, a four-term congressman. In the showdown,
Bangerter whipped Owens by more than 76,000 votes out of nearly
630,000 cast.
   
   
   10. VERMONT _ Democrat Madeleine M. Kunin, of Montpelier, was
born Sept. 28, 1933.
   Term: 2 Years.
   First elected: 1984.
   Election history: In 1984, Kunin, a Swiss-born writer and
teacher who served in the Vermont Legislature and twice was elected
lieutenant governor, narrowly won the gubernatorial race. She
emerged with 50.026 percent of the vote, edging Republican John J.
Easton Jr., a two-term state attorney general, by just 3,674 votes
out of 233,753 cast for the field of five candidates on the ballot
and assorted write-ins. She had been elected lieutenant governor in
1978 and was re-elected in 1980, then lost the 1982 gubernatorial
race to Republican Gov. Richard A. Snelling, who retired instead of
running again in 1984. In her bid for re-election in 1986, Kunin
drew 46.992 percent of the vote, topping Republican Peter Smith,
Vermont's lieutenant governor, and independent Bernard Sanders,
Burlington's mayor. Because Vermont law requires a majority vote
for governor, the Legislature made the decision in January 1987,
giving her the victory with 139 votes to 39 for Smith and one for
Sanders.
   
   
   11. WASHINGTON _ Democrat Booth Gardner, of Olympia, was born
Aug. 21, 1936.
   Term: 4 years.
   First elected: 1984.
   Election history: In 1984, Gardner, a former state senator who
had been elected Pierce County executive in 1980, won the
governor's office with 53.3 percent of the vote, ousting Republican
Gov. John Spellman. Gardner, an heir to the Weyerhaeuser timber
fortune but a man who would rather drive a not-very-new car and buy
his suits right off the rack, won the Democratic gubernatorial
nomination by beating state Sen. James McDermott, who had been the
party's 1980 nominee. Gardner overpowered Spellman by 124,999 votes
out of 1,888,987 cast.
   
   
   12. WEST VIRGINIA _ Republican Arch A. Moore Jr., of Charleston,
was born April 16, 1923.
   Term: 4 years.
   First elected: 1968.
   Election history: In 1968, Moore, a congressman since 1957, was
elected governor with 50.9 percent of the vote, beating James M.
Sprouse, the state Democratic chairman, for the office given up by
Democrat Hulett C. Smith. Smith could not seek a new term that
year. Moore was re-elected in 1972, with 54.7 percent of the vote,
beating Democrat John D. ``Jay'' Rockefeller IV, West Virginia's
secretary of state at the time. Moore was in his second consecutive
term, the state's legal limit, and could not try again in 1976. In
1978, Moore ran for the U.S. Senate and lost to incumbent Democrat
Jennings Randolph. Moore lost the 1980 gubernatorial race to
then-incumbent Rockefeller. In 1984, the two-term limit forced
Rockefeller to give up the governor's office; instead, he ran for
the U.S. Senate and won. Moore again was elected governor in 1984,
drawing 53.3 percent of the vote in topping Democrat Clyde M. See
Jr., speaker of the West Virginia House. Before becoming governor,
Moore lost a 1954 race for a U.S. House seat, then came back to win
election to the House in 1956 and re-election in 1958, 1960, 1962,
1964 and 1966.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>MORE</NOTE>
<TEXT>
</TEXT>
</DOC>
