ID: 204	RANK: 38	SCORE: 11.088224
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891113-0030 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-11-13-89 0520EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r i PM-BuyingJapan 1stLd-Writethru a0412 11-13 1078</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Buying Japan, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0412,1106</SECOND>
<HEAD>In Tokyo, Not Many Rockefeller Centers Are Up For Sale</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: To CORRECT spelling to Aoyama, SUB 22nd graf, ```It is ... right
away.' Picks up 23rd, `But foreign ...' ^An AP Extra</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto NY6</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By ELAINE KURTENBACH</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>TOKYO (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Could an American do in Tokyo what Mitsubishi did
with a stroke of its pen in New York _ gain controlling interest in
the landmark Rockefeller Center?
   The answer is sure ... well, maybe ... but, if. ...
   For one thing, not much real estate is available in central
Tokyo to buy and what's available is far more expensive than
similar real estate in the United States.
   ``If the building were worth having, nobody would sell it,''
says James Doherty, a real estate analyst at Jardine Fleming
Securities.
   Vacancy rates in central Tokyo are below 0.5 percent and land
prices are as high as 35.3 million yen per square meter _ $22,940 a
square foot, or $992 million an acre.
   The Mitsubishi Estate Co. of Japan paid $846 million for a 51
percent share of the Rockefeller Group, which owns the 22-acre
Rockefeller Center in the prime midtown area of Manhattan.
   If Rockefeller Center were in central Tokyo, its 22 acres would
be worth about $21.7 billion at going Japanese real estate prices,
and 51 percent of that comes to about $11 billion.
   Mitsubishi paid the $846 million not for the land but for the
majority share in the Rockefeller Group.
   That's how the Japanese are accustomed to operating, said
Doherty, and it's how an American or another foreigner probably
would have to operate in Tokyo to make a deal like Mitsubishi did
in New York.
   ``It's easier to buy companies than to buy land,'' Doherty said.
   But Tokyo, which was razed by an earthquake in 1923 and by
Allied bombing in World War II, doesn't have prestigious landmarks
like Rockefeller Center.
   ``There just aren't many buildings with much status,'' says
Noriko Hama, a researcher at the Mitsubishi Research Institute.
   ``People might be shocked if a foreigner bought the Kasumigaseki
Building,'' Japan's first skyscraper, ``but it wouldn't be for sale
anyway,'' she said.
   Lawyers and analysts active in mergers and acquisitions in Japan
say it isn't government regulations, as many foreigners believe,
that prevent foreigners from buying Japanese real estate or
companies, but the realities of the marketplace _ plus the age-old
insularity of the Japanese, as well as those things foreign eyes
don't see and foreign ears don't hear.
   Among the realities of the marketplace are high stock prices and
a system of share-crossholdings that locks about 70 percent of all
stocks in the hands of stable shareholders who often are corporate
allies. In addition, not many shares are in circulation.
   So far, foreign corporate buyouts of listed companies in Japan
number exactly one _ the recent acquisition of Sansui Electric Co.
by the British conglomerate Polly Peck International PLC.
   The tendency in Japan's corporate world to do business only with
trusted allies has traditionally limited both domestic and foreign
participation in mergers and acquisitions.
   Such deals, says lawyer Kanji Ishizumi in his 1988 book
``Acquiring Japanese Companies,'' have customarily been arranged as
rescues by associated firms or banks of companies in trouble.
   Selling to an outsider, especially for speculative purposes,
Ishizumi says, is ``as much a betrayal as a captain of a ship
deserting his crew in a storm.''
   Ishizumi recommends that foreign buyers cultivate informal ties
with businessmen and even government officials before attempting
any takeover activity to avoid a backlash.
   Without that type of ``nemawashi,'' or groundwork, investors
face the same rejection that Texas oilman T. Boone Pickens has run
into in his battles to win a seat on the board of Koito
Manufacturing, even though he holds a 26 percent stake in the
company. Toyota Motor Co., with a 19 percent share, has three seats.
   ``It is necessary to build a trusting relationship first,'' said
Tamotsu Aoyama, a Koito director. ``In Japan, it is not possible to
just say, `I'm a major shareholder,' and get a seat on the board
right away.''
   But foreign investment is growing here, nevertheless. Mergers
and acquisitions experts predict a boom as foreign pressure against
exclusionary business practices makes it increasingly difficult for
Japanese corporations to shut out foreign competitors.
   In the fiscal year that ended March 31, foreign investments in
Japan were up 46.5 percent over the previous year to $3.24 billion,
according to the Finance Ministry.
   It says investment by U.S. firms took 54.7 percent of the total,
jumping 89.1 percent over the previous year to $1.77 billion. The
United States meanwhile attracted $21.7 billion in direct
investment from Japan, up 47.6 percent from fiscal 1987.
   Federal Express, Merck Pharmaceuticals, Motorola, Bayer and
General Electric Co. are among many foreign companies that have
made small inroads.
   Pickens' stake in Koito and Polly Peck's takeover of the ailing
Sansui Electric Co. indicate traditional barriers to foreigners are
crumbling, says Howard Chao, an attorney with the Tokyo office of
O'Melveny and Myers.
   ``Foreign acquisitions are heating up in Japan,'' Chao added.
``There are indications it will open up more and more.''
   Likely targets for foreign takeovers, analysts say, are
companies in straits similar to Sansui. Once one of Japan's top
three audio equipment makers, Sansui has not paid a dividend for
five years and faced the threat of no longer being listed on the
stock exchange if not rescued from its debt by March.
   Polly Peck's $108.8 million, 51 percent stake in Sansui gained
the British company entry into Japan's competitive electronics
market.
   In another deal, two regional supermarket chains, Chujitsuya Co.
and Inageya Co., turned to the U.S.-backed firm of Nomura
Wasserstein Perella Co. to underwrite a share issue and help fend
off a takeover bid by property giant Shuwa Corp., said Doherty.
   ``It wouldn't be difficult to imagine an asset-heavy company
worn down by takeover attempts being grateful for a foreign `white
knight' to come along ... although one would have to be seen very
clearly as a savior from a fate worse than death,'' he said. ``The
market is moving toward this.''
   Pickens bought many of his shares in Koito Manufacturing from
the Tokyo-based Azabu Group, a group of companies affiliated with
Azabu Motors Co. that is well-known for arbitrage activities.
   ``Acquisitions of Japanese companies are almost never tender
offers, they are usually furtive, creeping accumulations of stock
holdings by such groups,'' said Chao.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
