ID: 204	RANK: 75	SCORE: 9.430942
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910621-0154
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910621-0154.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Potomac Watch:
   How Rockefeller
   Got a `Bush'
   Endorsement
   ----
   By Paul A. Gigot
</HL>
<DATE>
06/21/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10
</SO>
<CO>
   TAXES
</CO>
<NS>
TAXES, ISSUES, LEGISLATION, ASSISTANCE, EVASION (TAX)
</NS>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   When Sen. Jay Rockefeller said recently he might run for
president, no one thought he'd borrow his first volunteers
from George Bush.
   Yet Monday the West Virginia Democrat will announce a $55
billion children's crusade endorsed by conservatives,
including Bush administration officials. Mr. Rockefeller, the
liberal oil-wealth heir, will declare a new national
"consensus" on policy toward children from left-wing to
right. Possible New York Post headline: Bushies for Rocky II]
(Jay's uncle was Nelson, the former vice president.)
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The prospect has the White House practicing spin
damage-control, while Mr. Rockefeller builds a campaign theme
for 1992. Maybe Democrats aren't as brain-dead as advertised.
   How could this happen? Hark back to 1987-88. Senate
Democrats, angling for an issue, create the National
Commission on Children. With the help of Senate pal Lloyd
Bentsen of Texas, Mr. Rockefeller grabs the chair. The White
House appoints a few social conservatives, but it figures the
commission will split on partisan lines and go to the
graveyard that holds most Washington reports.
   The Bushies caught themselves between a Rockefeller and a
hard principle. They underestimated Mr. Rockefeller's savvy
and ambition. They also misjudged how frustrated many
Republicans are with the White House domestic policy of
Social Darmanism, which puts deficit-reduction before all
other ideas. Mr. Rockefeller shrewdly exploited this growing
GOP tension between the budget-balancers and the policy
activists to build his "consensus."
   He did it in high-wire style, too. Only hours before the
final commission vote, White House budget aide Thomas Scully
called the GOP appointees to urge rejection. This came after
months of inattention. But the genial, intelligent Mr.
Rockefeller wouldn't take no for an answer. Like President
Bush, he can be clumsy in a public speech but is persuasive
in private.
   Mr. Rockefeller jaw-boned liberals to make concessions
that would keep Republicans on board. "Mandatory" parenting
leave became voluntary. A new "guaranteed income"
child-support program became just a two-city experiment. A
$40 billion family tax credit of $1,000 per child could be
paid for by spending cuts elsewhere in the budget. A
dissenting chapter on health-care was allowed.
   "He gave away the store to get a consensus vote," crows
one GOP commissioner. Liberals squawked, but Mr. Rockefeller
also kept them from bolting. Even a last-minute phone call
from Mr. Scully (backed by higher-ups) couldn't derail a
unanimous vote.
   Barely one week later, Mr. Rockefeller announced he was
"open" for a run at the presidency.
   White House aides think Rocky took the Republicans for a
ride and are furious. Wade Horn, a deputy for health and the
ranking Bush official on the commission, has been called to
"come to Jesus" meetings. At Mr. Rockefeller's Monday's press
conference, Mr. Horn will be allowed to speak only for
himself, while the White House offers a polite yawn, brags
about its own spending on children and hopes the report and
the issue go away.
   Why is this more than insider politics? First, because the
Rockefeller report shows Democratic movement toward the
center on domestic issues; it mostly shuns reflexive statism.
At the same time, the episode illustrates the defensive
nature of White House budget politics. Last year's budget
agreement may block a tax bill this year, but it can't stop
public debate on domestic policy. Mr. Rockefeller is starting
that debate for 1992, and the White House response is an
awe-inspiring, Just Say No.
   Mr. Rockefeller's embrace of a $1,000 tax credit for
children is especially interesting as an attempt to wrest
both the tax and family issues away from Republicans. This is
not a big-government idea; it recognizes that parents with
children have had their tax burden (as a share of income)
doubled since 1960. A similar proposal, an increase in the
personal tax exemption, was endorsed in the 1988 GOP
platform. The White House has forgotten that George Bush ran
on that platform.
   Significantly, too, the Rockefeller report is socially
traditional in tone and rhetoric, praising two-parent
families and personal responsibility. It links children's
ills to adult behavior (e.g., drugs, divorce). For Democrats
and their liberal interest groups, even speaking such common
sense is a sign of progress.
   One of the commission's renegade GOP appointees thinks the
report is good enough that the White House should even
embrace most of it and say, "Mr. Rockefeller is returning to
his Republican roots." But that won't happen.
   Mr. Rockefeller is a pragmatist, but he's also at heart a
liberal, and he'll run for the Democratic nomination as a
liberal. That may mean he'll yet endorse tax increases on
"the rich," a line that will muddle any proposal to give tax
cuts to families. Most families hope eventually to be what
Democrats typically define as "rich."
   If he avoids that mistake, Mr. Rockefeller has an issue in
the family tax cut, one enticing enough even to attract parts
of President Bush's constituency. If the Children's
Commission does nothing else, it deserves credit for showing
the White House that a budget agreement is not the end of
politics.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
