ID: 204	RANK: 88	SCORE: 9.049024
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900912-0189 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-12-90 2259EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>s f BC-JapaneseInvestment Adv16   09-12 1147</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-Japanese Investment, Adv 16,1186</SECOND>
<NOTE>$adv16</NOTE>
<NOTE>For release Sunday, Sept. 16, and thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>Japanese Still Hungry For U.S. Properties But Tastes Changing</HEAD>
<NOTE>With LaserPhoto, Graphic</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By E. SCOTT RECKARD</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP Business Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>LOS ANGELES (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Japanese purchases of U.S. ``trophies'' such
as Rockefeller Center and Columbia Pictures had slacked off until a
Tokyo tycoon bought Pebble Beach Co., with its exquisite golf
courses and lone cypress tree.
   But don't be deceived by fewer high-profile deals. The Japanese
appetite for U.S. investment remains powerful, despite Japanese
government pressure to tone down purchases and a nearly 40 percent
drop in the value of stocks in that country this year.
   In fact, the Japanese are making more U.S. investments than
ever, and more sophisticated ones, as they become confident enough
to look past blue-chip targets.
   ``They're becoming insiders in the United States,'' said Jack
Barthell, a managing partner of the Los Angeles accounting firm
Kenneth Leventhal &amp; Co., which closely tracks Japanese investment.
   Nowhere is that more apparent than in real estate, Leventhal's
specialty. Having moved from office buildings to hotels to resorts
and golf courses, the Japanese are now developing property, often
in partnership with U.S. companies, here and abroad, Barthell said.
   While their total real estate investment fell by 11 percent from
1988 to 1989, to $14.8 billion, ``the volume of transactions was
way up,'' Barthell said.
   The Japanese also are moving from primary investment areas, such
as Honolulu, Los Angeles, San Francisco and New York, to other
metro areas and the suburbs.
   A Leventhal study showed that four-fifths of total investment
was in the primary areas in 1985; by last year, the figure was
about one-third.
   ``We're finding the very distinct move from the archetypical
downtown trophy office tower to developing single-family
residential in the suburbs, or even apartments,'' Barthell said.
   Another new target zone is Europe, where Japanese real estate
investment last year was twice the level of 1988 and nearly 4{
times that of 1987, according to Clark Whitehill, a British
accounting firm.
   A prominent example of the trends is the Japanese subsidiary
Shuwa Investments Corp., which owns $2.7 billion in U.S. real
estate. Shuwa led the charge into office towers, buying the ITT
Corp. headquarters in New York, the U.S. News and World Report
building in Washington, the Arco Plaza in Los Angeles, and the
Quaker Tower in Chicago.
   But during the past year, Shuwa made different kinds of
headlines: announcing plans to build luxury apartments in Los
Angeles; forming a $154 million partnership with Los Angeles-based
Tishman West Cos. in a London office building.
   Many observers say the Japanese were surprised last year by the
harshness of U.S. reaction to high-profile deals. Those included
Mitsubishi Estate Co.'s $846 million purchase of a controlling
stake in New York's Rockefeller Center, and Sony Corp.'s $3.4
billion purchase of Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc.
   Despite the negative publicity, the Japanese still appear ready
to buy U.S. landmarks if the circumstances are right.
   Those acquainted with this month's deal for Pebble Beach, where
a round of golf can cost $175 and the scenic 17-Mile Drive winds
past the often-photographed lone cypress, say competition was
vicious between two final bidders, both Japanese.
   Finally, businessman Minoru Isutani bought the Monterey property
for more than $800 million from a partnership including Beverly
Hills billionaire Marvin Davis.
   But Davis' asking price was much higher, some say $1.2 billion.
And Isutani is a special case. Because he owns an empire of golf
clubs and sporting goods companies in Japan and abroad, he can
exploit Pebble Beach with cross-memberships and marketing tie-ins
of all sorts.
   So even the top-dollar price for Pebble Beach is not interpreted
as a sign of a new rush for megadeals.
   ``The situations where a guy walked around Manhattan or Waikiki
with a wad of money in his pocket and bought the first overpriced
property are gone,'' said Daniel Schwartz, managing director at
Ulmer Brothers Inc., a New York investment bank specializing in
deals involving the Japanese.
   Research at Ulmer Brothers shows the trend extends beyond real
estate to investing in and buying out U.S. businesses. In the first
half of 1990, the company counted 103 such mergers and
acquisitions. That compared with 74 in the first half of 1989 and
47 in the same period in 1988.
   At the same time, the average deal size fell from $162 million
in 1988 to $51 million this year. That reflects the fact that the
Japanese increasingly are taking minority stakes in U.S.
businesses, often to provide new capital, Schwartz said.
   ``A lot of U.S. companies have found themselves in trouble, and
the ones with money are overseas, the Japanese and Europeans,'' he
said.
   The Japanese also have become quicker to back away from
overpriced deals, Schwartz noted. Whitman Corp. had hoped to get
$700 million for its Hussmann Corp. commercial refrigerator unit in
St. Louis, then pulled it off the market when Sanyo Electric Co.'s
bid came in substantially lower, he said.
   Similarly, Hilton Hotels Corp. removed its ``for-sale'' sign
this year after bids came in far below the $120 per share some
analysts expected. Several Japanese companies, including the
leisure and real estate conglomerate EIE International, had been
interested.
   Nowadays, Japanese investments in Midwest steel, automotive and
other manufacturing industries are being praised by such groups as
the Indiana Chamber of Commerce for upgrading the economy of what
once was the ``Rust Belt.''
   Even in Hawaii, where Japanese investments totaling $7.7 billion
have many residents worried that the character of their small state
will be ruined, some deals are welcomed.
   In one such case, Japanese brewing giant Suntory Ltd. bought
control of the Princeville Resort on Kauai in June after the
Australian owner, Qintex, went bankrupt. That allowed construction
to resume on a stalled luxury hotel project.
   Still, the huge island resort deals have drawn more protests
than praise. And they've been strengthened by a trend many
Hawaiians find disturbing: Japanese companies buying property in
Honolulu's older neighborhoods to develop large single-family homes.
   In reaction, Honolulu this year passed a law requiring
nonresident aliens to report real estate deals. Sponsors said it
will help the city develop regulations to control speculative
foreign investments. Similar measures have been proposed at the
state level.
   The Japanese, with their traditions of formality, deference and
courtesy, were keenly aware of American critics, even before the
deals for Rockefeller Center and Columbia, Barthell noted.
   But should they be? Some say the criticism is largely
unwarranted and emotional.
   That's especially true when the assets being purchased are
property, not technology or trade secrets, said David Germany,
senior economist for the Morgan Stanley &amp; Co. securities firm in
New York.
   ``They're not taking away the farm. They're taking away
ownership of a place where rich people play golf,'' Germany said.
``If we can't sell Pebble Beach, what can we sell?''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv Sunday Sept. 16</NOTE>
</DOC>
