ID: 113	RANK: 20	SCORE: 21.167273
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900207-0222 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-02-07-90 1409EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>s a BC-APArts:Lincoln Adv11-1stAdd   02-07 0969</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-AP Arts: Lincoln, Adv 11-1st Add,0993</SECOND>
<NOTE>$adv11</NOTE>
<NOTE>For Release Sunday, Feb. 11, and thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>NEW YORK: the South.</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   Beyond disagreements over slavery, it was a vicious campaign,
with Lincoln subjected to endless personal attacks from Southern
newspapers.
   ``He has most unwarrantly abused the privilege, which all
politicians have, of being ugly,'' the Houston Chronicle sneered,
commenting on Lincoln's thin, pock-marked face and unruly hair. ``A
horrid looking wretch he is,'' added the Charleston (S.C.) Mercury,
``sooty and scoundrelly in aspect, a cross between the nutmeg
dealer, the horse dealer and the night man.''
   But Lincoln, who would soon follow the advice of little Grace
Bedell of Westfield, N.Y., and grow a beard, said nothing, making
no formal speeches during the campaign. And thanks to the
Democratic split, he easily won the election while receiving only
40 percent of the votes.
   By his inauguration in March 1861, however, seven Southern
states had already seceded and rumors of an assassination attempt
had forced him to alter travel plans the previous month. In his
inaugural address, Lincoln pleaded for a peaceful settlement to the
slavery issue:
   ``We must not be enemies. Though passion may have strained, it
must not break our bonds of affection. The mystic chords of memory,
stretching from every battlefield and patriot grave, to every
living heart and hearthstone, all over this broad land, will yet
swell the chorus of the Union, when again touched, as surely they
will be, by the better angels of our nature.''
   On April 12, the Confederates opened fire on Fort Sumter in
Charleston harbor and captured it two days later. Lincoln, vowing
to ``repel force by force,'' called for a militia of 75,000 and
ordered a blockade of Southern ports. The Civil War had begun.
   ``Except in respect to military matters, Lincoln was not the
kind of president we expect today,'' Fehrenbacher said. ``He didn't
give leadership in domestic affairs because he didn't think that
was his job. The Whigs had been opposing the `dictatorship' of
(President) Andrew Jackson. They believed that was the leadership
of Congress. He took the leadership role in war, and also in
regards to emancipation.''
   With typical caution, Lincoln dismantled slavery. In 1862, he
drafted the Emancipation Proclamation, but waited for a Union
victory before officially issuing it on Jan. 1, 1863.
   ``What good would a proclamation for emancipation from me do,
especially as we are now situated,'' he worried. ``I do not want to
issue a document that the whole world will see must necessarily be
inoperative, like the Pope's bull against the comet! Would my word
free the slaves when I cannot even enforce the Constitution in the
rebel States?''
   The turning point in the Civil War came that summer, outside
Gettysburg, Pa. For three days one of the war's bloodiest battles
was fought. Nearly 50,000 soldiers were killed and the Confederate
Army of Northern Virginia was forced to retreat.
   In November, Lincoln was a last-minute invitee to the dedication
of the Civil War Cemetery in Gettysburg. The Gettysburg Address,
under 300 words long, was a modest prayer that, despite the war,
``government of the people, by the people and for the people, shall
not perish from the earth.''
   Ironically, Lincoln predicted in the same speech, ``The world
will little note, nor long remember what we say here.''
   ``It's quite obvious that he realized this was an occasion that
something important could be said about the meaning of war and the
meaning of America,'' Fehrenbacher said. ``He saw it a new birth of
freedom, and it's obvious he gave a great deal of thought to what
he was saying.''
   The Republican Party overwhelmingly chose Lincoln as its
candidate in the 1864 elections. The Democrats selected Gen. George
B. McClellan, whom Lincoln had dropped as commander-in-chief of
Union forces in 1862.
   With the Union deadlocked on the battlefield, Lincoln seemed
sure he would lose, even writing a ``Memorandum of the Probable
Failure of Re-Election'' on Aug. 23. But he easily won in November.
   ``With malice towards none; with charity for all; with firmness
in the right ... let us strive to finish the work we are in,''
Lincoln urged at his inaugural in March 1865, hoping for a peaceful
way to ``bind up the nation's wounds.''
   Once victory seemed assured, Lincoln's thoughts moved beyond
winning the war and focused instead on reconstruction, the subject
of his last speech, given on April 11, two days after Gen. Robert
E. Lee's surrender at Appomattox.
   On April 14, while attending a play at the Ford Theatre in
Washington, Lincoln was shot in the head by actor John Wilkes
Booth, who cried out ``Sic Semper Tyranus'' (``Thus Ever to
Tyrants,'' the motto of Virginia). He died the following morning.
   Lincoln had long worried about death, thinking, speaking and
even dreaming of his assassination. In his early 50s, he was
already referring to himself as an old man, and he reflected on
mortality in an 1862 letter to young Fanny McCullough, whose father
was killed in battle:
   ``In this sad world of ours, sorrow comes to all; and, to the
young, it comes with bitterest agony, because it takes them
unawares. The older have learned to ever expect it. I am anxious to
afford some alleviation of your present distress. Perfect relief is
not possible, except with time.
   ``... The mrobably would have continued as a writer,
Fehrenbacher said.
   ``In the presidency he was increasingly concerned with the art
of writing. That shows in his best works, and that's one more thing
that John Wilkes Booth took away from us.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Sunday, Feb. 11</NOTE>
</DOC>
