ID: 113	RANK: 25	SCORE: 20.112328
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880702-0152 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-02-88 1907EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a AM-HolidayRdp 1stLd-Writethru a0618 07-02 0880</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Holiday Rdp, 1st Ld - Writethru, a0618,0897</SECOND>
<HEAD>Big Weekend Starts With Big Crowds</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: SUBS grafs 12-13, `Entertainers ranging ..., with 4 grafs to
UPDATE with further detail from St. Louis, Gettysburg celebrations.
Picks up 14th graf: `The weather ...</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By ROGER PETTERSON</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Americans took to the open road on their way to the beaches,
parks, campgrounds, concerts, race tracks, rodeos and parades
Saturday for the Fourth of July weekend, but the fire hazard
created by the drought took fireworks off the program for many of
them.
   The weekend of partying under the summer sun opened with a
shiver for some people around the Great Lakes and in the East.
Temperatures dipped into the 30s and 40s overnight and two dozen
cities hit record lows, including 34 degrees at Elkins, W.Va.
   Outdoor concerts were a big part of the weekend festivities.
   In Maine, about 70,000 tickets were sold for concerts Saturday
and Sunday by the Grateful Dead at the Oxford Plains Speedway. The
band's followers, known as Deadheads, started arriving Friday to
camp out.
   ``This is the real American dream that sometimes gets lost,''
said Stephen Whitaker of Vermont, who characterized a Grateful Dead
concert as a unity of people. ``The specialness of why people have
been doing this for 20 years is the sense of caring.''
   Thousands more in Maine were expected to converge on Old Orchard
Beach on Sunday to hear Bob Dylan.
   Vice President George Bush was also in Maine, at his vacation
home in Kennebunkport, but aides said he planned no public
appearances and was scheduled to leave Monday.
   If rock wasn't your style, an annual Festival of American Fiddle
Tunes was scheduled at Washington's Fort Worden State Park.
   For those who preferred something more rousing, the New Mexico
Symphony Orchestra offered an outdoor pops concert Saturday evening
featuring Tchaikovsky's ``1812 Overture,'' accompanied by cannons
representing Napoleon's siege of Moscow.
   And there's always the Fourth of July outdoor concert by the
Boston Pops, with police expecting 200,000 people this year along
the Charles River.
   The Charlie Daniels Band joined in at Freedom Weekend Aloft, a
four-day hot-air balloon festival at Greenville, S.C. That event
opened Friday with 125 balloons taking off before an audience of
about 50,000 people. Going in the opposite direction at the opening
ceremony were members of the Army's parachute team, the Golden
Knights.
   Entertainers ranging from Glen Campbell to Chinese acrobats were
on the program in St. Louis, where organizers expected more than 3
million visitors for the annual VP Fair, billed as ``America's
largest birthday party.'' The three-day event kicked off Saturday
with a parade that drew 250,000 spectators.
   Big crowds were expected over the weekend at Gettysburg, Pa.,
for the final two days of festivities marking the 125th anniversary
of the Civil War battle, fought July 1-3, 1863. But only about
15,000 tourists spent at least part of the day at the battlefield
Friday, park officials said.
   During a ceremony Saturday, Pennsylvania Gov. Robert P. Casey,
Virginia Gov. Gerald Baliles, and U.S. Sen. Alfonse D'Amato of New
York exchanged original flags from the period. The flags will be
displayed at the Gettysburg battlefield's museum.
   ``We remember the remarkable bravery of our soldiers, the
sacrifices of our families and the consequences for succeeding
generations of Americans,'' Baliles said. ``But let us only
remember the past, not become prisoners to it.''
   The weather was playing a large part in the weekend diversions.
   In Florida, rain and damp weather caused swarms of mosquitoes to
breed and southwest winds, unusual for this time of year, blew them
from the Everglades into populated areas by the millions.
   ``In many, many parts of Dade County we're experiencing landing
counts on human beings of 50 (mosquitoes) per minute,'' said Pat
O'Conner, Dade County's assistant director of public works.
   But elsewhere the problem was the widespread drought and its
heightened fire danger. Counties and communities in Iowa, Nebraska,
North Dakota, Wisconsin, Kentucky, California and elsewhere banned
or restricted fireworks out of fear of setting grass and forest
fires.
   ``The potential is there for a disaster this year,'' said Les
Parr, a Riverside County, Calif., fire prevention officer. ``The
brush is dry and well-cured and the danger and potential for fires
is a lot greater.''
   Some drought-stricken farmers got a little relief Saturday when
trucks carrying some 2,000 bales of Virginia hay arrived at
Coldwater, Ohio. The Virginia farmers were returning a favor
granted by their Ohio counterparts during a drought two years ago.
   Concern with fireworks safety wasn't limited to drought areas.
Fireworks were blamed for an apartment fire in the Seattle suburb
of Burien that left eight families homeless Friday. That was the
sixth fire in the Puget Sound area blamed on fireworks in the past
two weeks.
   On the competitive side of the weekend, the 8th annual run of
the World's Greatest Lizard Race is set for Monday at Lovington,
N.M. A separate race is scheduled for slower horned toads. The town
also scheduled an egg toss, cowchip toss and drill-bit toss.
   And a Fourth of July church picnic at Oak Ridge, Tenn., will
feature a wrestling match between Tom ``Powerhouse Parson''
Melzoni, ordinarily the pastor of Central Baptist Church, and Chris
``Masked Saint'' Whaley, a divinity student who wrestles
professionally.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
