ID: 113	RANK: 34	SCORE: 18.225744
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900630-0136 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-06-30-90 2140EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-Mellon-Gift 1stLd-Writethru a0625 06-30 0746</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Mellon-Gift, 1st Ld - Writethru, a0625,0765</SECOND>
<HEAD>Gettysburg, Other Lands Donated by Foundation</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: SUBS 3rd graf, `The foundation...' to CORRECT spelling of
cavalry</NOTE>
<DATELINE>PITTSBURGH (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   A foundation is donating more than 100,000
acres of park land, wildlife refuges and historical property,
including a site from the battle of Gettysburg, in one of the
largest gifts of land to the federal government.
   The Richard King Mellon Foundation of Pittsburgh purchased the
properties during the last 1{ years through the Conservation Fund,
which promotes land and water conservation, according to
Conservation Fund senior associate Jack Lynn.
   The foundation, one of the nation's 15 richest, paid $666,000
for 266 acres that include Gettysburg's East Cavalry Field, a site
in the 1863 battle. The foundation will give the site to the
Interior Department as an addition to Gettysburg National Military
Park.
   Tom Wilson, Interior Department spokesman, said that no gift of
land he can recall ``comes close to the magnitude of this kind of
gift. If it is not the biggest, it is one of the biggest.''
   ``I would describe it as a tremendous gift to the people of
America, and indeed to the international visitors who come to our
national parks,'' said James Ridenour, director of the U.S.
National Park Service.
   The gift includes 280 acres of farmland near Sharpsburg, Md.,
that will be added to the Antietam National Battlefield, site of
the 1862 Civil War battle that resulted in more than 20,000
casualties in a single day.
   Ridenour said he considers the preservation of the Civil War
sites especially important because of a ``fever pitch'' of public
interest in the battlefields.
   The largest piece of land is a 93,000-acre tract in coastal
North Carolina near the Alligator River. The property will be known
as the Pocosin National Wildlife Refuge and was purchased for $8.8
million at a U.S. Bankruptcy Court auction.
   ``The casual observer would call it swampy and brackish,''
William Hartwig, realty chief for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service, said of the site. Conservationists hope to reintroduce the
endangered red wolf on the property, which is rich in waterfowl.
   The total gift comprises 102,714 acres and is worth more than
$21 million, the foundation said. Seven of the 10 purchases are in
the densely populated East Coast states of Pennsylvania, Maryland,
North Carolina and Virginia.
   Two are in the West, and the other is in Maine.
   The foundation on Tuesday will deliver deeds for the tracts to
U.S. Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan and Environmental Protection
Agency Administrator William Reilly, Lynn said.
   Jack Lorenz, executive director of the Izaak Walton League, a
national conservation group, called the donation ``a super
initiative.''
   ``It makes you want to genuflect,'' Lorenz said. ``It's a classy
way to start off the Earth decade, the '90s.''
   The other properties are:
   _130 acres near Manteo, N.C., to be added to the MacKay Island
National Wildlife Refuge. Cost: $1 million.
   _The 5,556-acre Forked Lightning Ranch near Pecos, N.M.,
containing more than 100 archaeological sites. Cost: $4.5 million.
The foundation wants the ranch to become a new historical park.
   _Two tracts totaling 1,287 acres in Virginia's Augusta and Mason
counties, bordering Shenandoah National Park. Cost: $950,000.
   _A 930-acre farm in Petersburg, Va., purchased as an addition to
the Petersburg National Battlefield. Cost: $930,000.
   _135 acres near Spotsylvania, Va., to be added to the
Spotsylvania Memorial National Military Park. Cost: $350,000.
   _Two tracts totaling 468 acres bordering the Rocky Mountain
National Park in Estes Park, Colo. The tracts were to have been
converted into a large housing development. Cost: $1.84 million
   _122 acres near Kittery, Maine, to be added to the Rachel Carson
National Wildlife Refuge at the state's southern tip. Cost:
$900,000.
   Banker and industrialist Richard King Mellon created the trust
in 1947, and it since has given more than $150 million to
environmental causes.
   Seward Prosser Mellon, the foundation's president and Richard
Mellon's son, said in a statement that the decline in federal land
purchases and the threats to wetlands show the importance of the
private sector's role in conservation.
   ``Our program will fill the gap whenever possible,'' Mellon
said. ``We feel that this program is an opportunity to say `thank
you' to the many outstanding people at the federal and state levels
who are engaged in land conservation and wildlife preservation and
for our foundation to help protect some of these important sites
during these times of tight budgets so that future generations may
enjoy the outdoors as we have.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
