ID: 113	RANK: 51	SCORE: 15.762083
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880531-0082 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-05-31-88 0949EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a PM-MemorialDayRdp 1stLd-Writethru a0565 05-31 0724</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Memorial Day Rdp, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0565,0739</SECOND>
<HEAD>Americans Remember War Dead, Also Begin Holiday Season</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Subs the 16th graf, beginning ``In Gettsbury,'' to CORRECT
spelling of Gettysburg,'' and Adds 2 grafs at the end with
Washington state details.</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   The nation honored its war dead at thousands of ceremonies large
and small on Memorial Day, including a crowd of 15,000 at the
Vietnam Memorial in Washington, while millions of Americans
welcomed the beginning of the summer season.
   A holiday outing in Tillatoba, Miss., was hit by tragedy when a
16-foot boat carrying eight people capsized, killing six young
women aboard the overloaded craft as well as a man who tried to
rescue them, authorities said.
   The operator of the boat said the occupants were enjoying a slow
``joy ride,'' splashing water on each other, when the accident
occurred Monday afternoon.
   A total of at least 340 people died on the nation's highways as
of midnight Monday, according to a state-by-state count by The
Associated Press.
   The National Safety Council had estimated that the long weekend
would claim 380 to 480 lives in traffic accidents. Last year, 416
people died, the Chicago-based council said.
   Although most of the country enjoyed sunny holiday weather, a
snowstorm hit the West on Sunday, dumping up to 10 inches of snow
on southern Utah. Up to 6 inches of snow fell in Wyoming, where
rangers closed large sections of Yellowstone National Park.
   Strong winds battered the California coast, and helicopters
plucked 17 boaters from a beach on Santa Catalina on Monday. On
Sunday, the stormy seas apparently claimed two victims in separate
boating accidents.
   Where the weather was good, people headed for the outdoors. In
Michigan, tourists packed motels and a state park along Grand
Traverse Bay on the state's Lake Michigan side.
   ``Last year we never did fill up,'' Traverse City State Park
Manager Ivan Rockwell said. ``This year, we were full on Saturday
night.''
   In Maryland, a fantasy weekend rock concert broadcast ``live''
by a Baltimore station from an imaginary town called Livestock had
as many as two dozen people calling state police asking how to get
to the concert.
   ``It's like the `War of the Worlds' all over again,'' said Sgt.
Kenneth Frick, referring to the fictional 1938 radio broadcast by
Orson Welles.
   The concert was ``just a way of having fun over Memorial Day
weekend,'' said WGRX general manager Bill Hopkinson. ``Every famous
group in the world was there. It was a nice escape for our
listeners.''
   Other memorial events around the nation included:
   _ A wreath-laying ceremony at the Tomb of the Unknowns in
Arlington Cemetery in Virginia, across the Potomac River from the
nation's capital, that drew 4,000 people.
   _ In Boston, a cannon on the 190-year-old USS Constitution was
fired 21 times beginning at noon.
   _ In Gettysburg, Pa., retired Gen. William C. Westmoreland, who
commanded U.S. troops in Vietnam and whose ancestors fought for the
Confederacy, said the wounds of the Civil War have not yet healed.
The three-day Battle of Gettysburg and other Civil War
confrontations played a crucial role in the evolution of the United
States, he said.
   _ In Springfield, Ill., officials said the state's new Vietnam
Veterans' Memorial, dedicated less than a month ago, attracted more
weekend visitors than Lincoln's Tomb.
   _ The Kennedy family spent a quiet Memorial Day at their Hyannis
Port, Mass., compound following a small memorial service Sunday for
the 71st birthday of President John F. Kennedy, said family
spokesman Marc O'Connor.
   _ Solemnity was followed by Dixieland jazz at a cemetery in
Omaha, Neb., when a band and a crowd of 100 followed up a Memorial
Day observance with a graveside salute to Anna Wilson, a bordello
madam who left $1 million to charity when she died in 1911.
   _ In Seattle, Washington state Supreme Court Justice Fred Dore
told a Memorial Day audience that paying tribute to the sacrifices
of the past was not enough, and that the nation's ``prayers and
best wishes'' were with President Reagan in his meeting with Soviet
leader Mikhail Gorbachev to reduce the chances of more war death.
   _Holiday fun turned rowdy at the usually sedate resort town of
Chelan, Wash., and about 400 citations were issued and 150 arrests
made, mostly for public intoxication and consumption of alcohol by
minors.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
