ID: 113	RANK: 53	SCORE: 15.241732
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880530-0156 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-05-30-88 2115EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a AM-MemorialDayRdp 2ndLd-Writethru a0678 05-30 1060</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Memorial Day Rdp, 2nd Ld - Writethru, a0678,1081</SECOND>
<HEAD>Holiday Observances From Solemn To Festive</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Inserts one graf after 14th, `In Indianapolis ...', to add
detail about people lining up to get tickets for 1989 race, picking
up 15th graf, `Though most...'. Inserts 1 graf after 18th graf,
`Stiff wind ...', about rescue of boaters, picking up 19th graf,
`But where ...'.</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto PX2</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By ROGER PETTERSON</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Solemn Memorial Day ceremonies honored the nation's war dead
Monday, drawing thousands to Washington's monuments and small-town
cemeteries, while many others partied in the sunshine to kick off
the summer season.
   ``It's about the saddest day _ that and Christmas,'' said
Margaret Meyers, 90, of Columbus, Ohio, who lost two sons at
Normandy in 1944.
   Memorial Day is ``a day of reflection, of being extremely
disappointed in the heart and mind ... and of thinking ... how much
I wish I could close the book on my father,'' said Robin Powers,
28, of Orion Township, Mich., outside Detroit. Her father, Maj.
Gary G. Wright, was declared missing in action after his Air Force
reconnaisance jet disappeared over Southeast Asia on Jan. 17, 1967.
   At Boston, a cannon on the bow of the 190-year-old USS
Constitution was fired 21 times beginning at noon.
   A wreath-laying ceremony was held at the Tomb of the Unknowns in
Arlington Cemetery just outside Washington, drawing about 4,000
people.
   U.S. Park Police estimated that 15,000 people gathered on the
Mall in Washington for a ceremony at the Vietnam Memorial.
   The Kennedy family spent a quiet Memorial Day at their
Hyannisport, Mass., compound following a small memorial service
Sunday for the 71st birthday of President John F. Kennedy, said
family spokesman Marc O'Connor.
   Illinois' new Vietnam Veterans' Memorial, dedicated less than a
month ago, attracted more weekend visitors than Lincoln's Tomb,
officials said. ``They're there from early morning until the
cemetery closes at 7 p.m.,'' said Nan Wynn, site manager for the
memorial, located in Springfield's Oak Ridge Cemetery less than a
quarter-mile from Lincoln's Tomb.
   Homeless veterans were among the 200 to 300 people marching in
the traditional New York County American Legion parade in
Manhattan. Larger parades were held elsewhere in the metropolitan
area.
   ``I marched in the parade because I felt I wasn't recognized by
the American people,'' said Wayne Fraley, 36, who provided air
support for soldiers in Vietnam and now lives in a homeless men's
shelter in Queens. ``In time of war we were called elite. How did
we ever land in the streets?''
   A five-month observation of the 125th anniversary of the Battle
of Gettysburg opened with a parade and a speech by retired Gen.
William C. Westmoreland, who said the nation-building process that
soldiers died for during the Civil War continues today.
   ``A nation is never fully formed,'' Westmoreland told an
audience of about 1,000 in a speech at Gettysburg National Cemetery
in southeastern Pennsylvania. About 1,500 children spread flowers
on the graves of the 3,722 Civil War soldiers buried here.
   Solemnity was followed by Dixieland jazz at Prospect Hill
Cemetery at Omaha, Neb., when a band and about half of a crowd of
200 followed up a Memorial Day observance with a graveside salute
to Anna Wilson, a bordello madam who left $1 million to charity
when she died in 1911.
   ``Saluting a prostitute is not the purpose of this thing,'' said
program organizer Larry McNichols. ``For one thing, she gave a lot
of money to this cemetery.''
   In Los Angeles, 20 protesters chose Memorial Day as the occasion
to demand a boycott of the movie ``Rambo III,'' denouncing the film
as overly violent and declaring it inflames passions against the
Soviet Union.
   In Indianapolis, people already were lining up Monday for
tickets for the 1989 running of the famous 500-mile race. The line
of those waiting to turn in their orders at the ticket windows
stretched 100-deep at times.
   Though most workers got the day off, Monday was not a paid
holiday for state employees in Alabama, Mississippi and Louisiana.
Alabama state employees worked as a trade-off for the holiday they
received April 25 for Confederate Memorial Day.
   Much of the nation had fair weather for Monday's ceremonies,
parades, picnics and beach parties, but parts of the West had
weather definitely not in keeping with the holiday's reputation as
the start of the summer season.
   Large sections of Yellowstone National Park in Wyoming were
closed because of snow, which accumulated 4 to 6 inches deep in
park mountain passes by early afternoon, park officials said.
   Snow fell at higher elevations of Utah, with 5 inches at the
Alta ski resort, and light snow lingered in northeastern Nevada,
the National Weather Service said. On Sunday, a surprise storm
dumped up to 6 inches of snow in the mountains of northern
California, surprising thousands of travelers and campers.
   Stiff wind and pounding seas trapped scores of boaters in coves
on the Channel Islands off Southern California, and 19 people were
rescued after their boats were smashed in two spots on Santa
Catalina Island.
   But where the weather was good, people shook off the memories of
winter and headed for the outdoors.
   ``We've been very busy,'' said Elizabeth Rothenberger of the
Exeter Public Golf Course in Reading, Pa.
   Temperatures were in the 70s and 80s across Michigan and
tourists packed motels and a state park along Grand Traverse Bay on
the state's Lake Michigan side.
   ``Last year we never did fill up,'' Traverse City State Park
Manager Ivan Rockwell said. ``This year, we were full on Saturday
night.''
   AAA Michigan said staffers at Van Riper State Park near
Champion, just west of Marquette, reported the biggest crowd in 20
years.
   Beaches along most of Massachusetts' Cape Cod were less crowded
Monday after clouds moved in. ``It was crazy until today,'' said
Tanya Hirst at the Cape Cod National Seashore.
   Along the Missouri shore of the Mississippi River, St. Louis
Mayor Vincent C. Schoemehl Jr., piloting the Becky Thatcher
Riverboat, edged St. Louis County Executive Gene McNary aboard the
Tom Sawyer in their annual Memorial Day Riverboat Race. The boats
are driven by modern propellers but carry paddle-wheels to look
like the old-time river steamers.
   ``We were long overdue,'' Schoemehl said. ``We had a new boat
and a new beginning.'' McNary leads in the seven-year series with a
4-2-1 record.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
