ID: 113	RANK: 71	SCORE: 14.151488
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880703-0068 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-03-88 2243EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-HolidayRdp 1stLd-Writethru a0805 07-03 1074</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Holiday Rdp, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0805,1098</SECOND>
<HEAD>Party Weekend For Some, Fire Watch For Others</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: INSERTS 3 grafs after 12th graf pvs, `Four descendants..., to
UPDATE with later dedication at Gettysburg, add detail on Boston,
picking up 13th graf, `Early Monday...; INSERTS 1 graf after 18th
graf, `But while..., with detail on California fire, picking up
19th graf: `In dry...</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos AU1, BX3</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By ROGER PETTERSON</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Many Americans partied in the sunshine Sunday on the second day
of the Fourth of July weekend, while Iowans welcomed Soviet and
American peace walkers into their churches, singing songs and
exchanging gifts.
   A Union general was belatedly honored with a statue at the site
of the Battle of Gettysburg, and the heritage and culture of the
American Indian was celebrated at a powwow in upstate New York.
   In some drought states, firefighters had to spend the holiday
sticking close to their equipment because of the danger that
fireworks could set tinder-dry fields ablaze.
   Rain was scattered across the South and the northern Pacific
Coast, but there was sunshine for most of the rest of the nation
for picnics, baseball games, beach parties and back yard barbecues.
   The warm, sunny weather attracted thousands to Maine to enjoy
the seashore, rivers and lakes.
   ``I can almost feel the state tipping,'' joked senior collector
Duane Douglass at the York toll boths on the Maine Turnpike, where
he estimated northbound traffic at a couple of thousand vehicles an
hour.
   Several of the 220 Soviets and 100 Americans peace walkers in
Iowa began their Sunday visiting about two dozen churches in Iowa
City and surrounding communities. The walk began June 17 in
Washington, D.C., and is scheduled to end July 16 in San Francisco.
   Several Soviet walkers brought guitars and other musical
instruments to play at worship services, while some church choirs,
like the one at Zion Lutheran Church, sang songs of welcome for the
visitors.
   ``We are gathered here in your church together to pray for peace
in the world, to save the sacred gift of life on this Earth,''
Vladimir Oleinik, a Russian Orthodox priest, said through an
interpreter at a joint Russian-English service at the First
Mennonite Church of Iowa City.
   In an emotional ceremony near a stone wall where Union forces
withstood a desperate Confederate attack on the third and final day
of the Battle of Gettysburg 125 years ago, a bronze statue of
Philadelphia-born Gen. John Gibbon was dedicated before about 500
spectators.
   Gibbon was the last of five Pennsylvania generals who were
supposed to be memorialized on monuments as long ago as 1911. But
the money earmarked by the Legislature didn't go far enough and
Gibbon's statue wasn't made until a private group started raising
money a couple of years ago.
   Four descendants of Gibbon, who died nearly penniless in 1896,
helped unveil the bronze statue.
   Later Sunday, a flame that had been put out during the energy
crisis 15 years ago was rekindled at the Gettysburg's towering
Eternal Light Peace Memorial.
   ``I think the idea of rededicating it for peace, for a world
united, is something they would be happy with,'' said Arthur Rice,
who witnessed the original lighting of the memorial in 1938 and
whose relatives helped plan that ceremony.
   In Boston, Mayor Raymond L. Flynn signed a city ``Declaration of
Independence From Drugs'' modeled after the declaration of July 4,
1776.
   Early Monday, just after midnight, a 6.3-million-pound tracked
transporter called a crawler was scheduled to set out at a snail's
pace to move the space shuttle Discovery to its launch pad at Cape
Canaveral, a giant step toward America's first space shuttle flight
since the Challenger tragedy.
   A flag-waving ceremony was planned for the early-morning rollout
when the 85-ton spaceship edged out of an assembly building into
the glare of spotlights to start the 4.2-mile journey. Thousands of
workers who have labored to return the shuttle fleet to space were
invited to attend.
   Monday's parade in the Chicago suburb of Westchester, Ill., will
feature stiff competition between two precision parade units _ the
Westchester Invitational Shopping Cart Team and the Westchester
Precision Lawn Mower Drill Team. The mowers had dominated the
parade until last year when the shopping cart jockeys won ``Best
New Entry.''
   ``Every time we did something stupid, people applauded,'' said
shopping cart team member Loretta Kraft. ``If we don't get applause
this time, we'll just take our blouses off.''
   But while many people celebrated, Minnesota's Department of
Natural Resource firefighting crews were on standby over the
holiday weekend to douse any flames caused by fireworks above
tinder-dry fields. Five fires in the Cambridge area of central
Minnesota alone were started by illegal firecrackers Friday, said
DNR spokesman Tom Baumann.
   Fire officials in California said they found evidence that an
870-acre brushfire burning out of control Sunday evening near
Yosemite National Park may have been caused by illegal fireworks. A
few scattered groups of campers along the Merced River were told to
leave the area, said Mary Hale of the California Department of
Forestry in Sonora.
   In dry Tennessee, Williamson County firefighters were on alert
through Monday because of residents using fireworks despite a ban,
emergency management director Mike Thompson said. ``One-fourth of
our manpower have to remain close to the main station'' for the
holiday, he said.
   Some Indiana communities decided to reschedule fireworks
displays until later in the summer in hopes that the fire danger
will eventually be reduced by rain.
   ``We are having a lot of postponements. You may be seeing shows
from now until Halloween,'' said Ross Perri, vice president of
Princess Fireworks Inc. of Mishawaka, Ind.
   In New York City, police prepared for the Fourth of July by
confiscating more than a ton of illegal fireworks in lower
Manhattan. City authorities said they have confiscated 3,000 cases
of illegal fireworks this year, compared with 2,815 last year.
   On Lake of the Ozarks in Missouri, one holiday weekend gathering
ended in flames Saturday when a 2,500-gallon gasoline tank ruptured
and exploded outside a floating restaurant, injuring at least six
people, one critically, authorities said.
   In upstate New York's Saratoga County, the Calico Dancers' 1988
Goodtime Powwow celebrating American Indian heritage and culture
concluded Sunday with a War Dance Society ceremonial dance. Indian
singers and dancers from as far away as Oklahoma performed and
competed.
   ``The dance is the matrix that draws everyone together,'' said
dancer and emcee Don Brennan of Rockville, Conn.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
