ID: 113	RANK: 96	SCORE: 11.772625
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890626-0222 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-06-26-89 2101EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>s a BC-APN--ElmiraPrison Adv09-1stAdd   06-26 0826</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-APN--Elmira Prison, Adv 09-1st Add,0843</SECOND>
<HEAD>$Adv09</HEAD>
<HEAD>AGENCIES AND RADIO OUT</HEAD>
<HEAD>For Release Sunday, July 9</HEAD>
<HEAD>ELMIRA, N.Y.: poor fellows.''</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   Emory Thomas, a history professor at the University of Georgia,
says doctors at Elmira weren't different from those practicing
elsewhere during a war in which twice as many men died from disease
than from battle-related wounds.
   ``The doctors really weren't convinced about the germ theory of
disease at this point,'' he says. ``At this time they were dealing
with very, very nuts-and-bolts things, like how to set a fracture
properly and whether chloroform would kill and if ether was better
than chloroform. These are important things, but we're not talking
about great leaps forward in medical practice.''
   The food at Elmira could have been another problem. Elmira
prisoners after the war said a day's rations generally included two,
1-inch-thick slices of bread, 2 ounces of meat and a pint of soup,
often only the thin broth in which the meat was cooked. Union
officers insisted after the war that rations at Elmira were more
generous.
   ``I was assured by a guard that the same rations were issued to
the prisoners as to the U.S. troops stationed there,'' Confederate
soldier Erastus Palmer recalled after the war. ``There seemed to me
to be some bad leak in it before it got to us.''
   In May 1864, Secretary of War Edwin Stanton had ordered that
prison rations to Confederates being held in Northern camps be
reduced to the same level as those Southern troops in the field were
receiving. This coincided with the Lincoln administration's general
hardening of its treatment of Southern prisoners starting that year
as news began to filter north of the deprivations being endured by
Union soldiers at Andersonville, the Libby prison in Richmond, Va.,
and other Confederate camps.
   Horigan calls Stanton a ``very vindictive man,'' who exercised
virtual dictatorial control over the Northern prison camp system.
   ``Abraham Lincoln had very little to do with any decision-making
as far as the prison-camp system was concerned,'' Horigan says.
``One of the characteristics of his presidency was that he relegated
power to his cabinet members. He gave them an enormous amount of
power and an enormous amount of leeway.''
   Many of Elmira's prisoners blamed Stanton, too.
   ``It is my honest opinion that Secretary Stanton did this in
retaliation,'' Virginia soldier Enos Lyons later wrote of conditions
at Elmira. ``Yes, men died in Elmira prison I know from hunger and
want; this in a land of plenty. I was young and strong and
determined I would not be carried out if I could help it, but many
poor prisoners lay right down and died of hunger.''
   According to figures compiled by an early-century historian of
the Elmira prison, Clay Holmes, 27 percent of the camp's captives
died. Pulitzer Prize-winning Civil War historian James McPherson
places Elmira's mortality rate at 24 percent.
   By way of comparison, 13,000 or 29 percent of the 45,000 Union
soldiers imprisoned at Andersonville died.
   For the Civil War as a whole, 15.5 percent of the Union soldiers
imprisoned in 28 Southern camps died while in captivity and 12
percent of the Confederates in 24 Northern camps died.
   Why, then, have Elmira and other Northern prisons with high death
rates _Camp Alton, Ill., Lookout Point, Md., Johnson's Island, Ohio,
and Rock Island, Ill. _ escaped Andersonville's notoriety?
   ``To the extent that Elmira and others lack infamy, I would guess
it has to do with who won the war,'' Thomas says.
   Andersonville's commandant, Henry Wirz, was the only soldier
executed after the Civil War as a war criminal, an act that caused
lingering resentment for decades among some Southerners who claimed
he was made a scapegoat for the mismanagement of prison camps on
both sides.
   And the only historic site operated by the National Park Service
at a former Civil War prison camp is at Andersonville. Events
including historic re-creations, memorial services and even an
archaeological dig will be held throughout this year to mark
Andersonville's 125th birthday.
   But Elmira's anniversary will pass quietly. The chances are good
that most of the people living in the well-maintained,
turn-of-the-century homes around the former site of the camp won't
give the historic significance of this year a second thought.
   ``A lot of people from around here _ a majority of people, I'd
say _ still don't know there was a prison camp in Elmira,'' Decker
says.
   ``The people in the South know Elmira,'' Horigan says. ``They
know their granddaddy was there or whatever. And quite a few compare
it to Andersonville. I don't think they're correct in doing so.
Nothing else was Andersonville.
   ``But why we only think of Andersonville when we think of Civil
War prison camps I don't know. These places were bad places, all of
them were. It was despicable, the way both the South and the Union
treated their prisoners. It was the darkest chapter of the war.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Sunday, July 9</NOTE>
</DOC>
