ID: 113	RANK: 97	SCORE: 11.746634
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880528-0141 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-05-28-88 1747EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-HolidayRdp 1stLd-Writethru a0609 05-28 0963</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Holiday Rdp, 1st Ld - Writethru, a0609,0982</SECOND>
<HEAD>Memorial Day: Sun And Fun, But Also Remembrance</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: SUBS 7-9th grafs, `Far more ..., with 5 grafs to UPDATE with
detail on cloudy Southern California, heat record tied in Maine,
picking up 10th graf: `It's going ...; INSERTS 1 graf after 16th,
`In Norfolk...,' with detail on ceremony in New Jersey; SUBS last
graf with 2 grafs on festival in Seattle, Cajun event in
Philadelphia.</NOTE>
<NOTE>With LaserPhoto</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By POLLY ANDERSON</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   It was a sunny day in most of the land as Memorial Day weekend
got rolling Saturday, and thoughts of barbecue, lazy days at the
beach and the roar of engines at Indy captivated millions.
   The nation also prepared to honor those who fell in battle, from
the Revolutionary War to the present day, with parades, speeches
and tears.
   Highway police, ticket books in hand, braced for legions of
travelers in an effort to scare off speeders and drunken drivers.
   In New Jersey, the National Guard had to spread its officers,
bands and color guards thin, a spokesman said.
   ``There have to be around 30 different parades around the state
that we have been asked to participate in,'' said Capt. John
Guarascio. ``It's the greatest number of requests in many years.
The sense of patriotism and feeling for veterans is definitely at a
very high point.''
   The Memorial Day weekend also is the unofficial start of summer,
but don't tell the folks in the mountains of northern California.
Winter storm watches were posted there Saturday, with wind gusts as
high as 60 mph in the Sierra passes.
   Southern California beaches were less crowded than on a usual
holiday weekend as a dismal layer of clouds blanketed the region.
   ``We've got 40-50,000 here at this time,'' said lifeguard Ralph
Lee at the vast Santa Monica beach, which has been known to
accommodate 100,000 people. ``We've got overcast skies, which is
keeping the crowds down just a little bit.''
   More summery weather prevailed elsewhere. In Seaside Heights,
N.J., beach officials estimated that 20,000 people were on the sand
by noon Saturday.
   ``All the beaches are filled. It's a zoo. The place is mobbed,''
said police dispatcher Randolph Jenkins in Yarmouth, Mass., on Cape
Cod.
   Farther north, traffic on the Maine Turnpike surged Friday
afternoon and campgrounds, beaches, motels and restaurants prepared
for the first wave of summer vacationers. On Saturday, the
temperature at Portland, Maine, hit 89 degrees, breaking a
29-year-old record for the date by one degree.
   ``It's going to be a winner, and I think a lot of it has to do
with the sun showing up,'' said Carl Sanford, vice president of the
Maine Restaurant Association.
   The National Safety Council estimated that the long weekend
would claim 380 to 480 lives on the nation's highways. Last year,
416 people died, the Chicago-based council said. A non-holiday,
three-day weekend this time of year would probably see about 390
deaths.
   ``This is the most dangerous holiday weekend on rural roads
around the state,'' said Brian Ellison of the South Carolina
Department of Highways and Public Transportation. ``Everybody who
is available will be out'' patrolling, he said.
   In Philadelphia, activities kicked off early when a crowd
gathered near Independence Hall on Friday to pay tribute to the
thousands of Revolutionary War soldiers who lie in unmarked graves.
   ``It's great to come to remember and honor our country and the
men who died to create it,'' said David West, 11, at the Tomb of
the Unknown Soldier of the American Revolution. ``May their souls
rest in peace.''
   In Norfolk, Va., families gathered in the rain Saturday to
remember 99 men who died 20 years ago when the submarine Scorpion
sank while coming home from the Mediterranean.
   More than 600 veterans and their families gathered Saturday at
the New Jersey Veterans Cemetery in North Hanover. An Army band
from Fort Dix played ``Amazing Grace'' as representatives of 16
veterans groups laid wreaths at a flag in the cemetery, where
nearly 1,500 veterans are buried.
   In Gettysburg, Pa., where nearly 50,000 soldiers were killed or
wounded during the Civil War, the 121st Memorial Day parade Monday
will be the start of a summerlong celebration of the 125th
anniversary of the battle, often called the turning point of the
war.
   Not all of the weekend's festivities were so serious. In
Somerset, Pa., sheep shearing is to be the highlight of the Fiber
Festival on Sunday, while in Pittsburgh, the Ashley Whippet
Invitational Dog Frisbee Contest was scheduled.
   In Indianapolis the main event is, of course, the 72nd running
of the Indianapolis 500 Sunday at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway.
Garfield the cat and his Hoosier creator, Jim Davis, were grand
marshals for the 500 Festival Memorial Parade in downtown
Indianapolis on Saturday.
   In Atlantic City, a traditional symbolic ``unlocking of the
ocean'' for the summer season will be held Monday, followed by a
Memorial Day parade on the Boardwalk.
   In Beaufort, S.C., the third annual Gullah Festival was under
way this weekend, an event that celebrates the Gullah culture and
language, a blend of English and West African tongues, of South
Carolina's sea islands.
   A wider variety of cultures are respresented at the annual
Folklife Festival at the Seattle Center, site of the 1962 World's
Fair, a potpourri of music, dance, artisanry and food from the
Pacific Northwest and elsewhere.
   An estimated 4,000 people ate Cajun food and listened to jazz
and blues on Saturday at the Jambalaya Jam at Penn's Landing in
Philadelphia. Also planned are hot air balloon races, a barrel
drop, horse racing and fireworks.
   Ex-Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North delivered a speech at the
Pennsylvania Fair in suburban Philadelphia, his first stop on a
national speaking tour. His topic: ``Commitment, Trust and Family.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
