ID: 134	RANK: 50	SCORE: 28.074965
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880229-0086 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-02-29-88 1023EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i PM-SouthAfrica 3rdLd-Writethru a0528 02-29 0858</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-South Africa, 3rd Ld - Writethru, a0528,0877</SECOND>
<HEAD>Tutu, Boesak Arrested Marching On Parliament</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: INSERTS 4 grafs after 5th graf, `Police also ...,' to UPDATE
with quotes from news conference. PICKS up 6th graf, `The clergymen
...'</NOTE>
<DATELINE>CAPE TOWN, South Africa (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Police today arrested Anglican
Archbishop Desmond Tutu and other church leaders as they marched
toward Parliament with a petition protesting the government's
crackdown on anti-apartheid groups.
   The clergymen, wearing robes and crosses around their necks,
stood with arms linked and Bibles clutched in their hands as a
policeman announced through a bullhorn that the gathering was
illegal. Police had been lining the street outside St. George's
Anglican Cathedral, waiting for the marchers to emerge.
   After Tutu, a Nobel Peace Prize laureate, and other clergymen
were placed in police vehicles, police fired water cannons at more
than 100 demonstrators sitting on the sidewalk singing a hymn,
local journalists said.
   The clergymen and demonstrators were taken to a police station
and released with a warning that charges would be brought against
them if they staged a similar protest, said the Rev. Allan Boesak,
president of the World Alliance of Reformed Churches. He said they
were told summonses might be issued against them for demonstrating
near Parliament and they might be called to court.
   Police also took some journalists into custody.
   Upon their release, the white, black, mixed-race and Indian
clergymen held a news conference in the cathedral, which was still
surrounded by policemen with a water cannon nearby.
   ``We are not defying the law,'' Tutu said, ``we are obeying God.
We also obey God every day.''
   ``In the past,'' Tutu continued, ``it was possible for people to
say it was the usual rabble rousers demonstrating. They can't say
it any more. It's the church.''
   Boesak described today's protest as ``an act of subversion.''
   ``We told the South African government that we had decided we
would be obedient to God. That is a higher law to us,'' he said.
   The clergymen carried a petition, addressed to President P.W.
Botha and Parliament, saying: ``We leaders of a number of South
African churches have come to Parliament today to witness and pray
in a time of crisis outside the buildings in which you make
important decisions affecting the lives of millions of South
Africans who belong to our churches.''
   The protesters, marching five abreast, walked a few yards toward
Parliament from St. George's Cathedral, the main Anglican church in
downtown Cape Town.
   In a service in the cathedral before the march, Tutu and other
ministers declared the churches would lead protests against the
government's anti-apartheid policies because 18 major black
opposition groups had been banned last week from all political
activity.
   Tutu marched in front of the procession, along with Boesak and
other prominent ministers.
   Tutu warned those at the service that they might be tear-gassed,
sprayed with water cannons or arrested. The church leaders said
they had informed the government about the proposed march.
   The march proceeded with clergymen at the end of each row and
lay people in the middle. As they reached Government Avenue, near
the Parliament buildings, they were met by about 50 policemen who
linked arms to block the road.
   The police told the crowd they were gathering illegally, then
began leading away the church leaders, starting with Boesak.
   The Rev. Sid Luckett, head of the Anglican Board of Social
Responsibility, led the rest of the crowd to the police vehicles
and they sat down on the sidewalk.
   Police sprayed the seated protesters with water cannons, but
they stayed in place, and were then put into police vans as they
recited the Lord's Prayer.
   Last Wednesday, the government banned the United Democratic
Front, the nation's largest anti-apartheid organization, and 17
other major black opposition groups from conducting any political
activity.
   Banning orders were also issued against 18 prominent black
leaders, prohibiting them from taking part in anti-government
activities, confining them to their hometowns, and ordering them
not to speak to the press.
   Church groups weren't included in the crackdown and
theoretically still were free to engage in resistance campaigns,
but most forms of peaceful protest are banned under existing
regulations.
   Tutu had called the new regulations ``a declaration of war
against the people.'' He and other church leaders had pledged the
churches would begin to conduct some of the protest campaigns that
had been organized by the banned groups.
   In May 1980, Tutu was one of 54 people, mostly priests, who were
arrested in Johannesburg under the Riotous Assemblies Act for
marching in protest against the detention of a Congregational
Church minister. All were convicted and sentenced to pay a $45 fine
or spend 50 days in jail. Tutu's fine was paid.
   Boesak was last arrested in August, 1985, when he was charged
with subversion for, among other things, organizing a march to
Pollsmoor Prison where African National Congress leader Nelson
Mandela is serving a life term. Fourteen months later the charges
were dropped.
   Under South Africa's apartheid policies of racial segregation,
the nation's 5 million whites maintain political and economic
control over 26 million blacks, who have no vote in national
affairs.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
