ID: 134	RANK: 78	SCORE: 25.782383
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880804-0132 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-08-04-88 2009EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-AnglicanConference     08-04 0844</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Anglican Conference,0873</SECOND>
<HEAD>Anglican Bishops Say They Understand Need for Violence</HEAD>
<DATELINE>CANTERBURY, England (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The world's Anglican bishops adopted
a resolution Thursday that states they understand people who choose
armed struggle ``as the only way to justice'' but condemns war as
un-Christian.
   The bishops also decided Thursday to allow polygamists into
their church, provided they marry no more wives after baptism. The
bishops, all men, did not address the issue of polyandry, where a
woman takes several husbands.
   Archbishop Robert Eames of All Ireland, who represents Anglicans
in both the Irish Republic and Northern Ireland, harshly criticized
the violence clause. He said the statement could be used by the
Irish Republican Army to justify its violent campaign to drive the
British out of the province of Northern Ireland.
   Archbishop Desmond Tutu of South Africa supported the clause,
pointing to people without parliamentary means of seeking justice.
   The 525 bishops from 164 countries were assembled in Canterbury
for the Lambeth Conference, held every 10 years. They represent 70
million Anglicans worldwide. Their three-week conference ends
Sunday.
   After 10 minutes of debate, the bishops accepted by a show of
hands the resolution titled ``War, Violence and Justice,'' which
condemns war as ``incompatible with the teaching and example of Our
Lord Jesus Christ.''
   The disputed clause says the conference ``understands those who,
after exhausting all other ways, choose the way of armed struggle
as the only way to justice whilst drawing attention to the dangers
and injustices possible in such action.''
   Bishop Brian Hannon of Northern Ireland told the bishops that
armed struggle in his province ``is simply leading us farther,
farther, and farther into depravity, immorality and further
violence.''
   Attempts by Irish bishops to have the words ``in self-defense''
inserted into the clause were defeated 226 to 168, with 29 bishops
abstaining.
   Archbishop Eames, in an interview with the British Broadcasting
Corp. after the vote, spoke strongly against the wording.
   ``We are losing members of our church, Anglicans who are serving
in the security forces of Northern Ireland. We are losing
civilians. Two of them are being buried today and tomorrow in my
diocese and in Belfast,'' Eames said.
   The IRA this week killed three members of Britain's security
forces in the predominantly Protestant Northern Ireland, which it
seeks to unite with the Roman Catholic Irish Republic.
   Tutu said the resolution referred to people who did not have
parliamentary means to effect political change. South Africa's
apartheid system of institutionalized racial segregation denies the
vote to the country's 26 million black majority. The 5 million
whites control the economy and maintain separate districts, schools
and health services.
   ``Our people have used conventional means, and each time the
response has been a violent response,'' said Tutu, the black church
leader who won the 1984 Nobel Peace Prize.
   ``We are not asking you to condone or condemn, but we are asking
you to say to those of our people who have tried everything: we
understand. The church is not pacifist,'' Tutu said.
   Bishop David Young of Ripon, northern England, said after the
vote that the resolution was drawn up by a large group of bishops
meeting privately during the conference, with especially strong
support from bishops in South Africa and Latin America.
   ``We felt we had to take a wide view for the whole of the
Anglican Communion,'' said Young, who proposed the resolution.
   Archbishop John Habgood of York, England, spoke in favor of the
clause after the vote.
   ``The Irish sensitivity was very much borne in mind, as was the
feeling that the IRA will pick up and twist to their own use
anything which seemed to offer them a handle of support,'' he said.
   But he said the key word was ``understand'' and that while both
sides of the Irish conflict had ``perfectly good Parliamentary
methods,'' other Christians around the world might not.
   The vote on polygamy was also taken by a show of hands, with
only about 12 of the 525 participating bishops opposed.
   Under the policy, the Anglican Church will recognize both
husbands and their multiple wives as Christians if the men take no
new brides after they are baptized.
   After the vote, Bishop Ralph Hatendi of Harare, in the Church of
the Province of Central Africa, said polygamy was not a major issue
anymore in Africa.
   ``The culture is potentially polygamous, but it does usually
depend on the area and also the wealth of the bridegroom,'' he said.
   There are no women bishops in the Anglican Communion, but
several of the autonomous churches in the communion, including the
2.5 million-member Episcopal Church of the United States, have
ordained women priests.
   On Monday, the bishops approved a compromise resolution on the
issue.
   In effect, it recognized that nothing can be done to prevent
Anglican churches in the United States, Canada and New Zealand from
consecrating a woman bishop after ordaining hundreds of women
priests.
   The resolution said the 27 self-governing Anglican churches
should respect such a move and that a commission headed by Runcie
be set up to prepare guidelines for it.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
