ID: 134	RANK: 98	SCORE: 24.831957
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890904-0125 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-04-89 2027EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-SouthAfrica 4thLd-Writethru a0637 09-04 0872</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-South Africa, 4th Ld-Writethru, a0637,0887</SECOND>
<HEAD>Police Use Force to Disperse Rallies; Tutu, Boesak Briefly Arrested</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: LEADS with 12 grafs to UPDATE with Tutu comments after freed,
plans to reconsecrate church. Picks up graf 10 pvs. `More than ...'</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By LAURINDA KEYS</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Police used teargas, bullets
and batons to break up anti-election rallies Monday and arrested
Archbishop Desmond Tutu and the Rev. Allan Boesak when they objected
to an armored truck blockading the entrance to a church.
   ``They have gone berserk,'' Tutu said after being held by police
in Cape Town for 90 minutes. ``They are clearly no longer in charge
and they are aware of it. I want to say to the world that the
terrorists in South Africa are the South African government.''
   Acting President F.W. de Klerk said in his final campaign speech
that white domination must end, but in a way that does not lead to
whites being dominated. Before de Klerk spoke at a rally in the
Johannesburg City Hall, 125 blacks marched there to present a
petition telling him that Wednesday's parliamentary elections
symbolize apartheid to the black majority who cannot vote. The
marchers dispersed peacefully after giving their petition to a
police major.
   In Durban, police fired tear gas and guns to disperse an
anti-election rally of 2,500 students at the multiracial University
of Natal, causing a stampede in which 10 people were hurt. Police
fired tear gas at 500 students holding a banned rally at the Indian
University of Durban-Westville. Officers arrested 26 students at the
two gatherings.
   Cape Town police jammed an armored truck against the door of the
Central Mission Methodist Church where people had gathered for a
rally opposing the election. Some people were trapped inside the
church and witnesses said police beat people trying to to to the
church.
   Tutu, the black Anglican Archbishop of Cape Town; Boesak, the
mixed-race president of the World Alliance of Reformed Churches, and
five other clergymen were arrested when they refused to go away from
the church.
   Journalists were arrested for covering the confrontation and also
were later released.
   ``I was refusing to disperse,'' Tutu told a midnight news
conference. He said he found it unbelievable that a police vehicle
could be used to block the door of a church and he had demanded that
it be removed.
   He also said he would hold a reconsecration service Tuesday at
St. George's Anglican Cathedral because, he said, police had
desecrated it when they entered it Monday evening. About 20
policeman had entered the cathedral, where Tutu officiates, ordered
it closed, barred people from entering to attend a choir concert and
temporarily kept the cathedral dean outside.
   ``This country claims to be Christian, yet they stopped the dean
of the cathedral from access to his cathedral church. Everywhere in
the world the church has been recognized as a place of sanctuary,
even by the craziest of dictators,'' said Tutu, who demanded an
apology from Law and Order Minister Adriaan Vlok.
   Both Boesak and Tutu were freed after being held briefly. Police
said Boesak had been detained for taking part in an illegal
gathering but they made no comment about Tutu.
   More than 30 police with dogs and batons blocked the Johannesburg
procession 300 yards from the City Hall entrance and ordered the
crowd to disperse. The protesters, holding their placards, sat down
in the street while Cyril Ramaphosa, leader of the National Union of
Mineworkers, South Africa's largest union, asked to present the
petition to de Klerk.
   ``Our people for over a month now have actually been showing in
various ways how these elections are irrelevant,'' Ramaphosa said,
referring to daily protests, rallies marches or acts of defiance
against apartheid laws. He said millions of blacks on Tuesday and
Wednesday will protest in what is expected to be a general strike.
   ``We believe that is the real election. That is how our people
are casting a vote,'' he said.
   Police Maj. Bruce Smith accepted the petition and the crowd was
ordered away from City Hall. De Klerk appeared there soon afterward
to address a mostly supportive National Party crowd of about 600
people.
   ``Discrimination must be eliminated. There is no other
alternative,'' de Klerk said. ``Only the National Party's policy and
direction can assure a new South Africa which will be just and
strong.''
   ``White discrimination, inasmuch as it exists, must come to an
end,'' he told the crowd. But, he said, ``The National Party is not
prepared to exchange white domination for another form of domination
... or for our becoming the dominated people in South Africa.'' He
said one-man, one-vote on a common voters roll would mean domination
of whites.
   Under apartheid, South Africa's 5 million whites control the
government and economy and maintain separate districts, schools and
health services. Blacks number 28 million.
   ``Your elections on Sept. 6 still symbolize apartheid and the
perpetuation of white minority rule,'' said the letter Ramaphosa
carried that was addressed to de Klerk. ``Millions of our people are
outraged that our future can still be decided in an election that is
racist because it excludes the majority of South African citizens on
the basis of their color.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
