ID: 242	RANK: 69	SCORE: 10.812086
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900111-0152 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-01-11-90 1659EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-Grammys     01-11 0799</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Grammys,0825</SECOND>
<HEAD>Veteran Pop and Rock Performers Claim Key Music Industry Award
Nominations</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By JOHN ANTCZAK</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>BEVERLY HILLS, Calif. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Don Henley's socially conscious
``The End of Innocence'' album was nominated for four plum Grammy
Awards on Thursday and a host of other aging pop music legends
grabbed most of the other key nominations.
   Henley's album earned nominations for album of the year and best
male rock performance. The title track was put in competition for
record and song of the year. The latter is a songwriting nomination
shared with Bruce Hornsby.
   The 32nd annual Grammy Awards will be presented Feb. 21 and
broadcast live on CBS-TV.
   A scattering of newer faces won prime nominations, but many went
to such veterans as Bette Midler, Bonnie Raitt, Tom Petty, Billy
Joel and Linda Ronstadt. Even the Rolling Stones got a nomination,
for group rock performance on their ``Mixed Emotions'' single.
   Miss Midler was caught by surprise when her ``Wind Beneath My
Wings'' single from the movie ``Beaches'' earned record, song and
female pop performance nominations.
   ``To tell you the truth, I haven't been paying a lot of
attention _ I have a lot of things going on, with the baby and
everything else,'' Ms. Midler said by telephone from her home here
as 3-year-old Sophie cried.
   The late Roy Orbison was nominated for pop vocal performance for
the single ``You Got It,'' and twice with pals Petty, George
Harrison, Jeff Lynne and Bob Dylan for their ``Traveling Wilburys''
collaboration.
   The nomination list for male rock performance typified the aging
face of the awards: Henley, Petty, Neil Young, Lou Reed and Joe
Cocker.
   The National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences announced
the nominations at a news conference with hosts singer Olivia
Newton-John and producer Quincy Jones. The announcements
experienced delays when a Grammy placard on the podium kept falling
off.
   There were 388 nominees representing 113 record companies.
   Neneh Cherry, Indigo Girls, Milli Vanilli, Soul II Soul and Tone
Loc were nominated as best new artists of 1989.
   The ``Batman'' movie soundtrack produced seven nominations,
including four for rock star Prince. He was listed for producer of
the year, male pop vocal performance, male Rhythm &amp; Blues
performance for the single ``Batdance,'' and for ``Partyman'' as
best song written for a movie.
   The rock band Fine Young Cannibals, featuring the sensuous
vocals of actor Roland Gift, was nominated for best album for ``The
Raw &amp; The Cooked'' and for best record and pop group for the single
``She Drives Me Crazy.''
   Miss Ronstadt's work drew multiple nominations: song of the year
and duo pop performance for ``Don't Know Much,'' and female pop
vocal for the album ``Cry Like a Rainstorm-Howl Like the Wind.''
   Joel's decades-summing single ``We Didn't Start the Fire'' was
tabbed for best record, song and pop male vocalist.
   Petty was nominated for his ``Full Moon Fever'' album and the
single ``Free Fallin''' was given the nod for male rock performance.
   Miss Raitt was nominated for her album ``Nick of Time'' and for
female pop vocalist for the title track and female rock vocal
performance for the album.
   Irish rockers U-2 earned a scattering of nominations, including
rock group performance for the LP ``Rattle and Hum,'' and in the
same category was picked for the single ``When Love Comes to Town''
with B.B. King.
   U-2 and lead singer Bono were also nominated for best song
written for a motion picture for ``Angel of Harlem,'' from the
movie ``Rattle and Hum.''
   Mike and The Mechanics were nominated for best record and song
for the single ``The Living Years'' as well as pop group
performance and short form music video.
   ``The Living Years'' is a personal story about the singer's
relationship with his father. ``I think it's one of those songs
that sort of reaches anybody,'' said Mike Rutherford from his
cottage in the English countryside.
   In the rhythm and blues category, best vocal performance
nominations went to Janet Jackson, Aretha Franklin, Natalie Cole,
Anita Baker and Vanessa Williams.
   Miss Franklin was also nominated twice in the R&amp;B duo
performance category for singles with James Brown and Whitney
Houston.
   Janet Jackson's ``Miss You Much'' also drew a songwriters
nomination. Her ``Rhythm Nation'' track from the album of the same
name was up for an instrumental arrangment Grammy and for best
long-form music video _ pitting her against brother Michael's
``Moonwalker'' video.
   Bobby Brown, Al Jarreau, Luther Vandross and Smokey Robinson
were R&amp;B male vocal nominees.
   In the country category, nominees included k.d. lang, Emmylou
Harris, Rosanne Cash, Dolly Parton, Kathy Mattea, Rodney Crowell,
Randy Travis, Clint Black and Lyle Lovett and the late Keith
Whitley.
   Heavy metal was a new category, drawing nominations for the
groups Dokken, Queensryche, Metallica, Faith No More and
Soundgarden.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
