ID: 242	RANK: 92	SCORE: 10.258291
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920214-0130
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920214-0130.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Paramount Hopes
   TV Skit `Parties On'
   At the Box Office
   ---
   New Flick `Wayne's World'
   Aims for Young Audience
   Of the Ultracool Duo
   ----
   By Thomas R. King
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/14/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B10A
</SO>
<CO>
   PCI
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
FILM, TELEVISION &amp; MUSIC INDUSTRIES (MOV)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)
</IN>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   HOLLYWOOD -- The deadline has passed for Academy Award
nominations, but rumors are swirling that "Wayne's World" --
a last-minute entry -- will sweep all the awards, including
Best Picture.
   Not]
</LP>
<TEXT>
   In Wayne lingo, as fans of NBC's "Saturday Night Live"
know, that "Not" actually means wrong. The characters of
ultracool metalman Wayne Campbell and his pal, Garth, have a
language all their own. Today they jump from the TV screen to
the big screen, and although there's little expectation of
rave reviews, much less of Oscar nominations next year,
Paramount Pictures Corp. is betting that its new low-budget
movie aimed at young people has all the elements to succeed
in today's tough box-office environment.
   "Wayne's World" was put into production shortly after
former NBC Entertainment chief Brandon Tartikoff took the
reins as chairman of Paramount last July, and some in
Hollywood have chortled contemptuously that one of his first
projects is laden with TV imagery. But the executive may have
the last laugh.
   In his first several months on the job, there was a dismal
drop in movie attendance, and a number of films targeting
adults fared poorly, including Paramount's own "Frankie &amp;
Johnny" starring Michelle Pfeiffer and Al Pacino. Mr.
Tartikoff and other studio executives now say they believe
that in recessionary times it's better to make movies that
appeal to a broader range of people and that it's crazy to
ignore the youth market, believed to comprise the most loyal
moviegoers. Paramount Pictures is a unit of Paramount
Communications Inc.
   The "Wayne's World" TV sketch features "Saturday Night
Live" regulars Mike Myers and Dana Carvey playing Wayne and
Garth, respectively, who broadcast a painfully low-budget
cable TV show from Wayne's basement in Aurora, Ill. The
buddies, whom Paramount describes in publicity material as
"the ultimate metal fans whose party-o-meters bang
dangerously into the red," use their cable show to rate their
favorite "babes" and blurt things like "party on]" and
"excellent]" It has become such a cult hit that Spin magazine
last year named the duo "Artist of the Year -- runners-up."
   Skeptics, though, wonder whether a short sketch that's a
cult favorite can be made into a compelling feature-length
movie appealing to a far wider demographic group. "If they
made it too slapstick, which I understand they tried not to
do, they could be in trouble," says Michael Hogan, president
of Hogan Communications, an entertainment marketing firm in
Burbank, Calif. "The college market is more sophisticated
than people think. They're turned off by movies that are too
silly."
   "Wayne's World," which cost about $15 million to make, is
pretty silly. But its creators contend that the material
they've banged together will hold moviegoers' attention until
the end.
   "In a weird way, the film is really the back story of the
sketch," says Mr. Myers, who created the characters and was
one of the film's writers. He dreamed up the Wayne character
in the early 1980s, playing him in the Second City comedy
troupe in Toronto, where he grew up, and on Canadian TV.
   Even though the TV sketch has never left Wayne's basement,
Mr. Myers says he's long known in his mind what the rest of
Wayne's world was like. "I always knew there was a doughnut
store. I always knew there was going to be a heavy metal bar,
that we'd drive in the Mirthmobile. And I always knew that I
was going to have a babe," the 28-year-old actor and writer
says.
   One of the film's most amusing segments takes place at a
studio where bigtime TV executives try to turn "Wayne's
World" into a commercial show. Wayne and Garth insist they
won't stand for exploitative product placement -- as they eat
Pizza Hut pizza, Doritos and Pepsi, with labels front and
center. Paramount says the scene is just a spoof, and PepsiCo
Inc., which makes all those products, didn't pay a cent.
   Despite such moments, some wonder whether the "Wayne's
World" TV sketch, which first aired in February 1989, has
already peaked and is heading to "Saturday Night Live" heaven
to join other overplayed bits such as the "Church Lady." The
duo's zenith was perhaps a year ago, when a particularly
humorous episode found Wayne and Garth critiquing TV news
anchors and coverage of the Persian Gulf War. ("Best News
Anchor name: CNN's Wolf Blitzer . . . Yeah, right]," Wayne
said. Garth: "He clearly made it up for the war]")
   Lorne Michaels, executive producer of "Saturday Night
Live" and producer of the movie, dismisses such criticism,
saying even the most popular "Saturday Night Live" skits --
including the "Coneheads" and the "cheeseburger-cheeseburger"
sketch inside a Greek diner -- played only a handful of
times. He notes that "Wayne's World" has aired only twice
this season.
   Mr. Tartikoff says the TV sketch isn't an issue. "I'm
optimistic that the `Wayne's World' movie is going to play
around the world in territories where they've never seen
`Saturday Night Live'," he says, suggesting it may have the
appeal of old Jerry Lewis comedies. "There's a lot of farce
and a lot of silliness, but I don't think you have to know
the characters in the TV program to enjoy the movie."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
