ID: 140	RANK: 19	SCORE: 19.317654
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890215-0204 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-02-15-89 2324EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-SatanicVerses 4thLd-Writethru a0817 02-15 1055</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Satanic Verses, 4th Ld-Writethru, a0817,1085</SECOND>
<HEAD>`Satanic Verses' Author Scrubs U.S. Trip; Iranians Announce Bounty</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: LEADS with 13 grafs to UPDATE with report death squads headed
for Britain. Pick up 13th pvs, `On Tuesday...'</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto LON7</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By ROBERT BARR</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Iran on Wednesday placed a $2.6 million bounty on the head of
Salman Rushdie, whose novel ``The Satanic Verses'' has enraged the
world's Moslems. Rushdie dropped from sight and canceled a U.S.
promotional tour due to start Friday.
   Police guarded Rushdie's home and his publishers.
   ``If the executioner is a foreigner he will receive a million
dollars,'' said Hojatoleslam Hassan Saneie, head of the 15th Khordad
Relief Agency, according to the Iranian news agency.
   The reward for an Iranian, however, will be 200 million rials, or
$2.6 million, the Islamic Republic News Agency quoted Saneie as
saying.
   The Times of London on Thursday quoted a former Pakistani
minister of information and religious affairs, Moulana Kausar Niazi,
as saying death squads from Pakistan and other Moslem states were on
their way to Britain to kill Rushdie, who lives in London.
   Tehran Radio denounced the book as ``a shameless onslaught on the
sacred character of Islam's prophet'' and protesters shattered
windows at the British Embassy in Tehran.
   The radio said Iran's ambassador to the Vatican, Salman Ghaffari,
urged Pope John Paul II to ``seriously oppose'' the publication of
the Italian translation of the book ``and prove that he defends
religion and spirituality.''
   ``With a glance at the writer of this book one may see the hidden
hands of world imperialism and the devious role of arrogance in the
activities of publication agencies which serve it,'' said a Tehran
Radio broadcast monitored by the British Broadcasting Corp.
   About 2,000 noisy protesters appeared at the British Embassy in
Tehran, Charge d'Affaires Nick Browne told BBC-TV, but he said
authorities protected the embassy and the seven people inside.
   ``There was never any question of any of us being in danger,''
Browne said.
   Tehran Radio, monitored by the BBC, reported other protests
Wednesday in Kashan, southeast of the holy city of Qom, and
Firuzukh, east of Tehran.
   Six people were killed and 82 injured when police opened fire
Sunday on demonstrators against the book who stormed a U.S. cultural
center in Islamabad, Pakistan. One person was killed in another
protest Monday in northern India.
   The Times said Moulana led the demonstration in Islamabad and
headed the movement to have the book banned in Pakistan.
   On Tuesday, Tehran Radio quoted Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini as
saying Rushdie and his publishers ``are hereby sentenced to death.''
   ``I call on all zealous Moslems to execute them quickly, wherever
they find them, so that no one will dare to insult Islamic
sanctity,'' it quoted Khomeini as saying.
   Rushdie _ a Moslem born in Bombay, India, and educated at
Cambridge _ was reported to be under police guard Wednesday with his
wife, American novelist Marianne Wiggins.
   In New York, spokesman Paul Slovak of Viking Penguin Inc. read a
statement representing ``the agreed joint position by the publisher
Viking and the author Salman Rushdie.''
   It said events in Pakistan and India and threats made against
Rushdie and others ``led us to conclude that the current climate is
not appropriate for a promotional tour in the U.S. as previously
planned.''
   The statement said no offense was intended in writing or
publishing the book and ended, ``It is also our unalterable position
that freedom of speech, freedom to publish and freedom to read must
be guaranteed internationally.''
   ``The Satanic Verses'' has sold more than 100,000 copies since it
was published in Britain in September to critical acclaim.
   At least five countries have formally banned the novel: India,
Pakistan, Bangladesh, Egypt and South Africa.
   Christian Bourgois, a French publishing house that bought the
rights to the novel, said Wednesday it was delaying publication.
   Britain recently reopend its embassy in Tehran, and the Foreign
Office said Browne was seeking a meeting with Iranian authorities to
clarify the situation.
   Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Velayati told diplomats in Tehran the
government would order the closure of cultural centers of nations
that permit publication of the book, Tehran Radio reported.
   ``There has been no direct impact on ties so far,'' IRNA said
Wednesday, ``but by being the first to allow the book to be
published on its soil, Britain could pay a heavy price for ignoring
the strong sentiments of over 1 billion Moslems worldwide.''
   Mostafa Barzegar, spokesman for Iran's Culture and Islamic
Guidance Ministry, announced a ban on books published by Viking and
other imprints of the Penguin Group, and said Penguin's invitation
to the second Tehran International Book Fair in May has been
canceled, IRNA said.
   Playwright Harold Pinter led a delegation to Prime Minister
Margaret Thatcher's residence at 10 Downing St. to deliver a letter
denouncing the Iranian threats.
   ``Salman Rushdie lives in this country and must be given full
protection, along with the other people involved,'' said the letter,
whose signatories included authors Fay Weldon, Marina Warner and
Hanif Kureishi, publisher Liz Calder and Stuart Weir, publisher of
the left-leaning New Statesman magazine.
   In The Netherlands, opposition lawmakers appealed to Foreign
Minister Hans van den Broek to cancel a planned trip to Tehran.
   Police were posted outside Rushdie's home and the office of his
publisher, Viking, and Kureishi said Rushdie had gone into hiding.
``He is obviously very frightened,'' said Kureishi. ``These people
are completely nutters,'' said Kureishi, who wrote the script for
the film ``My Beautiful Laundrette.''
   A major character in Rushdie's book is named Mahound, a medieval
corruption of the name of the prophet Mohammed. Moslems have
complained the book represents the prophet's wives as prostitutes
and suggests that he wrote the Koran, rather than receiving it from
God.
   The title refers to verses which Mohammed removed from the Koran,
Islam's holy book, believing they had been inspired by the devil.
   Before he went into hiding, Rushdie expressed no apologies for
his book.
   ``Frankly, I wish I had written a more critical book,'' he said
in an interview with BBC-TV on Tuesday.
   ``A religion that claims it is able to behave like this,
religious leaders who are able to behave like this, and then say
this is a religion which must be above any kind of whisper of
criticism, that doesn't add up,'' Rushdie said.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
