ID: 140	RANK: 31	SCORE: 18.061298
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890216-0212 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-02-16-89 2219EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-SatanicVerses 2ndLd-Writethru   02-16 1001</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Satanic Verses, 2nd Ld-Writethru,a0727,1029</SECOND>
<HEAD>Britain Protests to Iran; `Suicide Squads' to Kill Rushdie</HEAD>
<HEAD>EDS: SUBS 22nd graf, `The $2.6...' to CORRECT total bounty figure
to $5.2 million sted $5.6 million. Pick up 23rd pvs, `Non-Iranians...'</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto LON4</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By MAUREEN JOHNSON</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Britain protested to Iran on Thursday over Ayatollah Ruhollah
Khomeini's orders to kill Salman Rushdie, the author of ``The
Satanic Verses,'' and religious students in Iran threatened suicide
attacks on him.
   The bounty for killing the writer was doubled to $5.2 million,
and Britain's airlines _ including British Airways _ tightened
security following bomb threats against some flights.
   The death threats against Rushdie, whose book has been denounced
across the Moslem world as blasphemous, were called ``appalling'' by
the U.S. State Department. A leading Islamic theologian who opposes
the book said in Egypt that Khomeini erred by not giving Rushdie a
chance to repent.
   Rushdie, who was born a Moslem in Bombay, India, but no longer
practices Islam, is a naturalized Briton whose novel has sparked
violent protests from Islamic fundamentalists. He has canceled a
promotional tour for the book in the United States and remains in
hiding with his American wife, Marianne Wiggins. Published reports
said they were under police guard in Britain.
   Moslems say the allegorical novel offends their faith by
satirizing the prophet Mohammed as fallible; implying that Islam is
not the only true religion; portraying Mohammed's wives as
prostitutes; and suggesting he wrote the Koran, rather than
receiving it from God.
   The British Foreign Office summoned Iran's lone diplomat in
Britain, told him Khomeini's threat was ``totally unacceptable,''
demanded special protection for its Tehran Embassy, and froze plans
to expand diplomatic relations with the Islamic state.
   ``We recognize that Moslems and others may have strong views
about the contents of Mr. Rushdie's book,'' British Foreign
Secretary Sir Geoffrey Howe said after his office summoned Iranian
Charge d'Affaires Mohammed Basti.
   ``However, nobody has the right to incite people to violence on
British soil or against British citizens. Ayatollah Khomeini's
statement is totally unacceptable.''
   Howe stopped short of threatening to break diplomatic relations.
But in an address to a Foreign Press Association luncheon he said
``a stable and serious relationship ... will not be possible while
Iran fails to respect international standards of behavior.''
   Basti emerged from the Foreign Office in defiant mood, saying
Rushie's ``infamous book'' has had ``appalling consequences in some
Islamic countries.''
   ``It is a decree, it is a verdict after careful consideration,''
he said of the death sentence. ``It has nothing to do with any
particular country.''
   On Wednesday, protesters stoned the British Embassy in Tehran.
   Britain reopened the embassy in December after an eight-year
closure, and intended to appoint an ambassador and have more than 12
diplomats, the Foreign Office said.
   In New Delhi, an anonymous caller to the United News of India
threatened to bomb British flights unless Rushdie emerged from
hiding.
   At London's Heathrow Airport, British Airways immediately
tightened security with bag-by-bag searches of luggage of passengers
on its Thursday evening flights to the Indian sub-continent and the
Far East.
   Air Europe, another British-owned airline with flights to India,
said it was taking the threat seriously.
   Amid a growing international furor, the Pakistan government
called in the British and American ambassadors and demanded that all
copies of the book be destroyed.
   Pakistan, India and several other countries banned the book.
Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto reached agreement with her right-wing
opposition in January on a parliamentary resolution upholding the
ban.
   Tehran Radio said religious figures in the northwestern Iran city
of Urumiyeh said in a statement, ``We have already put on our death
shrouds and pledge to carry out the Imam's (Khomeini's) death
sentence against Salman Rushdie and his publishers in the United
States and Europe.''
   The broadcast followed reports that other death squads were
headed to Britain from Islamic countries in search of Rushdie, a
41-year-old Moslem.
   Rushdie dropped out of sight soon after Khomeini announced the
death sentence on Tuesday on him and Viking, his publishers in
Britain and the United States.
   The $2.6 million bounty offered by Iran was matched by Mohammad
Hashemian, religious leader in the southwestern city of Kerman, who
offered the cash reward ``to any group or individual who carries out
the death sentence on Rushdie and his publishers.'' That brought the
total bounty to $5.2 million.
   Non-Iranians would be paid $1 million if they got to Rushdie
first.
   In Washington, State Department spokesman Charles E. Redman said
the United States was ``appalled by the death threats against Salman
Rushdie by the Ayatollah Khomeini, as well as a subsequent offer of
a reward for his murder.''
   ``Such threats are completely irresponsible and are incompatible
with basic standards of international conduct,'' he said, adding
that he did not see how ``this in any way could improve the
prospects'' for U.S.-Iranian relations.
   In the Netherlands, where he is on a NATO tour, Secretary of
State James A. Baker III called the death threats ``regrettable.''
   Sheik Mohammed Hossam-el-Din, a leading Islamic theologian in
Cairo, said Khomeini erred in sending death squads after Rushdie
because executing him would be ``virtually impossible'' under the
tenets of Islam.
   Hossam-el-Din said in an interview that nobody has been executed
in Islam's 1,350-year history as an apostate, which he interpreted
as the crime that Khomeini invoked in issuing his sentence against
Rushdie. Khomeini said only that the Indian-born author deserved to
die for insulting Islam.
   In other developments:
   _ The French government said it was ``shocked'' at the death
threat and Dutch Foreign Minister Hans van den Broek canceled a trip
to Tehran.
   _ Italian publishers Arnoldo Mondadori Editore Spa said they
would go head with a contract to release the Italian edition of
``The Satanic Verses,'' but Rushdie's French publishers, Christian
Bourgois, suspended publication plans.
   _ The British Arts Council, backing earlier protests by British
writers, denounced the threats against Rushdie and his publishers as
contrary to the ``tolerance and understanding that are the hallmark
of a free society.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
