ID: 140	RANK: 42	SCORE: 17.643230
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890218-0006 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-02-18-89 1032EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i PM-SatanicVerses 7thLd-Writethru   02-18 1034</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Satanic Verses, 7th Ld-Writethru,a0483,1059</SECOND>
<HEAD>Rushdie Apologizes, Iran Says It's Not Enough</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: Subs 1 graf for the 2nd pvs, ``However, the...'' and inserts
2 grafs after 26th graf pvs, ``A Foreign...'' to UPDATE with reaction from
Moslem leaders in Britain. Pickup 27th graf pvs, ``Viking, the...'' TRIMS.</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto NY8</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By MICHAEL WEST</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>LONDON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Author Salman Rushdie, facing calls for his death
and a multimillion-dollar bounty for the killer, today apologized to
Moslems for the distress caused by the publication of his novel
``The Satanic Verses.''
   However, the official Iranian news agency said the author had
failed to repent or order that his book be withdrawn. A Moslem
leader in Britain welcomed the apology but said the campaign against
the book would continue.
   In a statement issued by his agent, Rushdie said: ``I profoundly
regret the distress that publication has occasioned to sincere
followers of Islam.''
   ``Living as we do in a world of many faiths this experience has
served to remind us that we must all be conscious of the
sensibilities of others.''
   The brief statement was also issued to Iran's Islamic Republic
News Agency, and a story was sent to Iran, a spokesman for the
agency said.
   Rushdie apologized after his book was banned in six countries and
removed from the shelves of major bookstores in the United States.
   The author's statement came a day after Iran's president, Ali
Khamenei, said the Indian-born Briton could save his life with an
apology.
   Iran's news agency noted the apology but said Rushdie's statement
``made no indication of his repentence or that his slanderous book
would be withdrawn.''
   IRNA, monitored in London, said Rushdie, who was raised in a
Moslem family, has been ``under growing pressure to make a public
repentence that his statement is seen falling well short of.''
   Two prominent Moslems condemned the Iranian campaign against the
author, which began Tuesday when Iranian leader Ayatollah Ruhollah
Khomeini said ``The Satanic Verses'' blasphemed Islam and demanded
zealous Moslems kill Rushdie. Two Iranian religious leaders later
offered a $5.2 million bounty for Rushdie.
   The Times of London today reported that a power struggle may have
prompted Khomeini's execution order, which sent Rushdie, 41, and his
American wife into hiding under the guard of Scotland Yard
detectives.
   The British Foreign Office said on Friday that ``considerable
confusion persists'' within the Iranian government and that Britain
``intended to proceed with that fact in mind.'' It did not elaborate.
   Moslems condemned ``The Satanic Verses'' when it was published
late last year to critical acclaim in the West.
   Another round of protests began Sunday with demonstrations in
Pakistan, where six people died. The protests spread and another
person was killed and 75 people injured in a series of
demonstrations in India.
   After Khomeini also ordered the death of publishers of the novel,
book companies in France, West Germany, Greece and Turkey decided
not to publish it. Others in Finland, Norway and Italy were unswayed.
   Major U.S. booksellers such as B. Dalton and Barnes &amp; Nobel
removed the novel from their shelves, and Canada halted imports. The
book has been officially banned in Iran, India, Pakistan,
Bangladesh, Egypt and South Africa.
   The governments of West Germany, Spain, Britain and the United
States condemned the Iranian compaign. The United States called it
``appalling.''
   The Times of London quoted ``a closely involved source'' as
saying Khomeini's son Ahmad and three hard-line ministers may have
persuaded the 88-year-old spiritual leader to make the death call to
undermine a political rival seeking improved relations with Britain.
   The report said supporters of Iran's parliament speaker, Hashemi
Rafsanjani, believe Khomeini's son and the government ministers
hoped the death call would deal a blow to British relations and
Rafsanjani.
   Some diplomats in the Middle East have speculated the Rushdie
issue was promoted by factions in Iran opposed to recent moves by
more pragmatic figures, including Rafsanjani, to improve relations
with the West.
   But Akhoond Zadeh Basti, Iran's charge d'affaires in London, told
Independent Television News in Britian on Friday that Khomeini's
call was ``based purely on religious grounds.''
   In Egypt, 1988 Nobel Prize laureate Naguib Mahfouz today said
Khomeini's call ``can undoubtedly be considered terrorism.'' The
76-year-old novelist said in an interview that the ``decision is
against humanity because it is against thought and against human
rights. It is also against Islam because it harms the reputation of
Islam and Moslems in the civilized world.''
   The head of the Shiite Moslem community in Europe on Friday urged
book companies not to publish the novel, but he denounced Khomeini's
death call.
   ``The Moslem world is shaken, shocked by this work, which throws
doubt on the authenticity of our holy book, which treats the wives
of the prophet as prostitutes,'' Ayatollah Mehdi Rhouani said from
his Paris home in an interview with The Associated Press. But he
said Khomeini's decree was ``contrary to Islamic law, contrary to
international law, contrary to morals.''
   Rushdie's publishers showed the apology to Britain's Foreign
Office shortly before it was made public.
   A Foreign Office spokesman, who by custom was not identified,
said: ``The statement is, of course, a matter for Mr. Rushdie and
not for the government. But if it serves to calm passions, then that
can only be a good thing.''
   Members of Britain's Moslem community welcomed Rushdie's
statement. But leaders of the Islamic community in Bradford, where
some copies of the book were burned in public, said their campaign
against it would continue.
   ``I think the apology will calm down the situation but it will
not change the situation overall until the book is withdrawn from
circulation,'' said Liaqat Hussain, general secretary of the
Bradford Council of Mosques.
   Viking, the book's publishers in Britain and the United States,
said earlier this week that it and the author ``very much regret the
distress the book has caused.'' But Viking did not apologize for
publishing the book.
   Before today's statement, Rushdie had said the novel was
fictional and not blasphemous.
   Moslems say ``The Satanic Verses'' blasphemes their religion by,
among other things, portraying the prophet Mohammed's wives as
prostitutes and suggesting that he wrote the Koran, the holy book of
Islam, rather than receiving it from God.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
