ID: 140	RANK: 6	SCORE: 21.108294
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP901224-0072 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NY-12-24-90 1414EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i PM-Rushdie 3rdLd-Writethru a0498 12-24 0761</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Rushdie, 3rd Ld-Writethru, a0498,0968</SECOND>
<HEAD>Rushdie Says He Will Not Authorize `Satantic Verses' Paperback</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: New thruout to UPDATE with comment from Rushdie and Moslems.
No pickup.</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By ROBERT BARR</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>LONDON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Salman Rushdie has embraced Islam and promised not
to authorize a paperback version of his controversial novel ``The
Satanic Verses,'' a group of Islamic and Egyptian officials
announced today.
   Earlier this year, Rushdie had insisted on the need for a
paperback version, but a spokeswoman for his defense committee
confirmed that the statement was genuine.
   In a statement released by Dr. Hesham el-Essawy, president of
the Islamic Society for the Promotion of Religious Tolerance,
Rushdie also declared that he did not agree with any statement
uttered by characters in the book that cast aspersions on Islam,
questioned the authenticity of the Koran, or rejected the divinity
of Allah.
   He also agreed not to authorize any further translations of the
work.
   Rushdie did not disavow the book, but insisted today that it was
a moral fable. All the things that Moslems found insulting, he
said, ``take place in the dream of a man who has lost his mind. He
has lost his mind because he has lost his faith.''
   In a telephone hookup with a news conference organized by
el-Essawy, Rushdie said it was up to the government of Iran to
remove the death sentence against him. ``I feel a lot safer tonight
than I felt yesterday,'' he added.
   Rushdie has been in hiding under police guard since February
1989, when Iranian leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini said the
writer deserved death as a blasphemer. Iran offered a $1 million
bounty for Rushdie's death.
   ``This is the way we hope that will earn Rushdie's release from
his predicament. This is how we intend to make him a free man,''
said el-Essawy.
   El-Essawy argued, as he has in the past, that Rushdie could not
be sentenced to death as an apostate because he was not a believing
Moslem.
   Now that Rushdie has embraced the faith, by ``declaring there is
no God but Allah and that Mohammed is his last prophet,'' el-Essawy
said that ``the slate is wiped clean.''
   El-Essawy characterized Rushdie as a ``convert,'' and quoted the
author as saying, ``There is no difference between Rushdie and
Islam.''
   Other British Moslems who have been prominent in the controversy
demanded more from Rushdie.
   ``It puzzles me that he hasn't gone far enough to remove the
hardback, if that's the intention. The Moslem community has been
suffering for a long time,'' said Sher Azam of the Council for
Mosques in Bradford, where the book had been publicly burned.
   ``Until the book is completely removed our campaign goes on,''
Azam said.
   Iqbal Sacranie, joint convener of the UK Committee on Islamic
Affairs, said Rushdie's statement was a positive step. However,
``It seems to us that the most appropriate course of action ... is
the withdrawal from circulation of this blasphemous book.''
   Rushdie recently has come out of hiding for a television
interview, and on Dec. 5 he appeared at a London bookshop to sign
copies of his latest book, ``Haroun and the Sea of Stories.''
   Iran severed diplomatic relations with Britain over ``The
Satanic Verses'' but ties were restored in October after an
18-month break. On Dec. 9, however, Iranian Minister of Culture
Mohammad Khatami said the death sentence against Rushdie could not
be revoked.
   El-Essawy said he met with Rushdie on Friday in a secure
location.
   He said they were joined at the meeting by Dr. Mohammed Ali
Mahgoub, an Egyptian government official who heads the Supreme
Council of Scholars of Islamic Affairs; Youssef Ahmed El Sharkawy,
2nd Secretary at the Egyptian Embassy and two clergy from the
Regent's Park Mosque in London.
   According to el-Essawy, Rushdie made four points in the
statement:
   ``1. To witness that there is no God but Allah, and that
Mohammed is his last prophet.
   ``2. To declare that I do not agree with any statement in my
novel `The Satanic Verses' uttered by any of the characters who
insults the prophet Mohammed, or casts aspersions upon Islam, or
upon the authenticity of the holy koran, or who rejects the
divinity of Allah.
   ``3. I undertake not to publish the paperback edition of `The
Satanic Verses' or to permit any further agreement for translations
into other languages while any risk of further offense exists.
   ``4. I will continue to work for a better understanding of Islam
in the world, as I have always attempted to do in the past.''
   ``The Satanic Verses'' has sold more than 1 million copies in
English - almost three-quarters of those in the United States - and
was on the Sunday Times of London's best-seller list for nearly a
year. It has been translated into 15 languages and banned in more
than 20 countries.
   Rushdie, born in Bombay and now a naturalized British citizen,
has been in hiding since Feb. 14, 1989.
   Moslems worldwide objected to Rushdie's use of the names of the
Prophet Mohammed's wives for the prostitutes in his novel and the
implication that Mohammed wrote the Koran, Islam's holy book,
instead of receiving it from God.
   In September 1989, a trade survey found booksellers in England
divided on the question of stocking any paperback edition. Forty
percent said they would not handle it, 44 percent said they would,
according to Publishing News.
   A London newspaper, The Observer, reported last year that Viking
Penguin had decided to publish the paperback in 1990, but the
company never made any announcement.
   In January, the company said it was unlikely to announce its
plans in advance because of the security implications.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
