ID: 140	RANK: 65	SCORE: 16.866255
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890220-0070 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-02-20-89 1250EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i PM-SatanicVerses 2ndLd-Writethru   02-20 0776</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Satanic Verses, 2nd Ld-Writethru,a0497,0797</SECOND>
<HEAD>Common Market Nations Recalling Envoys From Tehran</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: New 6th graf ``Late today,...'' to say Britain closing its embassy
in Tehran. DELETES 18th graf pvs ``The threat...'' as redundant.</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By JEFF DONN</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   The 12 Common Market nations today said they will recall their
ambassadors from Iran to protest Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's order
that Salman Rushdie be killed for writing a novel many Moslems say
is blasphemous.
   The decision in Brussels by the European Economic Community came
a day after the Iranian leader spurned Rushdie's apology for
offending Moslems with his novel ``The Satanic Verses.'' Khomeini
renewed his ``execution'' order.
   West German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher said the EEC
nations also will require Iranian diplomats in Europe to stay within
40 miles of where they are stationed.
   He called the action by the EEC foreign ministers a sign of
solidarity with Britain, where Rushdie, an Indian-born Moslem, lives
and is now in hiding.
   ``But it is also a signal to assure the preservation of
civilization and human values, the preservation of freedom of speech
and expression,'' Genscher said.
   Late today, Britain announced it was closing its embassy in the
Iranian capital and withdrawing all the embassy employees. Britain
restored diplomatic relations with Iran last November following a
17-month break.
   Khomeini indicated Sunday that he will not retract his order that
Rushdie be killed. Iranian clerics have put a $5.2 million bounty on
Rushdie's head.
   Khomeini's decree also named Rushdie's publishers, and copies of
the novel have been removed from some bookstores' shelves in the
United States and Japan. Fearing attacks, some Western publishers
have decided not to print the book.
   In Washington on Sunday, Secretary of State James A. Baker III
called the death threat ``intolerable'' and an obstacle to Iran
``rejoining the community of civilized nations.''
   In New York, Roman Catholic Cardinal John J. O'Connor implied
that Catholics should shun the work because it offends Moslems, but
criticized the death threat. O'Connor said he had not read the book.
   President Ali Khamenei of Iran had sought to defuse the crisis
over Khomeini's death decree by saying Friday that Rushdie's life
might be spared if he apologized and repented.
   In an apology issued Saturday, Rushdie said:
   ``I recognize that Moslems in many parts of the world are
genuinely distressed by the publication of my novel. I profoundly
regret the distress that publication has occasioned to sincere
followers of Islam.''
   Iran's official Islamic Republic News Agency said at one point
Saturday that the apology from the 41-year-old writer was probably
sufficient to warrant a pardon, but it later retracted the statement
as only the opinion of one of its writers.
   On Sunday, IRNA quoted Khomeini as saying: ``Even if Salman
Rushdie repents and becomes the most pious man of all time it is
incumbent on every Moslem to employ everything he's got, his life
and wealth, to send him to hell.''
   Khomeini said the ``imperialist foreign mass media are falsely
alleging that officials of the Islamic Republic said that if the
author of `The Satanic Verses' repents, the execution order against
him would be abolished. This is denied, 100 percent.''
   Neither Khomeini's statement nor IRNA in any of its reports
Sunday referred to Khamenei's suggestion of a reprieve, reflecting a
widening rift in the Iranian hierarchy over the affair and their
country's relations with the West.
   Pragmatists in Iran have been pursuing closer ties with the West
and help in rebuilding an economy wracked by its eight-year war with
Iraq.
   Canada decided Sunday to allow entry of the book after
determining it is not ``hate propaganda,'' said National Revenue
Minister Otto Jelinek. It had blocked imports of the book after
receiving a complaint from a Moslem group.
   ``The Satanic Verses'' is banned in Iran, India, Pakistan,
Bangladesh, Egypt and South Africa.
   Moslems say ``The Satanic Verses'' blasphemes their religion by
portraying the prophet Mohammed's wives as prostitutes and
suggesting that he wrote the Koran, the holy book of Islam, rather
than receiving it directly from Allah.
   Publishers in France, West Germany, Greece and Turkey have
decided not to publish the book, and leading bookstore chains in the
United States have pulled it from their shelves.
   Japan's top two foreign book dealers announced today they will
stop selling the book for safety reasons until the furor dies down.
   In Yugoslavia, the leading Communist Party daily began printing
excerpts of ``The Satanic Verses'' in today's editions.
   The printing of the excerpts in the daily Borba comes on the same
day as the arrival of Khamenei on a three-day visit. It is the
Iranian president's first official trip to a European country.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
