ID: 140	RANK: 68	SCORE: 16.830870
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890224-0183 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-02-24-89 1816EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-SatanicVerses 1stLd-Writethru a0693 02-24 0881</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Satanic Verses, 1st Ld - Writethru, a0693,0899</SECOND>
<HEAD>Up to 12 Killed in India Rally; British Ask Soviets For Help</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: LEADS with 4 grafs to CORRECT that 40 protesters wounded by
gunfire and 11 officers injured; picks up 5th `Police imposed'</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By ANDREA HAMILTON</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Police in Bombay, India, opened fire Friday on Moslem mobs
protesting ``The Satanic Verses,'' killing up to 12 people, and an
Iranian leader said the novel might cause a ``vast battle'' between
Iran and the West.
   Officials in London said Britain asked Soviet Foreign Minister
Eduard A. Shevardnadze to press the Iranian patriarch, Ayatollah
Ruhollah Khomeini, to lift his command that followers kill Salman
Rushdie, author of the novel Moslems call blasphemous.
   News reports said police gunfire wounded 40 people during the
Bombay protest by about 5,000 people after midday Moslem prayers and
that 11 police officers were injured. Police said they arrested 300
demonstrators.
   The protesters ignored a ban on assembly of more than five people
in public places Friday, the Moslem sabbath. A police spokesman said
they set fire to several buses and other vehicles and attacked
police.
   Police imposed the ban after some Moslems announced plans to
demonstrate against the book, which they say is blasphemous.
   Reports of the death toll conflicted. Press Trust said 12 people
were killed, United News of India put it at 10, and Police
Commissioner S.M. Shangari said eight had died. Two deaths initially
attributed to the violence were caused by unrelated road accidents,
he said.
   Demonstrations also were reported in the Indian cities of New
Delhi, Calcutta, Darjeeling, Varanasi, Patna and Siliguri. No
violence was reported.
   In New Delhi, about 400 Moslems marched to the British Embassy,
and the city's 32-officer police force was put on alert.
   India banned Rushdie's book in November, fearing it could spark
sectarian unrest. More than 90 million Moslems live in India and
make up about 11 percent of the nation's population of 880 million.
The novel also is banned in Pakistan, South Africa, Bangladesh, Iran
and Egypt.
   Rushdie was born into a Moslem family in Bombay in 1947. Now a
British citizen, he has been under police guard in England since
Khomeini first ordered Moslems on Feb. 14 to kill him. Iranian
clerics have put a $5.2 million bounty on Rushdie's head.
   In demonstrations Feb. 12-13, one person was killed in India and
six died in Pakistan, where police opened fire on a crowd that
attacked a U.S. diplomatic office.
   Iran's Parliament speaker, Hashemi Rafsanjani, urged Western
countries to state clearly if they agree with the contents of
Rushdie's novel.
   Rafsanjani said Moslems want to know if Western governments
support what the book says about Islam ``so that we know what our
duty is regarding those who are a partner in cursing the prophet.''
   ``The ground has been laid for a vast battle between Islam on the
one hand, and paganism and arrogance on the other,'' Rafsanjani said
in the prayer sermon in Tehran, broadcast by the official Islamic
Republic News Agency and monitored in Cyprus.
   British Foreign Office sources said Foreign Secretary Sir
Geoffrey Howe had written Shevardnadze urging him to tell Khomeini
that ``the Soviet Union shares the international community's wish to
see Iran respect international obligations and renounce the use of
violence.''
   Shevardnadze, on a 10-day Middle East tour, will meet with
Khomeini on Saturday in a rare audience with the religious patriarch.
   The Soviet Ambassador to London, Leonid Zamyatin, said the
controversy ``clearly shows the need for respect for religious
feelings and traditions as well as tolerance for the politics and
values of others.''
   The 12 nations of the European Economic Community have recalled
their envoys from Iran, and London has shut down its mission in
Tehran. Iran pulled its ambassadors out of the Common Market nations.
   Nearly 2,000 Moslems rallied in Manchester in northern Britain on
Friday and called for Rushdie's book to be withdrawn from library
shelves. They waved placards and ripped a cardboard effigy of
Rushdie to pieces.
   Britain's home secretary, Douglas Hurd, said his country's
750,000 Moslems were entitled to protest ``peacefully and with
dignity'' against a book ``which they believe denigrates and insults
the prophet of Islam.''
   ``But to turn such protests toward violence or the threat of
violence is wholly unacceptable,'' he told a meeting of Moslems in
Birmingham.
   Howe, in Tokyo for the funeral of Emperor Hirohito, was
threatened with death by a man who called the Tokyo correspondent
for Britain's Guardian newspaper and said Howe ``won't leave Tokyo
alive. ... He is a great infidel like Rushdie,'' the newspaper said.
   In Istanbul, a man called The Associated Press and said U.S.
embassies would be bombed. He said he spoke in the name of ``Islamic
Jihad for the Honor of Islam.'' Another caller said a bomb was
placed at the British Council office in Istanbul but no bomb was
found, police said. Istanbul Governor Cahit Bayar said security
precautions were taken at foreign missions in the city. He did not
elaborate.
   Some Moslem priests in Turkey denounced Rushdie during their
Friday sermons and one said he should be killed, the Anatolia News
Agency reported.
   Many people in the predominantly Moslem country have said they
disapprove of ``The Satanic Verses,'' but others have opposed
Khomeini's death threat.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
