ID: 140	RANK: 74	SCORE: 16.530552
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890221-0110 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-02-21-89 1250EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r i PM-SatanicVerses 6thLd-Writethru a0567 02-21 0895</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Satanic Verses, 6th Ld-Writethru, a0567,0920</SECOND>
<HEAD>Iran Recalls Ambassadors From Europe, Britain Expells Iranian Envoy</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: SUBS 5-6th grafs pvs ``President Bush ...'' with two grafs to
provide full quote. Picks up 7th graf pvs ``The United States...''</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By JEFF DONN</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Iran recalled its ambassadors from Common Market countries today,
a day after the 12 European countries decided to withdraw their
envoys from Tehran to protest Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's order
that novelist Salman Rushdie be killed.
   Iran said its move was in direct reponse to the European Economic
Community's decision Monday to recall ambassadors from Tehran and
suspend high-level diplomatic exchanges.
   Hours later, Britain _ which already said it would withdraw its
entire embassy staff from Tehran _ announced it was expelling the
Iranian charge d'affaires and his aide to protest the death threats.
   ``It is neither possible nor sensible to conduct a normal
relationship with Iran,'' British Foreign Secretary Sir Geoffrey
Howe told the House of Commons.
   President Bush said today he strongly supports European countries
that have withdrawn their ambassadors from Iran.
   ``However offensive that book may be, inciting murder and
offering rewards for its perpetration are deeply offensive to the
norms of civilized behavior,'' Bush said.
   The United States has no diplomatic relations with Iran.
   In a communique, the Iranian Foreign Ministry called Khomeini's
week-old order for the death of Rushdie a ``consensus judgment of
all Moslem leaders throughout the world,'' Iran's official Islamic
Republic News Agency reported.
   Many Moslems consider Rushdie's book ``The Satanic Verses''
blasphemous, although some Moslems have criticized Khomeini's order
that Rushdie be killed. The book has been banned by seven nations,
including India, Egypt and Pakistan.
   IRNA quoted the Foreign Ministry communique as saying respect for
Islam and its values will remain an inviolable principle in
relations between Iran and other countries.
   Britain said Monday it was withdrawing its embassy staff from the
Iranian capital and closing its embassy. The two countries resumed
diplomatic relations in November after a 17-month break.
   Rushdie, born into a Moslem family in India, now lives in London
and is a British citizen. The novel was first published in Britain
in September.
   Sweden and Norway, although not members of the Common Market,
recalled their ambassadors from Iran today. Foreign Minister Sten
Andersson of Sweden said his nation also will cancel a visit by a
trade delegation scheduled for next month unless the death threat
against Rushdie is rescinded.
   The European Community's foreign ministers, at a meeting Monday
in Brussels, Belgium, decided to recall their country's ambassadors
for consultation at Britain's request.
   Prime Minister Hussein Musavi of Iran called the EC action a
``useless maneuver certain to harm the European Community rather
than Iran,'' IRNA reported. He said it was ``the Western countries
which need to win Iran's favor, rather than the other way around,''
the agency said.
   Iran's Parliament speaker, Hashemi Rafsanjani, criticized the
recall as ``a big mistake'' and said it proved Rushdie's novel was a
plot ``designed by Western imperialism to fight true Islam,'' IRNA
reported.
   ``We do not fear such threats,'' he added. ``We are prepared to
follow our own path at an cost.''
   IRNA quoted Moslem leaders in Tehran as calling for severing ties
with Britain because: ``British colonialism and the Great Satan (the
United States) had played a basic role in insulting the prophet
Mohammed.''
   The statement called Rushdie's novel ``slanderous'' and asked the
world's Moslems to carry out Khomeini's order that the author be
killed.
   Iranian clerics have put a $5.2 million bounty on the author's
head. Rushdie is reportedly in hiding under police guard.
   Many Moslems say ``The Satanic Verses'' portrays the prophet
Mohammed's wives as prostitutes and suggests that he _ rather than
Allah _ was the source of the Koran, Islam's holy book.
   The novel has prompted Moslem protests around the world. In
Pakistan and India, seven people died in the protests.
   Publishers in France, West Germany, Greece and Turkey have
canceled plans to publish Rushdie's book, and it has been pulled
from bookstore shelves in Japan. Many U.S. bookstores have also
removed the novel from display.
   In a letter today to Premier Michel Rocard of France, the more
than 500 authors in the French section of the international Pen Club
called for publication of ``The Satanic Verses.'' The authors said
they were confident authorities could assure the publishers' safety.
Last week, Christian Bourgois, the French publisher with rights to
the novel, said it was suspending publication to protect its
employees.
   On Monday, Iranian leaders met at Khomeini's home to reaffirm the
``execution'' order, and Iranian television showed the
fundamentalist patriarch sitting on a balcony above a crowd of
several hundred men who waved clenched fists and chanted ``Death to
America!'' and ``Long Live Khomeini!''
   After Khomeini called for Rushdie's killing, Iranian President
Ali Khamenei said an apology from Rushdie might lead to a pardon.
   The 41-year-old writer apologized Saturday for any distress his
book has caused Moslems.
   But Khomeini rejected the apology. Neither he nor IRNA made any
mention of Khamenei's statement on the issue, suggesting a split in
Iranian leadership.
   The decision by the European countries to recall their
ambassadors was a setback for Iranian moderates' hopes of improving
relations with Western nations. Iran recently has expressed interest
in bolstering ties and receiving aid to help rebuilt its economy,
battered by eight years of war with Iraq.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
