ID: 140	RANK: 76	SCORE: 16.458515
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890227-0193 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-02-27-89 2133EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-SatanicVerses 2ndLd-Writethru a0656 02-27 0902</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Satanic Verses, 2nd Ld - Writethru, a0656,0925</SECOND>
<HEAD>Bomb Kills One, Wounds Seven in Kashmir Protest</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: ADDS graf with background on British blasphemy law.</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By JAMES L. WATSON</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   A bomb killed one person and wounded seven Monday at a protest of
``The Satanic Verses'' in India, and Britain said Iran's order to
kill author Salman Rushdie was a ``fearful example of where
intolerance may lead.''
   Activists in Moscow demonstrated for Rushdie outside the Iranian
Embassy.
   In Karachi, Pakistan, a bomb exploded at the British Council
library while it was closed Sunday night, killing a guard.
   At least 18 people have been killed in India and Pakistan since
Feb. 12. Both countries have banned the novel.
   Syria said it banned ``The Satanic Verses,'' which many Moslems
consider blasphemous, a month ago and suspended all dealings with
Viking Penguin, the publisher. The Information Ministry said the ban
includes any other publishing house that translates or distributes
the book.
   Moslem theologians meeting in Mecca, the holy city of Islam,
branded Rushdie a ``heretic and a renegade'' Monday but did not
endorse murdering him. Islamic law condemns heretics to death, but
only after they are tried and refuse to repent.
   In London, the government refused a request by British Moslems to
extend the blasphemy law to all religions. It now covers only the
Anglican faith.
   Rushdie, 41, was born into a Moslem family in Bombay, India, but
has become a British citizen and does not actively practice
religion. The writer has been in hiding and under heavy police guard
since Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini ordered his death.
   He has apologized for any distress ``The Satanic Verses'' caused
Moslems, but Iran rejected the apology.
   A senior Viking Penguin editor attending an emergency meeting in
London of the Writers' Guild of Great Britain said Monday hardback
copies of the novel were selling so well that a paperback edition,
due out in August, may be delayed for ``crude commercial'' reasons.
   He denied reports that Viking Penguin might cancel the paperback
edition to appease Moslems.
   Khomeini, Iran's 88-year-old revolutionary patriarch, ordered his
followers Feb. 14 to kill Rushdie for blaspheming Islam and the
prophet Mohammed. Iranian clerics put a price of $5.2 million on the
author's head.
   Nigeria's Supreme Council of Moslems said Monday it supports the
death sentence. A Moslem student group in Africa's most populous
country also demanded action against Nigerian author Wole Soyinka,
the 1986 Nobel Literature laureate, for defending his fellow writer.
   About 300 Moslems demonstrated at the British consulate in Kaduna
in the Moslem-dominated north. They carried placards condemning
Rushdie and Soyinka, one of which said ``Soyinka Must Die.''
   Rushdie got support Monday from about 15 unofficial political
activists and journalists in Moscow who shouted ``Shame on Khomeini!
Shame on Islam!'' outside the Iranian Embassy.
   Soviet media have published reports from abroad about the
controversy but have not commented editorially, and the Kremlin has
said nothing.
   Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze, touring the Middle East,
met with Khomeini in Tehran on Sunday. Iran's official news agency
indicated they did not mention Rushdie or ``The Satanic Verses.''
   A statement distributed by the Moscow protesters said: ``While
all the civilized world is outraged'' by the death sentence, ``the
Soviet government as usual remains silent.''
   Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain was in Paris for a
summit with the French president, Francois Mitterrand, and told a
news conference that defending Rushdie ``is a fundamental matter of
freedom of speech.''
   ``We cannot have other people inciting their own citizens to
murder one of our citizens, and on that we had to be very firm,''
she said.
   Iran's parliament has scheduled a vote for Tuesday on whether to
break relations with Britain.
   Mitterrand told the journalists: ``In an affair of this kind,
when dogmatism and fanaticism create a totally irrational situation,
one must of course expect anything.''
   Michel Rocard, the French premier, said any demonstrations urging
violence against Rushdie would result in criminal charges.
   British chief delegate Henry Steel told the U.N. Human Rights
Commission in Geneva the Khomeini incitement to murder was a
``fearful example of where intolerance may lead'' and ``raises .. .
grave issues'' for the 43-nation commission, at which Iran has
observer status.
   The bomb in India exploded in Srinagar, summer capital of
Jammu-Kashmir state, where a crowd was trying to enforce a strike to
protest a confrontation Friday in Bombay. Police fireed into the
crowd in Bombay, killing nine people.
   Press Trust of India said the bomb was intended for police who
were trying stop demonstrators from forcing shops to close. The news
agency said a Moslem civilian was killed and a police officer was
among the wounded.
   Several protests have been held in India, particularly in
Jammu-Kashmir, the only state in the overwhelmingly Hindu nation
with a Moslem majority.
   Karachi police said an explosive device weighing about to pounds
went off at the British Council library. It demolished the guard
room, killing Mohammed Shafi, 65, and damaged a section of the
outside wall, they said.
   Britain's blasphemy law applies to material found to revile,
vilify or insult God, Jesus Christ, the Bible or the beliefs or
doctrines of Christian churches. In the most recent case, the
magazine Gay News and its editor were fined a total of $2,600 in
1977 for publishing a poem suggesting Jesus Christ was a homosexual.
It was the first prosecution for blasphemous libel since 1922.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
