ID: 140	RANK: 93	SCORE: 15.749862
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890222-0119 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-02-22-89 1248EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i PM-SatanicVerses 5thLd-Writethru a0542 02-22 0831</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Satanic Verses, 5th Ld-Writethru, a0542,0849</SECOND>
<HEAD>Authors, Press, President Bush Say Khomeini Shows Uncivilized Behavior</HEAD>
<BYLINE>Eds: New thruout to UPDATE with march at U.N., West Germany calling
for Security Council intervention, other new details. No pickup. ^By RANDALL
HACKLEY</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Writers today denounced Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's call for
the death of Salman Rushdie, and West Germany asked the U.N.
Security Council to address the issue. President Bush said he
supports moves to isolate the Islamic republic.
   Khomeini said the Western reaction proved it was wrong for Iran
to open contacts to the rest of the world.
   A conference of Moslem theologians in Saudi Arabia said Rushdie,
who was born into a Moslem family, should stand trial in an Islamic
country for his novel, ``The Satanic Verses,'' a Saudi newspaper
reported today.
   Rushdie's wife, American novelist Marianne Wiggins, canceled a
U.S. book-promotion tour to stay with her husband, who is in hiding
in Britain. She had planned the tour to promote ``John Dollar,'' her
latest novel.
   Anti-terrorist police today guarded a plant in Cles, Italy, where
``The Satanic Verses'' was being printed, and Italians placed
hundreds of orders for it as a publisher prepared to release a
second run of the controversial book.
   West Germany, Iran's biggest trading partner, said today it had
canceled two visits by Cabinet ministers to Iran, and it called on
the Security Council to take up the issue.
   A West German television network said the Cabinet also discussed
``further measures'' against Iran. ``If the mullahs adhere to the
execution order against (Rushdie), then economic sanctions will no
longer be ruled out,'' the ZDF network reported.
   West Germany already has decided to remove its ambassador from
Tehran as part of an action by the 12 European Economic Community
countries.
   Bush said on Tuesday he supported the EEC decision and told a
news conference in Washington that no matter how offensive Rushdie's
book may be to Moslems, ``inciting murder and offering rewards for
its perpetration are deeply offensive to the norms of civilized
behavior.''
   Khomeini, who issued a death sentence on Rushdie on Feb. 14, said
economic sanctions will not change his stance, and he said
publication of ``The Satanic Verses'' was a sign from God that Iran
should not reach out to Western nations.
   ``God wanted it to happen in this way so that we may no longer
think in simplistic ways,'' he said.
   Hundreds of literary figures marched outside the Iranian Mission
to the United Nations in New York this morning and then to two Fifth
Avenue book stores _ B. Dalton's and Barnes &amp; Noble _ which have
pulled ``The Satanic Verses'' from their shelves.
   ``I write controversial books. What publisher is now going to
take chances with a controversial book?'' asked activist Abbie
Hoffman, one of those participating.
   A trio of Yale University graduates set up a toll-free number
through which anyone may order the book. The number, 1-800-544-7475,
was scheduled to go into effect at 3 p.m., said Kevin Kiernan of
Manhattan.
   The novel, which some say insults Islam, will debut as No. 2 on
The New York Times Book Review's best-selling hardcover fiction list
in the March 5 issue, the Times said today.
   The paper published a full-page advertisement from the
Association of American Publishers, the American Booksellers
Assocation and the American Library Association that says: ``Free
people write books, free people publish books, free people buy
books, free people read books.''
   In the Netherlands, more than 800 Dutch writers, artists,
publishers and journalists today took out a half-page ad in national
newspapers requesting their government to break diplomatic ties with
Iran if the execution order is not rescinded.
   Publishers in France, West Germany, Greece and Turkey canceled
plans to publish the book, which has been banned by at least seven
countries, including India, Pakistan and Egypt.
   Canada's revenue minister, Otto Jelinek, who made the decision
not to ban ``The Satanic Verses'' in Canada, said he was under
police guard after receiving death threats.
   In London, the 2,000-member International Press Institute
deplored the death threats against Rushdie as ``a gross violation of
civilized standards on the right of life and the right to freedom of
expression.''
   The Moslem World League, meeting in Saudi Arabia, said Rushdie
should be tried in absentia in an Islamic state ``for his ...
misleading allegations against Islam,'' the London-based newspaper
Al-Sharq Al-Awsat reported.
   Many Moslems say ``The Satanic Verses'' is sacrilegious because
it casts doubt on central tenets of the Islamic faith. The book, for
example, portrays the prophet Mohammed's wives as prostitutes and
suggests he wrote the Koran, the holy book of Islam, rather than
receiving it from God.
   Nicholas Browne, Britain's charges d'affaires in Iran, returned
home with two other top diplomats today and said: ``The statements
by Ayatollah Khomeini have given us no choice but to leave Tehran.''
   A total of $5.2 million has been offered by Iranian clerics for
Rushdie's murder. The writer issued an apology Saturday, but
Khomeini rejected it.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
