ID: 140	RANK: 97	SCORE: 15.632388
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890222-0207 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-02-22-89 2037EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-SatanicVerses 3rdLd-Writethru a0797 02-22 1019</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Satanic Verses, 3rd Ld-Writethru, a0797,1044</SECOND>
<HEAD>Khomeini Says Book Is Western Plot Against Islam</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: SUBS grafs 4-5, `Later, B. ... he said' to DELETE name of B.
Dalton spokesman at his request. Pick up 6th pvs, `President Bush...'</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto NY60</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By ANWAR FARUQI</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini said Wednesday the mounting Western
condemnation of his order to kill novelist Salman Rushdie has proven
the futility of normalizing relations with the rest of the world.
   Iran's revolutionary patriarch also declared the publication of
Rushdie's ``The Satanic Verses'' was a Western plot against Islam.
   In New York, hundreds of writers demonstrated Wednesday against
the order outside the Iranian Mission to the United Nations and at
two bookstores on Fifth Avenue _ B. Dalton's and Barnes &amp; Noble _
that pulled ``The Satanic Verses'' from their shelves on Friday.
Rallies were scheduled in Boston, Washington, Chicago, Minneapolis
and San Francisco to coincide with the book's official U.S.
publication date.
   Later, a B. Dalton spokesman who asked not to be identified
announced that B. Dalton and its Barnes &amp; Noble subsidiary _ with
about 1,250 bookstores across the country _ were reversing
themselves and will restock the novel.
   ``At the urging of an overwhelming majority of its store managers
and employees ... and in light of the statement yesterday by the
President of the United States, (we) ... will resume sales of `The
Satanic Verses,''' he said.
   President Bush said Tuesday he supported West European withdrawal
of ambassadors from Iran. On Wednesday Bush said he found Khomeini's
death threat against Rushdie ``deeply offensive to the norms of
civilized behavior.''
   Authors in Finland and the Netherlands also condemned Khomeini's
order Wednesday. Publishers in France, West Germany, Greece and
Turkey have canceled plans to publish the book, which has been
banned as blasphemous to Islam by at least seven countries,
including India, Pakistan and Egypt.
   Libya said Wednesday it has taken measures to confront
publication of the novel. The dispatch by the official JANA agency,
monitored in Rome, did not elaborate.
   A conference of Moslem theologians in Saudi Arabia said the
author, who was born in India into a Moslem family, should stand
trial in an Islamic country for his novel, the Saudi newspaper
Al-Sharq Al-Awsata reported Wednesday.
   Rushdie's wife, American novelist Marianne Wiggins, canceled a
U.S. book-promotion tour to stay with her husband, who is in hiding
in Britain. She had planned the tour to promote ``John Dollar,'' her
latest novel.
   West Germany called on the U.N. Security Council to take up the
Iranian threats.
   West German TV said the Cabinet also discussed ``further
measures'' against Iran. ``If the mullahs adhere to the execution
order against (Rushdie), then economic sanctions will no longer be
ruled out,'' the ZDF network reported.
   West Germany, Iran's biggest trading partner, already has decided
to remove its ambassador from Tehran as part of an action by the 12
European Economic Community countries.
   Khomeini said economic sanctions will not change his stance.
   The West's stinging reaction has exposed its ``true nature and
longstanding hostility ... so that we can come out of this state of
naivety,'' Tehran radio quoted Khomeini as saying.
   ``God wanted it to happen in this way so that we may no longer
think in simplistic ways,'' he was quoted by the radio report, which
was monitored in Cyprus.
   Branding critics ``misled liberals,'' he denounced ``those who
still believe that we should revise our policy and diplomatic
principles ... that our blunt slogans and war caused the West and
the East to become pessimistic about us ... and if we react
realistically they would reciprocate humanely and would respect
Moslems.''
   The statement underlined indications that Tehran's actions in the
Rushdie controversy stemmed as much from the power struggle in the
Iranian hierarchy than from religious outrage.
   Hardliners argue such changes will threaten the 10-year-old
Islamic republic and bring moral decay.
   ``As long as I am alive I will not let the state fall into the
hands of liberals ... As long as I am alive I will never stop
cutting off the hands of agents of the United States and the
U.S.S.R.,'' he was quoted as saying.
   ``At the beginning of the revolution we gave posts to people who
were not totally with us in ideology and the bitter results of that
are plainly evident.''
   He mentioned no names in the statement, but it appeared directed
at several Iranian leaders who have in recent weeks called for a
relaxation of political, social and religious restrictions following
the Aug. 20 cease-fire in the war against Iraq.
   President Ali Khamenei had said Friday that Khomeini's order
might be rescinded if Rushdie apologized, but on Wednesday in
Belgrade, Yugoslavia, he said ``there is no solution.''
   ``An arrow has been shot and it is unerringly aimed at its
target. There is nothing more that can be done,'' he said.
   Iranian clerics have offered $5.2 million for Rushdie's murder.
The writer issued an apology Saturday, but Khomeini rejected it.
   Many Moslems say ``The Satanic Verses'' is sacrilegious because
it casts doubt on central tenets of the Islamic faith. The book, for
example, portrays the prophet Mohammed's wives as prostitutes and
suggests he wrote the Koran, the holy book of Islam, rather than
receiving it from God.
   In other related developments:
   _ Anti-terrorist police on Wednesday guarded a plant in Cles,
Italy, where ``The Satanic Verses'' was being printed, and Italians
placed hundreds of orders for it as a publisher prepared to release
a second run of the controversial book.
   _ A firebomb was thrown at the dormitory of London's main mosque
early Wednesday, and a newspaper reported that detectives were
investigating whether it was prompted by anti-Moslem backlash to the
Rushdie affair. Police refused comment, and no one was injured in
the blaze, which caused minor damage.
   _ Iran on Wednesday called home its ambassador from Stockholm in
apparent reciprocation for Sweden's withdrawal of its envoy to
Tehran. Sweden said it will continue to look after British interests
in Iran. Britain called home all its embassy staff to protest calls
for the death of Rushdie, a British citizen.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
