ID: 140	RANK: 98	SCORE: 15.583424
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890220-0110 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-02-20-89 1754EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-SatanicVerses 2ndLd-Writethru a0606 02-20 0942</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Satanic Verses, 2nd Ld-Writethru, a0606,0971</SECOND>
<HEAD>Europeans Recall Diplomats to Protest Rushdie Threats</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: SUBS grafs 16-17, `Iran's deputy...' with 3 grafs to UPDATE
with Khomeini appearance on TV. Pick up 18th pvs, `Rushdie, an...'</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By LESLIE SHEPHERD</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   European Common Market governments decided Monday to withdraw
their top diplomats from Iran to protest Ayatollah Ruhollah
Khomeini's renewed order for Moslems to kill novelist Salman
Rushdie. Britain went further by pulling out its entire embassy
staff.
   Foreign Secretary Sir Geoffrey Howe said the death threats
against Rushdie and the publishers of ``The Satanic Verses'' for
allegedly blaspheming Islam were ``unwarranted interference'' in
Britain's internal affairs.
   He left open the possibility of expelling Iran's lone diplomat in
London, where Rushdie lives.
   The 12 European Economic Community governments, in a sharp blow
to Iran's hopes of improving relations with Western nations, decided
to recall their diplomats for consulations and suspend high-level
visits to and from Iran.
   They said they also will restrict the movement of Iranian
diplomats in their countries.
   Howe told a news conference that the EEC foreign ministers,
meeting in Brussels, had sent ``a strong, concerted signal to the
Iranian leadership that Khomeini's threats are an affront to
international standards of behavior and will not be tolerated.''
   For Britain's part, he said, ``it is no longer sensible to
maintain a diplomatic presence in Tehran.''
   He said Iran's charge d'affaires in London, Mohammad Basti, would
be summoned to hear ``the reasons for this action along with the
implications for Mr. Basti and his mission.''
   Asked if that meant closing the Iranian Embassy, he replied: ``I
leave it for your own conclusions.''
   In London, Basti was summoned and told of the decision but made
no immediate comment.
   Rushdie, 41, apologized Saturday for any distress the publication
of his book caused to Moslems, after Iranian President Ali Khamenei
indicated that an apology could lead to a pardon.
   On Sunday, however, Iran's official Islamic Republic News Agency
quoted Khomeini as ruling out any reprieve for Rushdie and urging
Moslems to ``send him to hell'' for his writings.
   Neither Khomeini's statement nor IRNA referred to Khamenei's
comments, reflecting a widening rift in the Iranian hierarchy over
the Rushdie affair.
   ``There plainly is confusion amongst the Iran authorities,'' Howe
said.
   He added, however: ``If the threat were turned into fact, that
would call for an even more serious response, but I hope that it
will not come to that.''
   Iran's deputy parliament speaker, Mehdi Karrubi, reaffirmed
Khomeini's execution order Monday.
   ``Without doubt, Salman Rushdie, and those following the same
line of thought, have no other fate but death and destruction and
banishment to hell,'' Karrubi said at a meeting at Khomeini's home
broadcast on Iranian television. The TV showed Khomeini sitting
impassively on a balcony above a crowd of several hundred men waving
clenched fists and chanting ``Death to America!'' and ``Long Live
Khomeini!''
   Rushdie, an Indian-born Moslem, has been in hiding, reportedly
under armed police guard, since Khomeini decreed Feb. 14 that he
should be killed and two Iranian religious leaders put a $5.2
million bounty on his head.
   In London, Archbishop of Canterbury Robert Runcie, spiritual
leader of Anglicans worldwide, appealed to Britain's Moslem
community to contain its anger.
   Commenting on the controversy for the first time, Runcie
aknowledged the book had deeply offended Moslems. But he condemned
the murder call and asked Moslem leaders ``to have regard to the
expression of profound regret that Salman Rushdie issued on
Saturday.''
   The Swiss foreign ministry in Bern called in Iran's ambassador to
express concern about the death threat, but did not plan to withdraw
its ambassador from Tehran, said ministry spokesman Lorenzo Schnyder
von Wartensee.
   Howe said normal relations between Britain and Iran would be
impossible until Iran repudiates violence and respects other
countries' laws.
   Asked whether the latest rupture would worsen the plight of
Western hostages in Lebanon and British businessman Roger Cooper,
who is jailed in Tehran, Howe said: ``Nobody can pretend that it
makes our task ... any easier.''
   Britain's embassy in Tehran, closed for eight years, reopened in
December.
   The two countries had all but severed diplomatic relations in
1987 following the arrest of an Iranian diplomat for shoplifting in
Britain and the retaliatory beating of a British diplomat in Iran.
   Moslems say ``The Satanic Verses'' portrays the prophet
Mohammed's wives as prostitutes and suggests that he wrote, rather
than Allah, the Koran, Islam's holy book.
   The novel is banned in Pakistan, Bangladesh, Iran, India, Egypt
and South Africa. Publishers in France, West Germany, Greece and
Turkey have canceled plans to publish it.
   Israel's Keter publishing house promised a Hebrew edition within
weeks, and Moslem leaders there vowed to block it.
   An anonymous caller claiming to represent the Guardians of the
Islamic Revolution telephoned news agencies in London and threatened
to kill Howe and Home Secretary Douglas Hurd, and bomb British
airlines, pubs, discos and government offices. The caller also
threatened a British TV anchorman for exchanging sharp words with
Basti on the air.
   The group also has claimed responsibility for the bombing of Pan
Am Flight 103, which killed 270 people when it exploded and crashed
in Lockerbie, Scotland, on Dec. 21.
   The head of IRNA in Madrid said he was willing to kill Rushdie.
Ali Akhbar Jaban told the private Cadena SER radio network that ``as
far as I know, there are at least 50 million Iranians ready to do
it'' _ himself among them.
   In Yugoslavia, the official daily Borba stopped printing a daily
series of excerpts from ``The Satanic Verses'' in an apparent
goodwill gesture toward Khamenei, who arrived Monday in Belgrade for
a three-day visit.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
