ID: 107	RANK: 27	SCORE: 8.431218
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890717-0152 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-17-89 2003EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-StealthTest 3rdLd-Writethru a0709 07-17 0972</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Stealth Test, 3rd Ld - Writethru, a0709,0993</SECOND>
<HEAD>Controversial, Costly B-2 Stealth Bomber Makes First Flight</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: SUBS 17th graf, `The Senate ...,' to CLARIFY that Pentagon proposing
$8 billion per year in each of three peak years of production.</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos EAB1,2,3,4,5,7; LaserColor EAB3c,EAB5C</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By DENNIS ANDERSON</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>EDWARDS AIR FORCE BASE, Calif. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The radar-evading B-2
stealth bomber took its maiden flight over the Mojave Desert on
Monday, impressing its pilots while crowds cheered and political
debate intensified over the costly plane's fate.
   ``If we appear a little giggly about all of this, it was a lot of
fun,'' said Air Force Col. Richard Couch, one of two pilots on the
test flight.
   The nearly two-hour flight appeared flawless to people who
watched the sinister-looking flying wing take off from
secrecy-shrouded Air Force Plant 42 in Palmdale shortly after 6:30
a.m. and land at nearby Edwards Air Force Base.
   The four-engine bomber, built with advanced composite materials
and a shape that are not easily detectable by radar, flew at 10,000
feet over the Antelope Valley at three speeds, accompanied by two
F-16 fighters through a clear sky.
   The B-2 was temporarily arrayed with radar reflective material to
allow test personnel to keep track of it on radar screens.
   The B-2, a tailless, 172-foot-long wing with a bulge in the
middle rather than a conventional fuselage, finally landed and
quickly rolled to a stop without a wobble, stopped for several
minutes and then taxied off into a hangar.
   ``We were very pleased with the performance of the aircraft. It
was very close to the simulators,'' said Bruce J. Hinds, chief test
pilot for Northrop Corp.'s B-2 division, who flew the plane with
Couch.
   During takeoff, they intended to pitch the plane to a 7{-degree
angle before it was supposed to become airborne, but ``we never got
there,'' Couch told reporters. ``The airplane just very smoothly
came off the ground.''
   Couch called the B-2 a ``very nimble aircraft'' and said it made
a ``Grade A'' landing.
   ``I had to ask the tower if we were on the ground,'' Couch said.
   The plane needed only about 5,000 feet of the 11,000-foot takeoff
runway and the wheels remained down throughout the flight, a normal
practice for a maiden flight. The B-2 used only about 5,000 feet of
runway on landing.
   The Air Force had planned to evaluate data and nspect the plane
for about five weeks before trying a second flight. However, the
results were so heartening that the next flight will probably be
sooner, said Gen. Bernard T. P. Randolph, commander of the Air Force
Systems Command.
   ``This is a historic day in aviation,'' Randolph said. ``It
basically negates the air defenses that have been building up over
many years around the world.''
   At the Pentagon, officials issued a statement by Defense
Secretary Dick Cheney on the B-2 flight:
   ``I am pleased with the success of the project to date. It is
good to see that the test program appears to validate the judgments
made previously by the Department of Defense and Congress to go
forward with the B-2.''
   The government has already invested about $22.4 billion in the
B-2 program, which is 18 months behind schedule, and Congress has
balked at the thought of paying Northrop more than $500 million
apiece for 132 bombers.
   The Senate Armed Services Committee, approving President Bush's
$305.5 billion defense-spending request for fiscal 1990, stipulated
Friday that no new money be spent on the B-2 until it flew. The
Pentagon seeks $4.7 billion for the bomber in the coming fiscal year
and may need $8 billion in each of the three peak years of
production, 1992 to '94.
   Rep. Sonny Montgomery, D-Miss., a member of the House Armed
Services Committee, said in Washington that in spite of the
successful flight, the program is ``still in trouble in the House.''
   The B-2's maiden flight was long awaited by aviation buffs and
workers from the desert aerospace community. Thousands gathered
among the tumbleweeds outside Plant 42 and shouted ``Here they
come!'' when the great wing's dark shadow passed over. ``Great
God,'' exclaimed Northrop employee Les Holland.
   The ``Star Spangled Banner'' was sung beside the runway by Alis
Clausen, employee at a local cable TV station. Air Force Capt. Tess
Taft unfurled the Stars and Stripes.
   ``I think it's time in the debate that we begin stressing the
capabilities of the aircraft instead of placing all ephasis on the
cost. We are a nation with global responsibilities,'' said Northrop
spokesman Les Daly, a longtime proponent of the flying wing concept.
   The B-2 is designed to carry nuclear bombs and, with the
conventional B-1, replace the Air Force's aging fleet of B-52
bombers that form part of the U.S. nuclear deterrent against the
Soviet Union.
   So-called stealth technology combines advanced materials and a
special shape to create a plane undetectable by enemy radar. Though
the bomber is still being developed, stealth fighters have operated
for several years.
   The B-2's first flight followed a series of ground speed tests.
It was supposed to fly Saturday but a low fuel pressure reading
forced a delay.
   Montgomery, the Mississippi congressman, said an amendment will
be offered in the House to stop all B-2 funding when the defense
bill comes up on the floor next week. He said the possibility of its
passing is ``realistic.''
   ``I believe what I'm leaning toward right now is to continue the
program mainly in research,'' he said.
   Rep. Patricia Schroeder, D-Colo., also a member of the House
Armed Services Committee and an opponent of the stealth bomber, said
she hoped the maiden flight would not result in a blank check for
the Pentagon.
   Schroeder supports an amendment to the defense bill that would
stop production of the B-2 after 13 planes until further tests and
flights.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
