ID: 107	RANK: 75	SCORE: 7.501135
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910204-0110
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910204-0110.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Ben Rich, Designer of Stealth Fighter, Says U.S.
   Is in Danger of Losing Its Technological Edge
   ----
   By Rick Wartzman
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/04/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), NO PAGE CITATION
</SO>
<CO>
   LK NOC MDEST
</CO>
<IN>
AEROSPACE (ARO)
</IN>
<GV>
DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)
</GV>
<LP>
   During his 40-year career at the "Skunk Works," Lockheed
Corp.'s super-secret Advanced Development Projects plant in
Burbank, Calif., Ben Rich helped design some of the nation's
most famous aircraft, including the U-2 and triple-sonic
SR-71 spy planes and the F-117A Stealth fighter.
   In Operation Desert Storm, the F-117 has used its
radar-evading abilities to swoop close to Iraqi
installations, pounding away at fortified aircraft bunkers
and other heavily defended targets. Through the first weeks
of combat, "the F-117 remains virtually invisible and highly
effective," Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf, the commander of the
allied forces, has said. Some airmen flying F-117 sorties
have even dedicated their bombing raids to Mr. Rich, who
recently retired as Skunk Works president and now is a
Lockheed consultant.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But Mr. Rich believes that America is in danger of losing
its technological edge. He warns that the nation is
undercutting its own high-tech capabilities with red tape and
budget constraints. In a recent interview with The Wall
Street Journal, the 65-year-old mechanical engineer spoke of
his concerns and his vision for the future:
                                                                                                       

   Q: U.S.-developed technology has played a huge role in the
Gulf war so far. Does this mean that our industrial base
really isn't as bad off as conventional wisdom would suggest?
   A: No, not at all. I worry about the industrial base.
Kelly Johnson {Mr. Rich's predecessor as Skunk Works chief}
developed 47 different airplanes in his 50 years. In my 40
years, I developed 27 different airplanes. My young engineer
today is going to be lucky to see one project -- an ATF {the
Air Force's next-generation Advanced Tactical Fighter, which
a Lockheed-led contractor group is competing to build against
a team led by Northrop Corp.}.
   That makes we worry about the entire work force: the tool
designer, the welder. I'm losing my engineers to Imagineering
{Walt Disney Co.'s creative unit near the Skunk Works'
Burbank facilities}. They're more challenged there. The
defense industry is too cyclical for them. We're going to
lose the ability to build airplanes.
                                                                                                       

   Q: Do you see signs of that happening now?
   A: I've seen young workers today putting hydro lines over
electric lines. We never did that because if you have a hydro
leak over an electric line, it'll spark a fire. They're
losing those tricks of the trade. They're making mistakes.
   Everything you're seeing now {being used in the Gulf} was
developed 10, 15 years ago. We've been going down hill ever
since.
                                                                                                       

   Q: Given today's looming federal deficit, can we really
afford to churn out  planes at Cold War-era rates just to
keep the work force sharp?
   A: You don't have to buy thousands of airplanes. But you
have to buy a few of them so you learn how to use them. Take
the U-2. They bought 20 of them in the initial buy. And then
they learned how valuable they were, and they reopened the
line again and bought 12 more in the second buy.
                                                                                                       

   Q: Given how well the weapons systems in the Gulf have
performed, couldn't we just keep using those for a while?
   A: The ATF is going to replace an airplane, the F-15,
which first flew in 1972. How many people drive '72 cars? Yet
we want to send our boys to fight in planes that first flew
in 1972.
                                                                                                       

   Q: What about lawmakers' proposals to save money by
stretching out the purchase of production models or even
keeping costly programs locked in the development stage?
   A: Technology has to be used. You can't just put it on the
shelf or it becomes obsolete.
   Take the F-117s. The government took them to Red Flag and
Checkered Flag {training exercises} and discovered the
tremendous leverage that they had. We gave the Air Force a
new dimension, and they had to learn how to use it.
                                                                                                       

   Q: But how can we afford fielding planes that are so
expensive?
   A: What price defense? We developed the F-117 for $2.6
billion. No one ever questioned that it took General Motors
$3.5 billion to build the Saturn automobile. And it doesn't
fly.
                                                                                                       

   Q: But how do you make it affordable?
   A: At the Skunk Works, we let somebody else spend for the
development and pushed it further. Like on the F-117. I took
the flight controls from the {General Dynamics Corp.} F-16
and expanded on them. I took the engine from the {McDonnell
Douglas Corp.} F-18 and expanded on it. I didn't start from
scratch.
   That's why we were able to build the F-117 at half the
time and half the cost of equivalent fighters. And even
though it was a fixed-price contract, I made money on it.
                                                                                                       

   Q: What else can be done to save money?
   A: Why must every airplane be good for 9,000 hours? All of
us don't have to drive a Rolls-Royce. We can drive a Chevy,
and it does the job. Best is the enemy of better. That last
5% you never use, and you pay too much for it. Some people on
the Hill and in the Department of Defense are demanding
perfection, and you can't have perfection.
   Why must every tire be good for hundreds of landings? Let
me throw them away after 10 landings. If I mass produce them
{at somewhat lower standards}, I'll save money. We have to
think in new ways.
                                                                                                       

   Q: What is the biggest impediment to advancing technology?
   A: We have the capability today to do almost anything you
can think of. The ATF has the throughput capacity of seven
Cray computers.
   The problem is that we have so much red tape to deal with.
We built the U-2 in eight months. Then the paperwork got
bigger, so the TR-1 {the U-2's successor} took me 15 months
to build, and the F-117 took me 27 months. Today, there are
just too many auditors.
                                                                                                       

   Q: Given a bulging bureaucracy, how much more expensive
would it be to build the F-117 today, using the same
base-year dollars?
   A: Five percent more.
                                                                                                       

   Q: And five years from now?
   A: I'm afraid it would be 25% more.
                                                                                                       

   Q: What advice would you give a young engineer today?
   A: Don't be a turtle. Stick your neck out.
   You don't make progress without problems. Hell, I once
lost the tail of an F-117 due to flutter. It came right off
the airplane in an early test. But then I replaced it with a
stiffer composite tail. I fixed it.
                                                                                                       

   Q: Do you think stealth technology in general has gotten a
big boost from Desert Storm?
   A: Every system of the future should have stealth. I don't
care if it's a transport or a helicopter or what. The cost of
stealth is 10% or less of what it would cost if you didn't
use the technology.
                                                                                                       

   Q: What has surprised you most about the way technology
has performed in the Gulf?
   A: The reliability has been amazing. We're getting the
same {maintainance} rates that the airlines get -- but in a
battle environment.
                                                                                                       

   Q: What worries you most about what you see in the Gulf?
   A: I'm scared that people will get overconfident with
technology, that we'll get burned.
   I'm scared that Congress won't fund the ATF, but just buy
more F-15s, last year's model, because they're cheaper. One
day the enemy will learn how to shoot down those airplanes.
Every action has a reaction.
   Remember, there are only 3,000 days left in the century.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
