ID: 107	RANK: 95	SCORE: 7.295949
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890625-0025 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-06-25-89 1222EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u w AM-RiskyBusiness Bjt   06-25 1133</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Risky Business, Bjt,1,100</SECOND>
<HEAD>NASA to Astronauts: Don't Risk Your Necks Until We Tell You To</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By HARRY F. ROSENTHAL</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   With no public announcement, NASA's director of
flight crew operations a year ago issued the first written order
prohibiting astronauts-in-training from taking part in ``risky
recreational activities.''
   ``High risk recreational activities are defined as those where
there exists exposure of major, or even fatal, injury,'' Donald R.
Puddy said in the order. ``Examples include, but are not limited to:
auto, boat, airplane or motorcycle racing; parachute jumping; and
snow skiing.''
   Astronauts, especially the early ones who had been fighter jocks,
often had boisterous habits that worried NASA, which wanted to keep
its highfliers safe until they could risk their necks officially.
   Last weekend, astronaut S. David Griggs, scheduled to be the
pilot on a shuttle mission in November, crashed and was killed in
Arkansas while practicing stunt flying for an air show. He was doing
``wing-over'' maneuvers in a vintage World War II single-engine
propeller plane.
   The investigation into the accident is not complete and NASA has
not determined whether Griggs' activities violated the rules, Puddy
said Friday. A replacement for Griggs, who was just beginning his
training for the flight, will be named next week.
   ``Essentially, the policy put in place in June 1988 is generally
worded,'' said Jeff Carr, a spokesman for the Johnson Space Center
in Texas. ``It doesn't say, `Thou shalt not do this and this'; it
doesn't mention anything as specific as aerobatic flying or stunt
flying. It says, `Hey, guys, use your head. Don't do something that
could expose you to injury or death.'''
   William Klassen, regional director of the National Transportation
Safety Board in Kansas City, said of the Griggs incident: ``We have
no evidence of engine problems or problems with the aircraft. He was
in the process of performing aerobatics and the aircraft was
observed flying over the runway at an altitude of 75 to 100 feet
above ground level.''
   Griggs was the latest in a long line of astronauts whose appetite
for life in the fast lane extended beyond their duty hours.
   Gordon Cooper, one of the Mercury Seven astronauts, had a
disconcerting fondness for racing fast cars and was about to make
his professional driving debut at the Daytona International Speedway
in February 1969 when NASA ordered him to cancel.
   ``The people in flight crew operations felt it would be better if
Cooper didn't take any risk such as auto racing, especially since he
is part of the backup crew for the important Apollo 10 mission
scheduled to orbit the moon in May,'' the official announcement said.
   ``They waited until the last minute to shut me off and I don't
appreciate it,'' said Cooper. He never flew in space again.
   Astronauts often were in the news for their various sports
injuries. James Lovell, a four-time space flyer in the Gemini and
Apollo programs, fractured his arm and shoulder while skiing in
Kitzbuehl, Austria; and Walter Cunningham of Apollo 7, suffered a
compression fracture of the vertebrae in his neck while using a
trampoline.
   The daredevil cavorting of the early astronauts was chronicled in
``The Right Stuff'' by Tom Wolfe in 1979. But even the publicity
attending Wolfe's account failed to shame or tame the astronaut
corps.
   ``I can remember discussions about what was restricted and what
wasn't, but I think all those things were unwritten rules,'' said
Alan Bean, who walked on the moon on Apollo 12, then spent 59 days
in Skylab. ``People were aware they should try to minimize risks.
Really, we got more people injured playing softball than anything
else.''
   In fact, Puddy's order cautions against ``nominal risk
recreational activities ... where there exists exposure to injury.''
   Included: Organized competitive softball, basketball, volleyball,
or racquetball. Astronauts are prohibited from taking part in those
beginning eight months prior to launch.
   Puddy said he issued the order when he was new on the job so
there would be no ambiguity. To his knowledge, Puddy said, the
no-risk rules were never written before.
   Brian Duff, former head of NASA's division of public affairs,
remembers accompanying Neil Armstrong on a publicity tour to Latin
America, long before Armstrong was picked to be the first man on the
moon.
   One morning, in Peru, he heard someone offer Armstrong a chance
to go soaring in the Andes. ``I had to sit down and ask myself,
`Should I let him do it?''' Duff recalls. ``I figured he would
probably do it anyway, so I deliberately made sure I wasn't around
when he was picked up.''
   Astronauts didn't need to go off the reservation to do dangerous
things. Preparing for the Apollo 11 moon flight, Armstrong was
rehearsing the descent to the moon when the simulator, known as
``The Flying Bedstead'' tipped over and crashed to the ground.
   The space fliers' fondness for living dangerously extended to
their children as well. Duff recalls that the children of Pete
Conrad, the commander of Apollo 12, used to ride their bicycles off
the roof of their house in Texas into the swimming pool below.
   Griggs was the 17th astronaut to die since the manned space
program began. Twelve died in the line of duty, one in an auto
accident, two in private aircraft crashes, one of cancer after
leaving the space program and one of a heart attack.
   The list includes the five NASA astronauts in the Challenger
explosion of 1986, but not non-NASA payload specialists Gregory
Jarvis and Christa McAuliffe.
   Just eight days before the Apollo 14 moon flight in 1971, backup
flight commander Eugene A. Cernan survived a fiery helicopter crash
in the Indian River south of Cape Canaveral, Fla., and had to swim
for his life. Reports circulated, but were never in the public
record, that he had been chasing a manatee, a large aquatic mammal,
and got too close to the water. An investigating board said Cernan
exercised ``misjudgment in estimating altitude.''
   Fred Haise, one of the astronauts on Apollo 13, which was
crippled by an explosion on the way to the moon in 1970, crashed in
1973 while trying to land a World War II training plane at
Galveston, Texas. He was critically burned.
   The BT13 airplane was owned by the Confederate Air Force, an
organization of airplane buffs, to which other astronauts _
including moonwalker Donald K. Slayton _ belonged.
   Slayton, who once headed the astronaut office, said he had to
warn Cooper and Charles Conrad about their auto racing activities.
``I called them and said, `You guys ought not to be doing that;
you've got too much at risk.''
   But Bill O'Donnell, a retired NASA public affairs officer, said
he recalled rumors at the time that the two astronauts continued
their racing _ under assumed names.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
