ID: 219	RANK: 25	SCORE: 12.399940
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910806-0133
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910806-0133.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   The Dioxin Un-Scare -- Where's the Press?
   ----
   By Reed Irvine
</HL>
<DATE>
08/06/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16
</SO>
<CO>
   SYN
</CO>
<MS>
BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
</MS>
<IN>
CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)
DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)
ENVIRONMENT (ENV)
</IN>
<NS>
ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)
</NS>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Dioxin has been described as "the most potent carcinogen
ever tested." An unwanted contaminant in some chemicals and
industrial processes, it has been the target of studies
funded by the government to the tune of $400 million over the
past decade. Claims lodged by individuals who allegedly
suffered or even feared serious damage to their health from
exposure to dioxin have cost businesses and the government
additional hundreds of millions of dollars. Now a high
government official tells us that an inordinate fear of
dioxin was just a scientific misunderstanding.
   In 1982, the government ordered the evacuation of the
2,232 residents of Times Beach, Mo., because traces of dioxin
were found in the soil. At that time, the Centers for Disease
Control believed that ingesting anything containing as much
as one part per billion of dioxin posed a significant risk of
human health. The Environmental Protection Agency spent $33
million to buy up the town, and declared it to be a dangerous
toxic waste site. Motorists passing through on Highway 44
were greeted with signs warning them to keep their windows
closed and not to stop and leave their vehicles.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The government pinned the responsibility for the
contamination of Times Beach and 16 other Missouri sites on
Syntex Corp. One of its subsidiaries had bought a plant that
had once supplied dioxin-tainted waste oil to a contractor
who had sprayed it on the streets of Times Beach and the
other sites. After years of costly litigation, Syntex signed
a consent decree a year ago agreeing to clean up the sites
and incinerate some 100,000 cubic yards of contaminated soil.
Cost estimates run as much as $200 million over the next
decade.
   Soon after the demolition of buildings in Times Beach
began this spring, Dr. Vernon Houk, the CDC official who had
recommended the evacuation in 1982, dropped a bombshell. At
an environmental conference in Missouri, he said that he
would not be concerned about the levels of dioxin at Times
Beach because scientific studies have shown that low doses of
dioxin pose minimal health risks.
   Dr. Houk, who is director of the Center for Environmental
Health and Injury Control at the CDC, told reporters that he
now believes that the evacuation of Times Beach was
unnecessary. Asked what he would tell the former residents of
the town, who underwent the trauma of being torn from their
homes, Dr. Houk said: "We should have been more upfront with
Times Beach people and told them, `We're doing our best with
the estimates of the risk, but we may be wrong.' I think we
never added `but we may be wrong.'"
   In debunking the claim that dioxin is a potent human
carcinogen, Dr. Houk attacked the scientific theory and
methodology that had led him and others to what he believes
was a false conclusion. Dr. Houk said the method used to
assess the risk was based on an assumption that violates a
fundamental rule in toxicology: The dose makes the poison. It
was assumed that feeding laboratory animals the maximum dose
they could tolerate would enable scientists to determine
whether trace amounts of a chemical would cause cancer in
humans. One obvious problem with this is that different
animals have different responses to the same chemical. What
can be highly toxic to guinea pigs may have no effect on
rats, and what may cause cancer in mice will not necessarily
have the same effect on humans.
   But Dr. Houk's attack went beyond this. He added his voice
to that of Bruce Ames, head of the biochemistry department of
the University of California at Berkeley, a leading critic of
the methods used to assess the cancer risk from chemicals.
Mr. Ames contends that the animal tests are fundamentally
flawed because the maximum tolerated doses of the chemicals
being tested kill cells due to the sheer size of the dosage.
Mr. Ames argues that this can cause rapid cell division among
the surviving cells, leading to cancer-causing mutations.
This suggests that risks calculated from animal tests
involving maximum tolerated doses are greatly exaggerated.
   Dr. Houk says that most scientists now agree with this. He
cites the dioxin case as "a good example of why we must use
both animal and human data when evaluating the potential
health effects of chemical exposure for humans." The
epidemiologic evidence, he says, shows that "if dioxin is a
human carcinogen, it is a rather weak one in the population
exposed to high doses . . . and is not a carcinogen in the
population exposed to lower doses." He adds that there are no
convincing data that show that exposure to dioxin causes
birth defects, chronic diseases of the liver or of the
immune, cardiovascular, or neurologic systems.
   Skeptics have long noted the glaring inconsistency of the
risk assigned to dioxin based on animal tests and actual
human experience. What has brought scientists such as Dr.
Houk around is the mounting empirical evidence and the
growing support for a theory that explains why humans are far
less sensitive to dioxin than are guinea pigs.
   The theory is that for dioxin to have a toxic effect it
must first bind to receptors. There appears to be a dose,
which varies by species, below which the receptors don't
function; therefore there is no risk unless that dose is
reached or exceeded. No one knows just what the level is for
humans, but it is apparently far higher than the maximum
acceptable intake level set by the EPA of 0.006 trillionths
of a gram per kilogram of body weight per day. Canada and
some European countries set acceptable levels 170 to 1,700
times that.
   The EPA has yet to recognize that dioxin's dangers have
been greatly exaggerated, but Dr. Houk predicts it will
eventually come around. It plans to begin studying the matter
soon, but acceptance of Dr. Houk's analysis won't come
easily. Michael Gough of the Office of Technology Assessment
says that if the EPA backs off on dioxin, it will open the
door to demands for reassessment of many other chemicals.
"That," he says, "is a door they will reluctantly open."
   In the meantime, the cleanup of Times Beach proceeds. Dr.
Houk says there is little choice but to go ahead with it,
"because we've got the public so riled up." The media that
got people riled up with scare stories about dioxin-tainted
Agent Orange, Times Beach and paper-mill effluent have done
little to "unrile" them. Dr. Houk's turnabout was reported by
the St. Louis Post-Dispatch under a front-page banner
headline, but it got little attention in the East. ABC News
reported it; CBS and NBC did not. The newspapers that
influence those in Washington who could bring the costly
Times Beach boondoggle to a screeching halt buried a small AP
story deep on their inside pages.
   ---
   Mr. Irvine is chairman of Accuracy in Media Inc., a media
watchdog group.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
