ID: 219	RANK: 45	SCORE: 10.527623
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911231-0103
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911231-0103.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Workplace:
   Use of Staff Guinea Pigs Causes Squeals
   About Safety of Firms' Product Testing
   ----
   By Sonia L. Nazario and Asra Q. Nomani
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
12/31/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   LABOR
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
AEROSPACE (ARO)
AUTOMOBILES (AUT)
BEVERAGES (BVG)
DISTILLERS AND BREWERS, MAKERS OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES (DST)
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
SPECIALTY RETAILERS OF LIMITED PRODUCT LINES (OTS)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)
LEISURE TIME SERVICES AND PRODUCTS (REQ)
ALL SPECIALTY RETAILERS (RTS)
TOY MANUFACTURERS (TMF)
</IN>
<NS>
LABOR, UNIONS, STRIKES, WAGES, RECRUITMENT (LAB)
CONSUMER ISSUES (CSU)
</NS>
<RE>
UNITED STATES (US)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
</RE>
<LP>
   Roger Olson has a lot of sympathy for guinea pigs.
   The McDonnell Douglas Corp. material-support analyst was
among those who volunteered to participate in evacuation
drills on a new jetliner model being tested in Long Beach,
Calif. A toe fracture was the worst that had happened in past
drills, they were told. But when 410 people surged on command
toward the exits of the pitch-black MD-11, chaos resulted.
Mr. Olson, crashing into a mass of bodies as he slid down the
inflatable escape chute, felt his left ankle snap. "I tried
to stand up, but I couldn't," he recalls.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   During the now-notorious tests last October, 50 people
were hurt, including seven with broken bones and one
60-year-old woman who was left paralyzed, perhaps
permanently, from the neck down. The experience has shocked
aircraft makers into reconsidering the practice of using
people in such testing; McDonnell Douglas and Boeing Co. both
are clamoring for government permission to use computer
simulations in many of the tests. And Anthony Broderick, in
charge of regulation and certification for the Federal
Aviation Administration, says the agency is also studying the
use of modified, less-dangerous human testing.
   But the ill-fated drills do raise questions about whether
any use of employees in product testing -- still fairly
common among auto makers and some other manufacturers and
consumer-product companies -- makes sense.
   "To just bring people off the production line or the sales
staff for product testing is a bad idea," says Mark
Rothstein, a University of Houston law professor and
specialist in occupational-health and employment law. And
employee morale really suffers if there's an accident.
Employees "would say things like, `Hey, did you hear about
Harry? He volunteered for a test, and he's in the hospital
now.'"
   Safety issues aside, critics suggest that asking employees
to raise their hands for product tests implies subtle
pressure. "When it comes time for your promotion, workers
will have to believe it will be taken into consideration. And
it probably is," says Sidney Wolfe, director of the
health-research group of Public Citizen, a consumer-advocacy
group active in workplace-safety issues. He notes that
pharmaceutical companies were legally prohibited years ago
from using prisoners to test as-yet-unapproved drugs, in part
because the voluntary nature of the activity was undercut by
inmate hopes that they might qualify for early parole.
   "It's an unethical practice, and moral companies shouldn't
tolerate it," says Joseph Kinney, executive director of the
nonprofit National Safe Workplace Institute.
   And David Stewart, a University of Southern California
marketing professor specializing in consumer behavior,
believes that in any event workers may be poor test
participants, in part because of their lack of objectivity.
"They aren't typical of how the average consumer might
interact with the product," he says. If, say, you're testing
a computer keyboard, and "all your employees are wizards on
the things, that may not be representative."
   However, Bruce Lee, Western regional director for the
United Auto Workers, which opposes McDonnell Douglas's new
stance against most employee tests, says: "Using employees
makes a lot of sense. People who make the products might be
able to improve the system they are trying to test."
   A General Motors Corp. spokesman says GM uses employees
"all over the place" for human-factors testing, and Ford
Motor Co.'s human-factors division is responsible for a
number of product changes, a Ford spokesman says. Based on
employee testing of its 1992 Taurus and Mercury Sable models,
Ford enlarged their radio push buttons and moved the volume
and station-seek knobs closer to the steering wheel.
   It's considered to be "just part of your job," the
spokesman says. "We always figure that you're happy to help
out the company." In fact, he adds, Ford secretaries are
often asked to drive in cross-country testing, because "you
don't always want the opinion of engineers."
   While some auto-industry testing with employees is rather
mundane, contributions to dashboard and seat-belt design can
have positive safety implications.
   Chrysler Corp.'s Jeep development team, while leaving the
toughest safety tests to dummies and professional test
drivers, maintains a data base containing names and
anatomical descriptions of scores of volunteers who help test
various Jeep designs.
   Several weeks ago, about 50 employees went to Chrysler's
Chelsea, Mich., proving ground, an hour from Detroit
headquarters. The test that day: taking Jeep mockups off-road
to see how functional the dash arrangement was in rough
driving conditions. The employee-drivers found some knobs too
small, and heater and radio controls placed too far away.
Earlier, employees at the site had found that off-road
bouncing triggered the Jeep's automatic seat-belt locking
device too easily. The design team readjusted it.
   Tall and short employees are especially prized for
testing, although Craig Winn, executive engineer for Jeep
development, shrugs off the idea that such individuals might
be pressured to participate because of physique. "People
really enjoy participating beyond their basic job function,"
he says. And employees are drawn by the idea that "someone
really cares where I think the steering wheel should be."
   Neither does the source of their paychecks seem to make
volunteers shy about their concerns, Mr. Winn says. In fact,
"we get into some good fights," he says, when volunteers spew
criticism of a vehicle in front of its designers.
   Outside the auto industry, Walt Disney Co. fine-tunes
theme-park rides by putting employees on board. "They know
what they are looking for," says a spokeswoman. And toy maker
Fisher-Price Inc. lets employees' children loose in an East
Aurora, N.Y., "play-lab" brimming with prototype toys. Behind
a two-way mirror there, a spokesman says, designers watch the
kids enjoy their toy creations, ignore them, or worse yet,
pick them up and proclaim: "This stinks."
   Similarly, Wilson Sporting Goods Co., River Grove, Ill.,
asks employees to help test its prototype tennis rackets,
golf clubs, and team-sports equipment on weekends or after
work. The company's successful "Hammer" tennis racket, which
went through 30 prototype designs before hitting the market
one year ago, especially benefited from employee testing.
"You can tell in a hurry if you have a dog, and not waste
your time testing it with consumers," says Frank Garrett,
director of racket-sports technology. Wilson is a unit of
Amer Group Ltd., of Finland.
   Brown-Forman Corp., Louisville, Ky., gives "points" to
employees who volunteer for tasting panels for liquor and
other products -- the points are redeemable at its cafeteria
and at a store where luggage, giftware and china are sold.
(Tasting rules require that the liquor products be spit out,
not consumed.) "They are employees who come in on their own
free will," says David Lundahl, the company's manager of
sensory and statistical research. Top tasters also get
monthly prizes.
   Aircraft makers testing evacuation times for their cabins
have used employees in the past to help provide the
population cross section that federal regulations require.
But those rules may be about to change. California's Division
of Occupational Safety and Health has ordered McDonnell
Douglas not to reschedule the MD-11 drill, at least until it
proves that employees won't be hurt.
   Self-described "company man" Mr. Olson, who was injured in
the last test, isn't sure whether McDonnell Douglas should
use employees or a computer model. But he's sure of one
thing: "I would never volunteer again."
   ---
   Brett Pulley contributed to this article.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
