ID: 219	RANK: 95	SCORE: 8.786629
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900712-0168 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-12-90 2100EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-HanfordRadiation 1stLd-Writethru a0660 07-12 1036</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Hanford Radiation, 1st Ld - Writethru, a0660,1060</SECOND>
<HEAD>Hanford Downwinders `Finally Getting Truth' About Nuclear
Radiation</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: INSERTS three grafs after 3rd, `An independent ...,' to
include comment from state Health Dept., radiological oncology
expert; picks up 4th graf pvs: `The preliminary ...'</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto SE3; LaserGraphic</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By JOHN K. WILEY</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>RICHLAND, Wash. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   People who live downwind from the Hanford
nuclear reservation reacted with anger and relief Thursday about
the government's disclosure that enough radiation spewed from the
base to cause cancer.
   ``I feel like they used us for guinea pigs, and I don't feel
like they cared one iota what happened to us either, or our
families,'' said Betty Perkes, a farmer in Pasco, which is next to
the 560-square-mile reservation.
   An independent panel of scientists released preliminary data
Thursday that showed some residents in the early years of
atomic-bomb building in the 1940s could have been exposed to large
doses of radioactive iodine. For a few infants, the doses were as
high as 2,900 rad over three years. One rad is the amount of
radiation a body organ would absorb from about a dozen chest X-rays.
   Terry Frazee of the state Health Department said radiation
standards allow a maximum of five rads a year for industrial
workers, although individual organs can handle greater amounts.
   Dr. George Laramore, professor of radiological oncology at the
University of Washington School of Medicine, recommended that
people who were infants in the Hanford area during the period be
checked for thyroid conditions. But he added that thyroid tumors
would likely have appeared five to 15 years after exposure.
   Survivors of the U.S. atomic bombings of Japan at the end of
World War II received thyroid doses estimated at 130 rad, Laramore
said, adding that some nuclear medicine treatments use doses as
high as 800 rads.
   The preliminary study results came a day after Energy Secretary
James Watkins admitted past Hanford emissions may have caused
health problems.
   John Till, a South Carolina consultant who chaired the 18-member
panel of scientists and experts, cautioned that the figures were
not meant as health risk estimates.
   But, Till added, ``These numbers are significant because that is
a lot of folks. That dose level is significant enough to strongly
justify a thyroid dose study.''
   A parallel study by the federal Centers for Disease Control will
use the exposure estimates to try to document cases of thyroid
disease among Hanford-area residents.
   The Hanford Environmental Dose Reconstruction Project concluded
that most people living near the Hanford site from 1944 to 1947
were exposed to low doses of radiation. The study covered 270,000
people living in 10 Washington and Oregon counties.
   But up to 13,500 people may have received doses of more than 33
rad of radioactive iodine from the milk they drank.
   About 1,400 infants and children living in the area received 15
to 650 rad, Till said, including a small number of infants who may
have received doses of 2,900 rad or more.
   The radioactive iodine was produced when spent reactor fuel rods
were chemically dissolved to produce weapons-grade plutonium and
uranium. When it concentrates in the thyroid gland, iodine-131 can
cause cancer and other diseases.
   Till said that by comparison, doses downwind from the Nevada
nuclear weapons testing site ranged from a few rad to 500 rad.
   ``I know of no other releases of this magnitude from any other
U.S. facility,'' Till said of the 1944-47 period, noting that
modern releases are extremely small.
   ``Downwinders,'' people living directly east of the installation
during the years of heaviest releases of radioactive iodine, called
a news conference after the report was released to express
confidence in the Technical Steering Panel's work and anger at the
government's long record of secrecy.
   ``We really believe we're getting the truth now,'' said Tom
Bailie, a Mesa farmer whose family's history of cancers and other
medical problems have been extensively chronicled in news reports
about the downwinders.
   Although the government cannot be sued under the doctrine of
sovereign immunity, Bailie said compensation could be sought
through Congress, similar to that recently given to uranium miners
for radiation-related illnesses.
   ``The federal government owes something if folks have been
harmed by these early releases of radiation,'' Rep. Sid Morrison,
R-Wash., whose district includes the reservation, said in
Washington, D.C. ``While these estimates are preliminary and they
will change, the potential for harmful side effects is with us to
stay.''
   At the downwinder news conference, residents gave a litany of
family health problems, including thyroid dysfunctions and cancers,
that they attributed to the radiation releases.
   ``For a lot of years, I have been hunting every scrap of
newspaper I could find to see why this is happening,'' said Mary
Pengelly, who lives in Kirkland and was raised near Pendleton, Ore.
``It makes me feel that maybe ... we're going to see some answers.''
   The Technical Steering Panel was appointed in 1988 after health
concerns were raised by the release in February 1986 of 19,000
pages of previously classified Hanford environmental documents.
   The phased, five-year, $15 million study is intended to create
computer models of possible radiation doses to nearby residents.
   The first phase studied airborne radioactive iodine emissions
during from 1944-47 and radioactive cooling water poured into the
Columbia River from 1964-67.
   Because of prevailing west-to-east winds, the affected area lies
roughly east of Hanford, with larger radiation doses affecting
those who lived closest to the reservation, Till said.
   Most at risk were infants near Hanford's eastern border who
drank a lot of milk from family owned cows, Till said.
   On Wednesday, Watkins told reports in Washington, D.C., that the
implications of the report were serious.
   It was the government's first admission that the leaks were at
levels sufficient to cause cancer and other illnesses in people
living near Hanford.
   ``I don't want you to think we do this today,'' Watkins said.
``But we do have to go back and look at what happened to people.''
   The inch-thick preliminary report contains hundreds of pages of
tables listing dose ``pathways'' in each U.S. Census area among the
10 counties. The counties are: Benton, Franklin, Walla Walla,
Adams, Grant, Kittitas, Yakima and Klickitat in Washington and
Oregon's Morrow and Umatilla.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
