ID: 179	RANK: 22	SCORE: 11.591426
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910918-0131
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910918-0131.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Critique:
   Adamsweek: Klinghoffer Dies Again
   ----
   By Raymond Sokolov
</HL>
<DATE>
09/18/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   New York -- They didn't give John Adams the keys to the
city. Which is just as well, since the composer would have
found the locks jimmied and the cupboards bare at City Hall
and especially at cultural organizations rocked by Mayor
David Dinkins's budget squeeze. But we did our best here last
week for Mr. Adams.
   The Philharmonic played two of his Fanfares in the opening
concert of its first season under Music Director Kurt Masur.
And the Brooklyn Academy of Music played host to the first
U.S. run of the Adams opera "The Death of Klinghoffer," which
is based on the assassination of an American-Jewish tourist
in the Middle East by Palestinian terrorists.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   For Mr. Adams, who has built a career mostly in San
Francisco and lately in St. Paul, this double welcome here
looked in advance like a kind of coming-out party.
   But in the end the man of the hour was not the
Romantically inclined minimalist composer but the newly
appointed head music critic of the New York Times, Edward
Rothstein. Indeed, the most memorable moment of Adams-week
was the sight of a poker-faced Mr. Rothstein striding from
the front of Avery Fisher Hall up the center aisle, ignoring
the cheers from Philharmonic supporters on both sides of him,
as he rushed to his computer on 43rd Street to pour tepid
water on their Masur-fest.
   He didn't much like "Klinghoffer" either, which should
help to feed Mr. Adams's paranoia about critics. But perhaps
Mr. Adams should pay more attention in the future to picking
his friends than to picking fights with his presumed enemies
in the glossy pages of Harvard Magazine. At Fisher Hall, Mr.
Masur, late of Leipzig and a long, apparently happy career as
a conductor and communist, began his debut with some brief
and light American works by Mr. Adams and Aaron Copland,
matched in inequal symbolism by the weighty Seventh Symphony
of Anton Bruckner, first performed in Leipzig in 1884 and
dedicated to Mad Ludwig of Bavaria.
   Mr. Masur produced a rather tentative, almost soporific
evening of mostly loud music. One hoped for better as the
season progresses but couldn't help wondering why the
Philharmonic had gone in Mr. Masur's direction -- to a
foreigner of mature years from one of the most entrenched
bastions of tradition in musical performance -- if it was
indeed looking for a fresh approach, a broadened repertory
and a stronger appeal to a younger audience. Why, for
example, had Dennis Russell Davies -- American, younger but
widely experienced in new and old music, and a superb
conductor -- been allowed to escape the talent search?
   The curious can seek out Mr. Davies across the East River,
where he will shortly inaugurate his first season as
principal conductor of the Brooklyn Philharmonic. In the
meantime, the Brooklyn Academy has had to suffer the
indignity of several "Klinghoffers," one of them on the
Jewish New Year. This is the so-called opera cobbled together
by the terrible infant of the contemporary stage, Peter
Sellars, from an Adams score, a libretto by the so-called
poet Alice Goodman and choreography by Mark Morris -- much of
the package having been assembled by fax before the Brussels
premiere last spring.
   Reviewing that production on this page, Manuela
Hoelterhoff found little to love and was especially
unconvinced by the libretto's supposedly even-handed
treatment of Arabs and Israelis: ". . . when both groups
appear on stage wearing identical clothes, the production has
graphically equalized victims and their assassins." One could
go further.
   The real-life death of Leon Klinghoffer was a revolting
piece of thuggery against an innocent old man. So it is
thoroughly obnoxious that Ms. Goodman's libretto matches
scenes of aggrieved Palestinians with a piece of Neil Simon
Jewish domestic comedy. Obviously we are meant to conclude
that the Klinghoffers were trivial suburbanites, sheltered
from want and danger, while his assassins were acting out the
righteous anger of their oppressed brethren.
   A truly even-handed treatment would have included a scene
of wealthy robed Saudis in a gaudy palace in the desert,
nattering on about their latest limo or Learjet paid for by a
loan from BCCI.
   Surely there is nothing in the libretto in an anti-Arab
vein to match the repulsive anti-Semitism that drools from
the mouth of a character called "Rambo": ". . . wherever poor
men/Are gathered they can/Find Jews getting fat./You know how
to cheat/The simple, exploit/The virgin, pollute/Where you
have exploited . . . America/Is one big Jew. . . ."
   Could it be that Mr. Sellars encouraged Ms. Goodman in
this in order to distract audiences from thinking about
"Klinghoffer" with the same musical judgment they would
ordinarily apply to an opera? By almost forcing us into a
posture of moral outrage, they would keep us from noticing
that there is not much here for the voice.
   Mr. Adams has said he wasn't basically interested in
opera. He should have listened to himself, instead of heeding
the temptations of that giggling Mephisto, Mr. Sellars. Much
of the orchestral work is rich and appealing, but I doubt
anyone came out of BAM whistling an aria.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
