ID: 179	RANK: 45	SCORE: 9.393982
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920316-0099
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920316-0099.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- In Concert:
   A Decade's Diversities
   ----
   By Mark Swed
</HL>
<DATE>
03/16/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   New York -- To most of the art world, eagerly involved
with the latest trends, the '80s already are old news. But in
the back-to-the-future world of classical music, where
playing centuries-old music on period instruments is often
thought up-to-date, works from the '80s can still seem
glitteringly new. And, for most of us, they usually are. Only
a small fraction of important new work gets recorded, and
that often takes several years. (None of Philip Glass's
orchestra scores of the past decade have yet been recorded.)
Second performances of all but the most popular new pieces
are rare; most musicians prefer the glamour of a premiere.
Unlike in the visual arts, which support several monthly
magazines, there are now, with the recent demise of Musical
America, no commercial American magazines that report on what
is happening in music around the country.
   So Joel Sachs's choice to devote this year's "Focus]"
festival at the Juilliard School to a six-concert survey of
the "American '80s" might have provided an unusual overview
where modern music is going these days had that been his
intention. But, as Mr. Sachs noted in his program
introduction, beyond a noticeable conservative trend in music
that paralleled the political climate of the times, American
music remained as diverse as ever. Partly because
dissemination is so slow, there are fewer stylistic shifts in
music than one finds in the visual arts, and they occur more
slowly. For instance, minimalism, which came and went during
the '60s in painting and sculpture, gradually evolved in
music throughout the '70s to become a mainstream language of
the '80s.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The festival did manage to represent most -- although I
counted about three dozen Americans who wrote pieces between
1980 and 1989 that I liked but weren't included -- of the
different kinds of music typical of the past decade, and it
lived up to its diverse billing. It began in gloomy fashion
with the academic expressionism of Leon Kirchner's "For Solo
Cello," and ended outrageously, one week and 36 works later,
with Paul Schoenfield's "Four Parables" for piano and
orchestra, a Gershwin-esque kitsch extravaganza that received
an overexcited standing ovation.
   With no common language, some composers work primarily
with instrumental color (Margaret Brouwer's impressionistic
orchestra piece, "Third From the Sun"). Minimalism's rhythmic
repetition remains so strongly in vogue that Steve Reich's
Sextet sounded almost like a classic in this context. There
arose in the late '80s a young postminimalist generation full
of quirky life, and two of its members, Stephen Dougherty and
David Lang, were represented with alluring works. Number
crunchers like Milton Babbitt are still at it (his brief
"Homily" for snare drum solo is a dazzling exercise in
rhythmic obscurity), and so are the academic electronic boys,
such as Mario Davidovsky, who favor the '50s school of bleeps
and burps (his "Synchronisms No. 9" for violin and tape was
eloquent despite its antiquated electronic sounds).
   Bright Sheng, born in China, colors Chinese folk music
with Western techniques. Chinary Ung, a composer from
Cambodia, illuminates Western muic with an Asian spirit. Lou
Harrison, a Northern Californian, can make clay bowls sound
like a gamelan. Tania Leon, Cuban born, spices her works with
Latin rhythms. David Diamond wrote the same kind of
neoclassical music in the '80s that he wrote in the '40s.
John Cage, whose seventh decade coincided with the '80s, has
never stopped experimenting. Anthony Davis and Muhal Richard
Abrams, composers out of a progessive jazz tradition, are no
strangers to improvisation. Morton Subotnick uses electronic
modifications of standard instruments in performance to
create new cybernetic perspectives.
   Refreshing as it might seem not to have a curatorial point
of view placed on it, such diversity can seem confusing. But
perhaps one of the lessons of "Focus]" and maybe a lesson of
the multicultural '80s as well, is that different traditions
are really different: They don't always mix well and
shouldn't be expected to. So rather than enhance one another,
these pieces often clashed. A gorgeous, richly sensuous piece
for string quartet, "Solstice," by a Southern California
composer, Robert Erickson, was poor preparation for the
rigorous if equally expressive Third Quartet of Richard
Wilson, which followed. Both are terrific pieces, but their
sensibilities are incompatible.
   The Juilliard students who performed this music did not
help. Perhaps the major disappointment of the festival was
the level of performance, which was always proficient but
seldom charismatic or understanding. There were, however, two
important exceptions. The Inja Quartet, which played
"Solstice," is a rapturous ensemble. Cheryl Marshall, a
flamboyant soprano, completely misunderstood the whimsical
theatricality of Mr. Cage's "Sonnekus 2" by acting the tart
in quotations of two Satie songs. But she had the strongest
stage presence of anyone in the festival, and she made up for
the Cage with a wonderfully athletic performance of Joan La
Barbara's heavy-breathing "Time(d) Trials and Unscheduled
Events."
   Mostly though, performances tended to be dour and dutiful,
as if the '80s were a gray era. Important pieces like John
Adams's grim but inspiring "Wound Dresser" or Jacob
Druckman's characterful Third String Quartet came off as
dull. Witty ones, like Pia Gilbert's "Food," didn't sparkle.
Although these performers were growing up during the '80s,
most of them played as if they had had nothing to do with
those times. And it's not a hopeful thought that maybe they
didn't.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
