ID: 179	RANK: 55	SCORE: 9.104350
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910705-0126
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910705-0126.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   REVIEW &amp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):
   The Great Anniversary Festival
</HL>
<DATE>
07/05/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A6
</SO>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   "The second day of July, 1776, will be the most memorable
epoch in the history of America. I am apt to believe that it
will be celebrated by succeeding generations as the great
anniversary festival. It ought to be commemorated as the day
of deliverance, by solemn acts of devotion to God Almighty.
It ought to be solemnized with pomp and parade, with shows,
games, sports, guns, bells, bonfires, and illuminations, from
one end of this continent to the other, from this time
forward forevermore."
   So John Adams wrote to Abigail Adams on July 3, 1776. The
second day of July 1776 was the day that the resolution for
independence, drafted by Richard Henry Lee of Virginia, was
adopted. July Fourth, the day of the signing of the
Declaration of Independence turned out to be the day of the
great anniversary but in every significant regard, John
Adams's impassioned prediction about the holiday has been
borne out. Two hundred and fifteen years of succeeding
generations have solemnized the day of deliverance in the way
he envisioned -- with pomp and parade, bonfires and
illuminations.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   This Independence Day weekend, as always, the flags are
flying and the parades forming up across the nation. There is
something special about the holiday observances this year.
The difference so evident in the air, in the mood and in the
numbers attending patriotic celebrations is that this is the
year of Desert Storm.
   Not everyone is thrilled. These celebrations, and the
patriotism on display so recently in the Desert Storm victory
parades, have set off some uneasy churning and editorializing
about the difference between bad patriotism and the good
kind. There have been painstaking definitions about what
constitutes offensive and dangerous patriotism, about the
tone patriotism should have, when it should be dusted off and
allowed out. These ruminations about what good patriotism is
all about have been pouring forth in response to the clear
message the nation's citizens have been sending the past
seven months.
   That message, however, goes well beyond their wholehearted
support of Desert Storm and its combatants. It is about the
will to assert natural allegiances, to be what Americans have
always been -- exercisers of that civic virtue known as
patriotism. They know, most of all, that this is a nation
unique for its freedoms.
   It is a uniqueness appreciated by those in our own society
who have known the lash of hatred and injustice. This is the
nation that fought the Civil War, and in the many years
since, no nation in history has striven so mightily to right
the wrongs of injustice. It was with deep feeling and
recognition that Clarence Thomas murmured, "Only in America,"
on being nominated to the Supreme Court.
   A while back a Jewish chaplain in the U.S. Navy found
himself part of a delegation of Americans en route to see
Mikhail Gorbachev to plead for the rights of Soviet Jews.
What would he say to Gorbachev? a reporter asked. He didn't
have to tell Gorbachev anything, the chaplain replied. "All I
have to do," he said, "is stand there in front of him with my
U.S. Navy uniform with the Ten Commandments on the sleeve."
That, thought the chaplain, should be testimony enough about
the character of a free nation.
   We're not too worried about the kind of patriotism
flourishing in the land this weekend. John Adams, we suspect,
had a pretty good idea what he was unleashing with his bells,
bonfires, pomp and parade. A great anniversary -- forward
forevermore.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
