ID: 179	RANK: 66	SCORE: 8.569505
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP881108-0129 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-11-08-88 1448EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r p AM-ELN--AmericaVotes Bjt   11-08 0936</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-ELN--America Votes, Bjt,0961</SECOND>
<HEAD>In Snow, Sun, South Bronx Ruins, Election Day 1988</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By ROBERT BARR</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Rebecca Beasley was late getting to the polls in Dexter, Iowa,
because the horse got loose.
   Scott Arrington warmed his hands with a cup of hot coffee as he
waited in the dark to vote in Kearns, Utah, attracted in part by a
hot campaign over a tax-cutting proposal.
   ``I've had a habit of sitting back and complaining about state
government, so at least this way I know I spoke out by voting,''
said the 30-year-old carpenter and father of two.
   In the devastated South Bronx in New York City, only one voter
had turned out at the 69th Election District by mid-morning, but
poll worker Mercedes Quinones promised at least four more from her
family would participate. ``Six, if my in-laws come,'' she said.
   It was morning in America, Election Day 1988. Time to make
choices _ for president, for U.S. representative, for a senator in
33 states, and for countless local candidates and ballot issues.
   The voting began in the wind-blown snow of Dixville Notch, N.H.,
at midnight and ended 25 hours later on blustery Adak Island in
Alaska, a ritual of democracy that spanned the continent and the
generations.
   In Brownsville, Texas, 59-year-old Beto Jimenez cast his first
vote as an American citizen. ``It seems there is not much enthusiasm
for voting,'' Jimenez said. ``I think the Mexican-Americans have
more enthusiasm for voting than the Americans.''
   In Fostoria, Ohio, 98-year-old Harry Sprout cast his 20th ballot
for president _ dating back to 1912 when he helped put Democrat
Woodrow Wilson in the White House. Who this time? The venerable
voter wouldn't say. Sprout's secret ballot stayed secret.
   Laura Brace, 95, was out early to vote in Huntingburg, Ind., but
couldn't match Sprout's string. She voted for the first time in
1920, when Republican Warren G. Harding was the winner _ the first
presidential election in which women participated.
   ``They called it women's suffrage at that time. Yes, I thought
that was a big deal,'' Mrs. Brace said.
   Tommy Caudill, 81, of Waynesfield, Ohio, recalled selling his
vote _ as many as 30 times in one election _ during the Depression.
This year, he said he was casting his first legal ballot _ he hadn't
voted since the 1940s _ to help a friend in her campaign for a state
judgeship.
   ``A lot of people died for this right,'' said Michael Campanile,
74, who voted at Sunrise Lakes Satellite Clubhouse No. 5 in Sunrise,
Fla. ``A lot of our own people died overseas,'' the World War II
veteran said.
   In Dixville Notch, 34 of the 38 votes went to Republican George
Bush. Michael Dukakis got three votes _ in a town with six
registered Democrats _ and Republican Rep. Jack Kemp got the other.
   Dixville Notch was incorporated in 1960 strictly for purposes of
voting. At midnight, voters who took refuge from the snow and cold
to cast ballots at The Balsams resort were nearly outnumbered by
reporters.
   ``Whether it's the first vote or the last vote doesn't make any
difference,'' Neil Tillotson, the 89-year-old town moderator, said
before casting the first ballot.
   Three presidents _ John Adams, John Quincy Adams and John F.
Kennedy _ were born in Norfolk County, Mass., and both Bush and
Dukakis were born there, too.
   But the talk at the Oakdale Elementary School gym in Dedham,
where refreshments were served under the basketball hoop, was about
dress.
   ``We were going to get dressed up to vote, but we wanted to take
a walk and then go to work. That's the new age,'' said Kay Riley,
whose red sweatsuit matched the one worn by her husband, James.
   ``When I grew up, you had to have a necktie and a shirt and a
jacket to vote. You wouldn't come casual,'' said Hank Persson, 67, a
retired sales manager for a shoe company, who wore a tan suit and
brown tie.
   For some, it was an important social occasion.
   ``The only time I see some of these people is weddings, funerals
and voting, '' said Edward Hartnett, 76, a retired postal foreman
who wore a red, white and blue ``U.S.A.'' cap.
   In Southmost, a heavily Hispanic neighborhood near the Rio Grande
in Brownsville, Democratic posters appealed, ``Dale Gas con
Dukakis-Bentsen'' (``Give it the gas with Dukakis-Bentsen'').
   Wanda Chiles, a hairdresser in Spangle, Wash., felt a sense of
relief at her polling place. ``It's nice to have it over with,'' she
said with a grin, ``and I hope it continues to be over with soon.''
Why? ``Because it was a dirty campaign.''
   At P.S. 29 in the South Bronx, voting inspector Rachel Dorson
wasn't suprised by the low turnout.
   ``This is choice?'' she said, taking a reporter to an empty
voting booth and pointing to the line for state Supreme Court
justice. The candidates were Burton C. Hecht, Democrat; Burton C.
Hecht, Republican; Burton C. Hecht, Conservative Party, and Burton
C. Hecht, Liberal Party.
   Paul Gresante, standing on line at a fire station in Malibu,
Calif., had a celebrity scoop. ``Sean is registered but Madonna
isn't,'' said Gresante, who lives next door to the famous Penns but
said his information came second-hand from a neighborhood canvasser.
   Sam Dowey was a glum Democrat as he waited to vote at the Malibu
Park School auditorium. ``The Dukakis group really blew it,'' he
said. ``If he was to run the country like this campaign we'd be in
trouble.''
   Asked why he was voting for Dukakis anyway, Dowey said, ``I had
to kill my wife's vote.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
