ID: 179	RANK: 78	SCORE: 8.106358
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-15209</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CJFCBACLFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921006
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  06 OCT 92 / Arts: Montreux-Vevey Festival
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By RONALD CRICHTON
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Have the organisers of the Montreux-Vevey Festival suddenly become aware
that if they do not hurry, the 20th century will be over? After 47 years of
existence the festival has acquired an image more solid than adventurous. It
is stuffed with the names of well-known soloists and conductors likely to
attract wealthy residents of that lotus-land and visitors who can afford the
big hotels.
However, this year most of the works came from the first half of this
century, with a weekend of chamber music stretching as far as Stockhausen,
Glass and Adams, also a new work commissioned in memory of Messiaen. The
Franco-Swiss Honegger apart (this is his centenary year) native composers
were hard to find. When it comes to outward-aimed cultural relations the
Swiss appear to treat their own music as a more or less guilty secret, to be
kept hidden from prying ears.
The festival's final week brought an opportunity to visit one of
Switzerland's shrines of culture. The Theatre du Jorat in the village of
Mezieres near Lausanne has been described before on this page. This great
barn, in its conversion an ancestor of the Maltings at Snape, was
transformed early this century by the writer Rene Morax into a simple, roomy
theatre with about 1,000 places, principally intended for drama but
adaptable for concerts and occasional opera. Honegger's King David had its
first performance there in 1921. The place is bare, but like most wooden
buildings, friendly. On this evening it housed the Lausanne Chamber
Orchestra under Emmanuel Joel, with Jean-Francois Antonioli as solo pianist.
There were two works by Honegger, the concertino for piano and the second
symphony (strings and trumpet). The concertino is an agreeable lightweight,
somewhere between neo-classical Stravinsky and Ravel in his jazz mood. The
first two movements of the second symphony with their soberly expressed
grief suited the surroundings perfectly - as in the Maltings, strings sound
beautifully natural. The busy finale, culminating navely but effectively in
a chorale pealing out on the trumpet, can hardly fail to work. The soloist,
Gerard Metrailler, also played Jolivet's first trumpet concerto (with piano
obbligato), a Conservatoire test piece whose lumpy textures I find
disagreeable.
Earlier we heard the six 'little symphonies' of the year's other
centenarian, Milhaud; pungent miniatures written over a period of six years
from 1917. They were not intended for performance together: each 'symphony'
uses a different chamber combination of strings and wind with, in the sixth,
a vocal quartet. Thumbnail capriccios, by no means as casual as they seem at
first, playing with styles as far apart as Brazil and Vienna, ranging in
mood from blue melancholy to piquant mordancy, turning everything to
personal use. This is the kind of experience one hopes for at a festival.
There were some empty seats. Perhaps they would have been full if the
organisers had laid on transport - Mezieres is not easily reached from
Montreux and presumably even in this prosperous region not every music-lover
has a car. Democracy is a house with many mansions but even so, for a
village enterprise intended above all to be 'popular', it is surprising to
have top seat prices at about Pounds 37 (SFr80) - in a Spartan, unheated
building with bare benches.
Montreux itself has been forced to make do with a provisional concert hall
in the Congress Centre by the lake - a large, rectangular, low-ceilinged,
one-level chamber which inflates and muddles orchestral sound. This was
deafeningly demonstrated by the Suisse Romande Orchestra's concert under the
regular conductor, Armin Jordan. In more senses than one a smashing
programme - Roussel's third symphony, Ravel's left-hand piano concerto with
Leon Fleisher as a commanding soloist, Janacek's sinfonietta - it could have
been designed to show off the hall's bad points. And this was the same
orchestra and conductor who made such sweet sounds for Louise in Geneva a
few nights previously. Fortunately, the new Auditorium Stravinsky (the
composer lived nearby for some years) is rising on an adjacent site and will
soon be ready.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
