ID: 179	RANK: 82	SCORE: 8.040812
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910329-0079
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910329-0079.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Opera: Adams/Sellars `Klinghoffer'
   ----
   By Manuela Hoelterhoff
</HL>
<DATE>
03/29/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A9
</SO>
<LP>
   Brussels -- "The Death of Klinghoffer," an opera based on
the hijacking of the Achille Lauro luxury liner in October
1985 by pro-Palestinian terrorists, opened here last week at
the Theatre Royal de la Monnaie in front of an eager
audience. I have never before seen so many journalists, opera
directors and general managers in one place. Or felt so safe:
What could the purveyors of international terrorism object to
in this opera, which turns the sport killing of a frail old
Jew in a wheelchair into a cool meditation on meaning and
myth, life and death. And without a penny of subsidy from the
PLO.
   Directed by Peter Sellars with music by John Adams, a
libretto by Alice Goodman and choreography by Mark Morris,
"Klinghoffer" takes three hours and involves some 90 singers
and dancers, including eight principals -- forces normally
spent on "Aida" or "Boris Godunov." So its staging required
the mingled fortunes of the opera companies of not only
Brussels, but Lyons, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Brooklyn and
twee Glyndebourne, which, however, will not be able to show
it. The set is too big. Lucky Glyndebourne. I wonder if other
opera-company chiefs were hoping that their stages were
shrinking as they flew back home for their next board
meeting.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Among other things, "Klinghoffer" is not the opera it was
meant to be, but a high-tech oratorio with ritualistic
choruses and athletic dancers linking together a string of
largely incomprehensible soliloquies delivered by inert
characters wearing body mikes. There's much to admire in the
often compelling score and the elaborate presentation, but
neither can finally overcome the flabbergasting subject.
   "Klinghoffer's" makers caused a stir in 1987 with another
weirdly contemporary work, "Nixon in China." But
"Klinghoffer" has grander ambitions than that intimate,
faintly satirical behind-the-scenes look at the epochal
meeting between a minor miscreant and a mass murderer. Here
is how Mr. Sellars explains it in his repulsively amoral and
culturally pretentious foreword to Ms. Goodman's high-minded
libretto: "This is essentially a religious drama in the sense
that Greek tragedy or the Bach Passions or the Persian
"Ta'ziyeh" or the Javanese "Wayang Wong" are religious
dramas." Anyone who thought the Achille Lauro hijacking was
just another example of small-minded viciousness festering
among Muslim thugs is certainly in for a surprise.
   But then, "Klinghoffer" has been so vigorously scrubbed
not even the boat is left from which the murdered American
was tossed in a rage after Syria of all places refused safe
haven to the terrorists. The set is a stunning, glistening
steel scaffolding several stories high and stripped of all
references to historically relevant places, since
"Klinghoffer" wishes us to ponder larger issues and brings in
many quotations from the Koran and the Bible to point the
way. That "Klinghoffer" takes sides in the wearying conflict
between Israelis and Palestinians has been vigorously
disputed by its makers. But when both groups appear onstage
wearing identical clothes, the production has graphically
equalized victims and their assassins -- and dulled the drama
besides.
   The Palestinian chorus sings of houses razed in 1948; the
Israelis sing of arriving without luggage in a country whose
scars are holy places. Imbedded in Ms. Goodman's text are a
few potent images and memorable lines hard to savor since she
balked at using supertitles shortly before the premiere. Very
few words were understandable, including -- this perhaps for
the better -- a pious-sounding address to the Lord above,
delivered just before the opera closes after two long acts.
   An odd little prologue elliptically describing the banal
world of the Klinghoffers sticks out of the weaker first act.
Like refugees from Leonard Bernstein's "A Quiet Place," some
friends of the couple roll out onstage with their living-room
set singing of the gift items they acquired from sweatshops
around the world (so kill them for their knickknacks, these
tasteless shoppers]). They never reappear as the opera veers
into an abstract presentational mode for the remainder of the
evening.
   High up on the darkened scaffold, Mamoud, the chief
terrorist, his face glistening on a huge screen, tells us at
great length about his lousy childhood and then the Captain
muses on the concept of pleasure cruises. In penning
recitations long enough to exhaust Richard Wagner, Ms.
Goodman was hardly doing any favors for Mr. Adams, who is not
an epic tunesmith and who generally finds the orchestra a
greater source of inspiration than the solo voice. With
conductor Kent Nagano in total command, there was usually
something interesting going on in the pit, which glimmered
and throbbed with eerie obbligatos, hypnotic textures,
19th-century flourishes and amplified pounding. But
complexity comes at a price -- with some of the music so
difficult the chorus resorted to scores at the end. The
unsettling specter of overtime costs was surely also
preoccupying the opera chiefs heading homeward.
   Perhaps "Klinghoffer" has a future as a cheaper, songless
ballet, since Mark Morris's dance troop is already heavily
engaged tying together the narratives with energetic
movements reminiscent of exercises for strained backs.
   Otherwise there wasn't much to look at except the stage
effects devised by Mr. Sellars, since his talent for
character illumination was not much use in a piece without
characters. The frenzied activity provoked by the discovery
of the terrorists made quite an impact as the chorus ran up
and down the scaffold's staircases in a spooky light, like
automatons run amok.
   As befits the work's title, the dead Leon Klinghoffer is
more memorable than the live one (who has one major scene).
In a very beautiful image, a dancer doubling Klinghoffer
coiled around a rope, face down, slowly descended to the
ground from the top of the scaffold sinking in dream time
into an imaginary sea. But we know how it really happened,
and poetry and reality clash uneasily here as in the rest of
the work.
   The performers, many familiar from other Sellars shows,
were excellent: James Maddalena as the Captain, Eugene Perry
as Mamoud, Sanford Sylvan as Klinghoffer, and Janice Felty in
a variety of roles including that of a nutty woman who locked
herself in the stateroom eating chocolates for several days.
But the most memorable was contralto Sheila Nadler as the
grieving Mrs. Klinghoffer, who against all odds (including a
miming double) suggested the tragic dimension and the sense
of coldblooded Arab cruelty missing in "Klinghoffer." In
another setting recently, thousands of innocent Arabs were
helping to wipe out the debt for Klinghoffer's pointless
killing.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
