ID: 179	RANK: 92	SCORE: 7.748680
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-395</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CL2A6ADRFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921224
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  24 DEC 92 / State of the Art: The verbiage of creativity that is. .
.mad, bad and dangerous to use - New Music, the shock of the old
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW CLEMENTS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
THE trouble started more than a century ago with Wagner. Those opening bars
of Tristan and Isolde, groping towards any feeling of a key, were unlocking
a Pandora's Box that within 40 years had led the composers of the Second
Viennese School, Schoenberg, Berg and Webern, towards music in which the
sense of key was totally abandoned. Debussy, Stravinsky and Bartok all added
their own threads to modernism and for almost all of the 20th century,
tonality has been under attack. It was a battle that it lost for almost 60
years; while atonalism and its progeny serialism reigned, only gifted
individualists such as Britten, Tippett and Shostakovich, were able to
demonstrate the continued power of tonality. But it is only in the last two
decades that tonal music has been able to come-out again, sheltering under a
banner that has been called post-modernism.
Now, though, there is freedom of choice: composers can select their own
label. They can choose to become neo-romantics, minimalists,
post-minimalists, neo-expressionists, or polystylisticists, and all of them,
inasmuch as they can be pinned down at all, can be shoved into the drawer of
musical history labelled post-modernism. The range of music produced under
these headings is already vast. but what it all has in common is a rejection
of the main evolutionary thread that can be traced through the music of this
century from Wagner through the Second Viennese School and the other
modernists, to the post-1945 avant-garde of Boulez, Stockhausen and Berio.
Some gifted composers articulate this urge to regress in impeccable
historical terms; Nicholas Maw, who started as a serial composer and now
falls more or less into the neo-romantic school, talks of remaking the link
with the late romantics, with Brahms, Wolf and Wagner, and recovering the
contact between composers and their public which he maintains was sundered
by Schoenberg and his followers. By returning to the harmonies of 100 years
ago Maw has fashioned for himself a highly expressive and individual
language.
But all these strands involved regressions or historical short-circuits,
even if the old is sometimes treated with the ironic detachment that often
seems the single unifying character of the 57 varieties of post-modernism.
There is even an argument for viewing later Stravinsky as one of the first
post-modern composers; in neoclassical works such as the opera The Rake's
Progress, the conventions of classical opera are appropriated and gently
subverted, traditional usages are contradicted, even if the irony is never
overtly humorous or satirical.
Stravinsky, though, was very special. As the 20th century starts to take
stock of itself his genius, along with that of Alban Berg, another composer
able to move forwards without ever rejecting his past, seem increasingly the
most vital and significant musical figures. The contemporary composers who
stand history on its head seem less reverential in their treatment of the
past, less certain of what it has to to teach them. Minimalism, the most
pernicious and self-serving of all recent trends, uses the simplest melodic
and rhythmic shapes and the most elementary harmonic contrasts to build
ramshackle musical structures; when used by a composer of genuine wit and
perception such as Steve Reich the results can be genuinely musical and
intriguing, but in the 1980s, a minimalist background became simply the
jumping-off for high-profile international careers. In their much hyped
operas Philip Glass and John Adams have both grafted old-fashioned rhetoric
onto this ill-defined musical stock so that the minimalist techniques now
just fill the gaps between the cliches; post-minimalism has been born.
However, the meditational music of Arvo Part is minimalist in a very
different way, disarms with its naive sincerity, while a piece such as John
Tavener's Protecting Veil, a huge commercial success on disc in Britain,
makes just as few intellectual demands; it is as reassuring as the cosiest
form of religion, a comfort blanket woven from uncomplicated melody and
sweet-toothed harmonies. If contemporary music seems too threatening then
listeners can bury their heads under the blanket with Tavener.
The appeal of Alfred Shnitke is harder to categorise. For Shnitke's use and
abuse of 'old-fashioned' material serves a genuinely ironic, authentically
post-modern, purpose; he aims at musical subversion of a sometimes
overwhelming kind, and any object is grist to that mill. Shnitke's
'polystylicisticism' - horrible word for music that can be inescapably
beautiful - is an uncertain thing. Perhaps that goes with the territory; the
musical risks have to be taken before the reward can be secured, but there
is no doubt that Shnitke's best music touches a chord with contemporary
audiences that few other living composers of comparable sophistication
manage to reach.
Which should indicate that not everything in the post-modern musical world
is commercially driven or meretricious. There are composers who have
exploited the expressive freedom of choice of the last quarter century for
the best possible musical ends. The German composer Wolfgang Rihm has
produced a stream of pieces hard to classify, yet pull the listener into
their world with great power. Judith Weir is another who can switch styles
and perspectives in a way that is at the same time identifiably post-modern
yet coherent and effective. For once then the musical world is mirroring the
real thing - still coming to terms with the new freedom and still feeling
lost without the old certainties, whether they were good or bad.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page VII
</PAGE>
</DOC>
