ID: 312	RANK: 45	SCORE: 22.086020
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920103-0125
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920103-0125.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
   Who Cares Who's No. 1?
   ----
   By Frederick C. Klein
</HL>
<DATE>
01/03/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A5
</SO>
<LP>
   Pasadena, Calif. -- Washington beat Michigan in the Rose
Bowl here Wednesday, and a few hours later Miami beat
Nebraska in the Orange Bowl in Miami. The two winners thus
ended their seasons with 12 wins and no losses, making
certain that the burning question of "Who's No. 1?" in
collegiate football for the 1991 season will be inconclusive,
whatever the polls say. This will delight people who thrive
on ambiguity, controversy, argument and similar good stuff.
It will enrage those who would turn an interestingly complex
situation into a 2+2 equation with an exhausting post-season
tournament in the bruising sport.
   But New Year's Day could have turned out a lot better for
those of us who enjoy lots of pepper in our conversational
stew. If Michigan (10-1 going in) had beaten 11-0 Washington,
Nebraska (9-1-1) had beaten Miami (11-0) at Miami, Texas A&amp;M
(10-1) had beaten Florida State in the Cotton Bowl, and
Florida (10-1) hadn't been upset by Notre Dame in the Sugar
Bowl, five teams would have stood at 11-1 with the campaign
over, and one at 10-1-1. That would have made six -- count
em, six] -- teams with a legitimate claim to the Poll Bowl
national title. It might have boosted sales of beer, pretzels
and bandages enough to boot the economy out of its funk.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The outcome we did have, of course, is quite enough to
louden the cries of the post-season-tournament advocates, or,
at least, prompt them to push harder for the so-called Bowl
Alliance solution. That arrangement, cooked up last fall,
would give the Orange, Cotton, Sugar and Fiesta bowls an
improved shot at securing a No. 1 vs. No. 2 New Year's Day
match to decide the national crown.
   But a new bidder -- the Blockbuster Bowl, sponsored by the
video-store chain -- threw the deal into doubt by waiving a
few extra dollars before the noses of our institutions of
higher learning, and squabbles over who'll take the
second-place finishers of some of the Alliance's conference
customers have further roiled the waters. Suffice it to say
that things again look good on the healthy-chaos front.
   Just who will top the polls remained to be seen at this
writing yesterday, but off Wednesday's performance before a
capacity crowd of 103,000 in the ancient oval a terrific case
can be made for Washington. Coach Don James's Huskies didn't
just beat their 12 foes this term, they stomped them in true
No. 1 fashion by a 495-115 scoring margin. And they didn't
just beat Michigan, they routed, clouted and outsmarted the
champions of the Middle West. The score was 34-14, and the
final margin could have been wider.
   The first Michigan touchdown, in the second quarter,
followed a weird play in which the Wolverines got the ball on
the Husky 44-yard line after Washington was penalized for
interfering with a fair catch on a botched, bloop kickoff
(yes, you can fair-catch a kickoff). The second came in the
last period, against the Husky scrubeenies, after Washington
had taken a commanding, 34-7, lead.
   Washington outgained Michigan almost 2 to 1, 404 yards to
205, and about half of Michigan's output came after the game
had been decided. Led by Steve Emtman, a 6-foot-4, 295-pound
slab of a tackle, the quicker, stronger Husky defense
recorded six quarterback sacks and seven more tackles for
losses, and Michigan was able to make good on just two of 15
third-down plays. "Their defense just beats you around. It
may be the best I've seen," Michigan coach Gary Moeller said
later.
   The outsmarted part was carried out mainly by Billy Joe
Hobert, Washington's sophomore quarterback. He scored the
game's first touchdown, on the first play of the second
quarter, by stacking his blockers to the right side of a
formation and then darting alone through the left side for
two yards into the end zone. He kept another TD drive going
in quarter three when he sent out five wide receivers on a
fourth-down-and-one situation, then quarterback-sneaked
through a spread-out Wolverine defense. At other times, he
completed 18 of 34 passes for 192 yards, and shared the
game's most valuable player award with Emtman.
   The unkindest cut of all was supplied by Mario Bailey, the
Huskies' 168-pound jack rabbit of a senior wide receiver.
This young man had been overshadowed in the pre-game hype --
and in the season as a whole -- by his Michigan counterpart,
Desmond Howard.
   Howard is an admirable athlete who was lucky enough to
have captured the nation's psyche with a diving TD catch to
win a nationally televised game against Notre Dame on Sept.
14. Bailey, by contrast, has an identity problem even on his
own team, where he must share uniform No. 5 with cornerback
Dana Hall on a squad with 100-plus members, and his last name
with two other Baileys.
   But Bailey entered the game with more catches than Howard
this term (62 to 61), and more yards (1,037-950), and on
Wednesday he widened that margin by snaring six for 126 to
the closely guarded Howard's one for 35. And after his
showiest catch, for a 38-yard last-period touchdown, he stuck
out an arm and raised a knee in the pose of the player on the
Heisman Trophy. Howard, you may recall, had done the same
after a punt-return TD against Ohio State on Nov. 23 had
solidified his election to that august award.
   "I never practiced that {the pose} except in my dreams.
But, then, the whole game was kind of a dream game for us,"
Bailey grinned.
   James, the professorial-looking Washington coach, wouldn't
go that far, but he did lobby a bit for his team's election
as No. 1 afterward by wearing a shirt with the words "1991
National Champs" embroidered over a pocket. "This has been my
best team. I can't believe anybody's a whole lot better than
us," said the man who has won more games than any coach in
PAC-10 conference history in his 17 seasons at Seattle.
   And with lots of starters slated to return, James can look
forward to a prosperous 1992. He's so well stocked, in fact,
that he'll have two QBs from which to choose next season --
Rose Bowl-hero Hobert and Mark Brunell, whose pre-season
injury gave Hobert his chance to shine.
   But, hey, quarterback controversies are fun, too.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
