ID: 141	RANK: 19	SCORE: 16.151152
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900604-0087 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-06-04-90 1100EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a PM-MidwestStorms 1stLd-Writethru a0480 06-04 0829</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Midwest Storms, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0480,0848</SECOND>
<HEAD>Storms Follow Worst Indiana Tornadoes in 16 Years; Death Toll 14</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: LEADS with 8 grafs to UPDATE with second boy dying in Indiana,
death toll up to 14 nationwide, governors seeking federal aid,
UPDATES and CORRECTS Indiana death toll from 8 to 10; clarifies that
damage in Illinois not limited to two counties named. Picks up 8th
graf pvs, `In Albion...'. INSERTS 1 graf after 17th graf pvs, `More
severe ..., to include car pileup; picking up 18th graf, `At least
...</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto CS2</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By CONNIE CASS</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Tornadoes and thunderstorms throughout the Midwest killed 14
people, injured scores and left hundreds more homeless. Ten of the
dead were in Indiana, where about 50 twisters touched down.
   The most disastrous tornado tore a five-mile swath through the
southwestern Indiana town of Petersburg on Saturday. It killed six
people, injured at least 57 and destroyed more than 150 homes.
   ``It looked to me like there had been a bombing run made right
through the middle of Petersburg,'' said Indiana Gov. Evan Bayh, who
viewed the town from the air Sunday. ``I'm confident we'll rebuild,
but it will be tough.''
   Residents of the mining and farming community of 3,000 already
had been without fresh water for two weeks because of flooding that
tore through levees along the White River and severed the water main.
   Bayh, who had requested federal disaster assistance after the
floods, signed an amended request Sunday and sent it to President
Bush. Ohio Gov. Richard Celeste also asked for disaster assistance
after dozens of families in two Ohio counties were left homeless by
the storm there.
   Tornadoes also were reported in Illinois, Minnesota, Kentucky and
Michigan on Saturday.
   More deadly weather struck the Midwest on Sunday. Wind-toppled
trees killed a 21-year-old woman camper in a state park in
south-central Wisconsin and two boys, ages 6 and 8, in a town park
in the central Indiana town of Mulberry.
   In Illinois, the storm Saturday destroyed about 50 homes and
damaged more than 100, most of them in Jasper and Shelby counties.
Authorities reported one woman died.
   In Albion, Ill., a new $4 million electronics warehouse was
leveled, Edwards County Coroner Mark Curtis said.
   ``It's just total devastation,'' Curtis said. ``It's
unbelievable. Everything they tell you about tornadoes _ the roar
like a train, the wind _ is true.''
   Also Saturday, a 10-year-old boy drowned in a storm-swollen river
in Milwaukee and an 82-year-old man was killed by a wind-blown tree
branch in the northwestern Missouri town of Stewartsville.
   A tornado in Harrison, Ohio, outside Cincinnati, destroyed 20
houses and 10 businesses and damaged another 100 houses and 50
businesses, police Sgt. Carl Butler said. No serious injuries were
reported.
   Winds up to 70 mph in Kansas knocked down power lines, leaving
nearly 50,000 homes without electricity and sparking grass fires. In
Arkansas, thunderstorms dumped heavy rain, causing flash flooding
that closed roads.
   Across Indiana, officials reported eight dead and at least 150
people injured Saturday in storms that left 24 cities in 15 counties
with significant damage. Officials tracked about 50 tornado
touchdowns during a four-hour period.
   The outbreak was the worst in Indiana since a tornado barrage in
1974 killed 47 people. A series of twisters on Palm Sunday in 1965
killed 137 people in 18 Indiana counties.
   The other Indiana tornado deaths were in Bedford, in the southern
part of the state, and in Putnam County in west-central Indiana,
said Jerome Hauer, director of the State Emergency Management Agency.
   Hauer said the tornadoes were particularly devastating because
they spent long periods of time on the ground. One twister, he said,
was on the ground 38 minutes.
   More severe thunderstorms and at least one tornado raked central
Indiana on Sunday, downing trees and power lines.
   Clouds of black dust blown from freshly plowed fields created
blackouts on highways in the northern part of the state, causing an
18-car pileup on U.S. Highway 31 outside South Bend. Five people
sustained minor injuries, police said.
   At least 150 homes and 18 businesses in Petersburg were destroyed
and 120 homes and 58 businesses were damaged when Saturday's tornado
ripped through town, said Al Miller, field operations coordinator
for the State Emergency Management Agency. At least 57 people were
injured.
   There was no electricity in the town, and residents were urged to
stay away from their damaged homes after dark. State police and the
National Guard staffed roadblocks at the edge of town and used
generators to shine floodlights on Main Street.
   ``We want to keep out the sightseers and looters and people who
don't need to be here,'' said police Sgt. Norm Weber.
   Petersburg resident Mary Hall, 63, picked through the rubble of
her collapsed home early Sunday. She and her husband, Clifton, had
taken cover in the basement porch when the storm hit.
   ``The insurance man told us to save what we could, but there's
really nothing left,'' she said.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
