ID: 141	RANK: 3	SCORE: 27.013884
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900829-0015 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-08-29-90 0203EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-IllinoisTornado 9thLd-Writethru a0776 08-29 1076</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Illinois Tornado, 9th Ld-Writethru, a0776, a0751,1118</SECOND>
<NOTE>Eds: LEADS with 17 grafs to UPDATE with varying official counts of
the dead, more expected, picks up 16th graf of a0751, `Commonwealth
Edison... </NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos CX6,7; LaserColor CX106. LaserGraphic.</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By JIM PAUL</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>CREST HILL, Ill. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Tornadoes ripped through several
northern Illinois towns Tuesday, blowing residents out of apartment
buildings and leveling at least 100 homes and a school. As many as
26 were reported dead and the death toll was expected to rise.
   Local hospitals said at least 290 people were being treated for
storm-caused injuries.
   The tornadoes touched down at least four times just after 3:30
p.m. CDT along a seven-mile southwesterly path from the community
of Plainfield to Joliet, about 40 miles southwest of Chicago,
Illinois State Police said.
   In Crest Hill, on the outskirts of Joliet, eight people were
killed when the twister flattened an apartment complex, said
Lockport Fire Chief Dave Martis. Four bodies, including that of a
4-month old baby, were lying in a cornfield next to the complex,
and four others were pulled from the collapsed buildings and a car.
   ``When the storm went through, some of the buildings
disintegrated,'' Martis said. ``High winds blew some of the people
into the corn field.''
   Guy Allton, 16, watched the storm from his house near Plainfield
High School.
   ``We went outside, and there was picnic tables flying past our
faces and stuff,'' Allton said.
   Afterward he helped pull people from nearby houses, including
two badly hurt babies.
   ``Everything was messed up,'' Allton said. ``Lots and lots of
people hurt.''
   Officials' counts of the dead varied from 20 to 26, and some
said they expected to find more bodies when searching resumed
Wednesday.
   Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Agency spokesman Lynn
Bobo said late Tuesday that 26 people were killed.
   The Will County coroner said 20 bodies had been brought to a
central morgue as of 11:45 p.m. CDT. Others might be in transit,
but some may have been counted twice, said coroner Duane Krueger.
   Five people died in Plainfield, said John Watson, ambulance
services chief for the Plainfield Fire Department.
   Four people were killed in Joliet, including three in a
subdivision under construction, said Police Chief Dennis Nowicki.
   ``I'm not confident the death toll won't rise,'' said Will
County Executive Charles Adelman, noting that it wasn't known how
many people were inside the heavily damaged Plainfield High School.
   There were several arrests for looting, Adelman said.
   It wasn't immediately clear where the others of the 23 were
found.
   The National Guard was called out Tuesday evening to help state
police prevent looting and control crowds in the area, said Ms.
Bobo, the emergency services spokeswoman.
   Commonwealth Edison spokesman John Hogan reported 17,000
customers without power in the area hit by the storms.
   Judi Mack, a spokeswoman for St. Joseph Hospital in Joliet, said
the hospital had received 157 storm victims. Only 25 were admitted
with injuries ranging from minor to severe, she said.
   Thirty-five people were taken to Silver Cross Hospital, where
they were in serious to fair condition, said spokeswoman Susan
Larson. Several other hospitals also reported treating storm
victims.
   Plainfield High School was destroyed and some teachers and
students were injured, said Steve Schernerhorn, who with other
teachers and student athletes crouched in the halls as the roof was
blown off.
   ``We had some very short warnings. We immediately took cover,''
he said in a telephone interview. He said about 25 houses near the
school were destroyed.
   Dozens of athletes were in the gym shortly before the tornado
hit, but coaches moved them to another part of the school just
before the gym roof collapsed onto the floor.
   Principal Jim Waldorf said as many as 175 people were in the
school at the time of the storm, and a number of them suffered
minor injuries.
   Teacher Mike Salisburg said some cars in the school parking lot
were thrown as far as several hundred yards.
   Major damage was also reported at St. Mary's Elementary School
nearby.
   Eric Curtis, 24, who lives a half-mile northwest of the high
school, said he was at home when the twister hit.
   ``I felt real bad pressure in my head,'' Curtis said. ``I saw my
dad running toward the house.''
   The Curtis house suffered only minor damage, but others in the
neighborhood were wrecked.
   Michael Hejka, 28, arrived at his friend's house five minutes
before the tornado hit.
   ``I saw trees bending, and I said to my buddy, `It's a
tornado!''' Hejka said. ``I said, `Jump into the bathtub.' He
jumped in, and I jumped in right on top of him. The whole house
lifted up, and then came down.''
   Phone lines into the area were jammed; many were reported down.
   At least nine emergency shelters were set up by local disaster
agencies and the Red Cross.
   The Red Cross was supplying clothing, toiletries and food.
   Will County is part of a frequently hit ``tornado alley,'' the
National Weather Service said. A tornado hit Plainfield Township in
April 1984, injuring six people and demolishing 14 homes. In June
1976, a twister hit Lemont, 10 miles northeast of Plainfield,
killing three people and injuring as many as 40. That tornado
damaged 375 houses and businesses.
   Commonwealth Edison spokesman John Hogan reported 17,000
customers without power in the area hit by the storms.
   State Police spokesman Robert Fletcher said at least 50 houses
were leveled, about 30 of them north of Plainfield and 20 or 30
near the Louis Joliet Mall just outside Joliet.
   Other State Police officials reported 15 to 20 houses damaged in
unincorporated areas of Will County.
   Watson, of the Plainfield Fire Department, said emergency
workers found 40 homes flattened southeast of the city.
   At least six people were injured in pileups on Interstate 55
caused by violent winds, said State Police Lt. Clifford Mann. The
interstate at U.S. 30 was down to one lane of traffic because of a
semi tractor-trailer rig blown over, he said.
   Crops were flattened west and north of Joliet.
   Many roads were blocked by trees, and toppled electric towers
and downed lines sparked fires in Joliet, Mezera said.
   In Plainfield, a dumpster was lodged in the upper branches of a
tall tree, an empty dump truck was on its side and an empty van was
found after it fell off a bridge into the DuPage River. Seachers
were combing the banks of the debris-clogged stream.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
