ID: 141	RANK: 46	SCORE: 14.573814
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900604-0015 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-06-04-90 0029EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-MidwestStorms 4thLd-Writethru a0869 06-04 1077</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Midwest Storms, 4th Ld-Writethru, a0869,1070</SECOND>
<HEAD>Precede Petersburg.</HEAD>
<HEAD>Storms Follow Worst Tornadoes in 16 Years; Death Toll 13</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Edits throughout to tighten, add detail on camper's death.
Pick up 32nd graf pvs, `_In Wisconsin...</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos LX1, NA1, EV3</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By CONNIE CASS</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Midwesterners mourning neighbors killed in a deadly barrage of
tornadoes were hit Sunday by a second onslaught of thunderstorms and
high winds that raised the weekend weather death toll to 13.
   Wind-toppled trees on Sunday killed a camper in Wisconsin and an
8-year-old boy in a town park in Indiana, the state that bore the
brunt of the fierce weather that began Saturday night.
   Across Indiana, officials reported eight dead and at least 150
people injured Saturday in the state's worst tornado outbreak since
1974. The storms left 24 cities in 15 counties with significant
damage. Officials tracked about 50 tornado touchdowns during a
four-hour period.
   In Illinois, a tornado Saturday destroyed or damaged scores of
houses and killed one woman. Also Saturday, 10-year-old boy drowned
in a storm-swollen river in Milwaukee and an 82-year-old man was
killed by a wind-blown tree branch in the northwestern Missouri town
of Stewartsville.
   Twisters or high winds downed trees, knocked out power and
damaged homes and businesses from Kansas to Michigan and Ohio. In
Arkansas, thunderstorms dumped heavy rain, causing flash flooding
that closed roads.
   In the second round of deadly weather Sunday, high winds at a
campground in Rocky Arbor State Park in south-central Wisconsin
toppled a tree onto a tent, killing a 21-year-old woman and injuring
another woman in the tent with her another, according to the Juneau
County Sheriff's Department. The injured woman, 24, was hospitalized
in fair condition.
   In the central Indiana town of Mulberry, a 60-foot-tall felled by
80 mph wind blew down on three boys who were visiting Centennial
Park for a picnic, said Town Marshal Bruce Welton. The freak
accident killed an 8-year-old boy and left a 7-year-old boy in
critical condition and a 10-year-old boy in guarded condition,
hospital officials said.
   Severe thunderstorms and at least one tornado raked central
Indiana on Sunday, downing trees and powerlines, but no serious
damage or injuries were immediately reported.
   Clouds of black dust sucked from freshly-plowed fields by 40 mph
winds created blackouts on highways in the northern part of the
state, causing an 18-car pileup on U.S. Highway 31 outside South
Bend. Five people suffered minor injuries, police said.
   The most disastrous of the many tornadoes to touch down Saturday
ripped through the southwestern Indiana town of Petersburg, killing
six and leaving hundreds homeless just two weeks after floods
knocked out the town's fresh water supply.
   The other Indiana tornado deaths were in Bedford, in the southern
part of the state, and in Putnam County in west-central Indiana,
said Jerome Hauer, director of the State Emergency Management
Agency. Hauer, who was unable to provide details of the deaths, said
said his staff had received reports that 150 people were injured
statewide.
   Indiana Gov. Evan Bayh toured Petersburg and Bedford and viewed
other damage from the air on Sunday.
   At least 150 homes and 18 businesses in Petersburg were destroyed
and 120 homes and 58 businesses were damaged when the storm ripped a
five-mile path through town, said Al Miller, field operations
coordinator for the State Emergency Management Agency. At least 57
people were injured.
   ``The tornado clearly cut right through the middle of town,''
Bayh said. ``It looked to me like there had been a bombing run made
right through the middle of Petersburg.''
   Residents of the mining and farming community of 3,000 had been
without fresh water for two weeks because of flooding that tore
through levees along the White River and severed the water main. A
temporary pipeline carries water from a nearby power plant, but it
was unsafe to drink without boiling first.
   The Rev. Jeff Stratton said the townspeople had kept their sense
of humor despite the added hardship.
   ``I've joked with some friends here that I've heard from reliable
sources that tomorrow it's frogs and locusts,'' he said.
   Petersburg resident Keith Burch had just sat on the couch when
the tornado hit. He said he had no idea what was happening.
   ``The windows blew in and I started crawling into the bedroom,''
he said. ``The refrigerator blew up against me and pinned me against
the wall. That's probably what saved me. The rest of the house blew
in.''
   Elsewhere over the weekend:
   _ In Illinois, 30 homes were destroyed and at least 70 damaged in
Jasper County, while Shelby County reported 12 homes demolished and
26 others damaged. A 54-year-old Edwards County woman was killed
when a twister destroyed her home.
   _ In Ohio, a tornado damaged 100 houses homes and some 50
businesses in Harrison, outside Cincinnati, and up to 20 houses and
10 businesses destroyed, police Sgt. Carl Butler said. No serious
injuries were reported. At least 30 airplanes were damaged or
destroyed and one of three hangars was flattened at the Cincinnati
West Airport in Harrison, said Tim McKenna, whose family owned the
airport.
   _In Wisconsin, several thousand residents of Fond du Lac, an
eastern Wisconsin city of 36,000, were temporarily without electric
service as tree limbs tore down transmission lines. In Milwaukee,
searchers Sunday found the body of a boy, 10, who slipped into the
Menomonee River shortly after storms swept through the area the
previous evening.
   _In Minnesota, thunderstorms with wind gusts up to 70 mph and
hail moved across southeastern and east-central parts of the state.
A tornado damaged four farms Saturday one mile east of Goodhue in
southeastern Minnesota, but no injuries were reported.
   _ In Kentucky, tornadoes struck several counties, damaging homes,
tossing mobile homes, downing trees and knocking out power. At least
five people were injured, none seriously.
   _ In Michigan, a tornado touched down in Big Prairie Township,
damaging some of the many vacation trailers in an area where many
retirees live, said Newaygo County sheriff's dispatcher Bob Bain. No
injuries were reported, and authorities were unable to provide
detailed description of the damage.
   More than 110,000 homes and businesses were blacked out Sunday
because powerlines were downed by thunderstorms and high wind that
hit the state late Saturday and early Sunday.
   _ In Kansas, winds that reached 70 mph tore roofs from homes
throughout the city of Hutchinson. Downed power lines knocked out
power to nearly 50,000 homes and sparked grass fires.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
