ID: 141	RANK: 47	SCORE: 14.512156
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900617-0067 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-06-17-90 2236EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-MidwestStorms 2ndLd-Writethru a0693 06-17 0887</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Midwest Storms, 2nd Ld-Writethru, a0693,0909</SECOND>
<HEAD>Midwest Cleans Up from Severe Thunderstorms, Tornadoes</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: SUBS 9th graf, `The 11-year-old ...,' to ADD dead girl's
name; SUBS grafs 13-15, `The engineer ...,' with six grafs to
UPDATE with scattered thunderstorms Sunday in parts of Illinois,
width of South Dakota tornado's path, partial South Dakota damage
estimate, CORRECTS to say warning sirens not sounded in most South
Dakota areas hit; picks up 16th graf, `In northeast ...'</NOTE>
<HEAD>With
AM-Flash Floods, Bjt</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto SI1</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Midwesterners mopped up or continued battling flood waters
Sunday after tornadoes, thunderstorms and flooding hit parts of the
region, killing an 11-year-old girl in Iowa and a railroad engineer
in Illinois.
   Tornadoes that roared through South Dakota and Nebraska on
Saturday left damaged or destroyed farm buildings and homes and
uprooted trees in their wake. Up to half a foot of rain fell on
already-sodden ground in Minnesota and Nebraska.
   In eastern Iowa, Clear Creek jumped its banks, closing a
two-mile section of Interstate 80 on Sunday. Flooding knocked out
water service to the small town of Manning in the western part of
the state.
   Damage to just the eastern Iowa cities of Bettendorf and
Davenport along the Mississipi River was $21 million, officials
estimated.
   Heavy rains caused the collapse early Sunday of the roof and
part of a wall at the K&amp;M Manufacturing sheet metal plant in
Marshalltown in central Iowa. No one was at the plant at the time,
and there were no injuries.
   Eight inches of rain have doused Iowa over the past week; some
parts of the state got more than 5 inches of rain in a matter of
hours, said forecaster Scott Truett of the National Weather
Service's Des Moines office.
   Weather service flood specialist Ed May said some rivers were
still rising but predicted there wouldn't be much more flooding
beyond farmland.
   ``It's not unusual to have flooding in June. June's a wet
month,'' he said. ``What's unusual is the extent. We've got almost
all of the rivers in two-thirds of the state above flood stage.
That's kind of rare.''
   Michaella Aguiler, 11, was killed when she was swept into a
culvert in the Davenport suburb of LeClaire on the Mississippi
River, authorities said.
   Gov. Terry Branstad declared seven eastern and central counties
disaster areas on Saturday, and sent the National Guard to help
sandbag low-lying areas as rivers and creeks overflowed. Guard
soldiers remained on flood duty on Sunday.
   Heavy rains lashed western Illinois on Saturday. Thirty-two cars
of an 88-car Burlington Northern freight train derailed when a
waterlogged embankment gave way near Morrison, killing the engineer
and injuring three other railway workers, officials said.
   Train workers were trapped in the engine because the locomotive
car they were in came to rest in about 15 feet of water and mud,
said a Whiteside County sheriff's dispatcher who refused to give
her name.
   The engineer was identified as Samuel Jiardina, 61, of La
Crosse, Wis. The injured were treated and released. Damage was
estimated at $2.1 million, including about 600 feet of damaged
track.
   Scattered thunderstorms pounded parts of northern and
west-central Illinois on Sunday night, but no damage or injuries
were reported.
   In southeastern South Dakota, a tornado hit so fast Saturday, it
knocked out power before warning sirens could be activated in most
areas. The twister left a nine-mile-long, three-mile wide trail of
destruction, but no injuries were reported.
   The tornado damaged 30 farms, five of them seriously, said Fire
Chief T.A. Mullinix in Beresford, 35 miles south of Sioux Falls.
One home lost its roof, Mullinix said. The twister also knocked
down power lines and several buildings and barns in Alcester 10
miles east of Beresford.
   Alcester Police Chief Kevin Booker said he got to activate
warning sirens for a few seconds before power was lost.
   Millinix estimated that damage could total at least $1.2 million.
   In northeast Nebraska, cleanup began Sunday in Madison following
a Saturday night tornado that caused widespread damage just hours
after 60 to 80 people had been evacuated from the other side of
town because of flooding, officials said. Accompanying torrential
rains caused widespread flooding throughout the northeast part of
the state.
   Part of the roof of the IBP Inc. meat packing plant in Madison
was torn off by the storm, said a woman who answered the plant's
phone. She wouldn't give her name.
   ``There are trees down everywhere, roofs off of houses all over
town, and gas lines ruptured,'' said Madison police Officer Mike
Bowersox. ``It moved right through the middle of town.''
   There were no reports of deaths or injuries in the community of
2,000 about 100 miles northwest of Omaha.
   Another tornado touched down farther north near O'Neill earlier
Saturday, damaging two farms, in Nebraska's fifth straight day of
severe storms.
   In the southern Minnesota city of Fairmont, heavy rains flooded
streets because sewers were unable to keep up as winds gusted to 60
mph, the weather service said.
   Flooding also hit the basement of Fairmont Community Hospital,
which had to be pumped out by the fire department, said a hospital
supervisor who refused to give her name. The water posed no threat
to patients, she said.
   ``It looked like hurricane winds for a while,'' the supervisor
said. ``It was really bending the trees.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
