ID: 141	RANK: 49	SCORE: 14.475787
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890711-0037 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-11-89 0210EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-Tornadoes 3rdLd-Writethru a0434 07-11 0946</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Tornadoes, 3rd Ld-Writethru, a0434,0972</SECOND>
<HEAD>Tornado Destroys Homes Along East Coast</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: SUBS lead to CORRECT that homes were damaged, not destroyed,
CLARIFY that number of homeless an estimate; SUBS grafs 8-11, `A 35-unit
...,' with 5 to give details; picks up 12th graf, `Hundreds of ...'</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos POU1,2,WOR1</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By ANNE BUCKLEY</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Tornadoes slammed four Northeastern states Monday, killing at
least one person in Connecticut, injuring scores more and ripping up
dozens of homes and businesses. Thousands were left without power
and at least 200 people were believed homeless, officials said.
   Tornadoes wreaked havoc in two upstate New York towns and a Long
Island village, around three central Massachusetts communities and
in northwestern and coastal Connecticut. Twisters, which are unusual
in the Northeast, were also reported in northern New Jersey.
   Intense thunderstorms boomed over New York's Long Island and
Westchester County, producing damaging winds, hail and lightning.
Scattered storms also fell over southeastern New York, southern
Connecticut and northern New Jersey.
   The New York twisters cut a narrow path through the Putnam County
towns of Carmel and Brewster 30 to 40 miles north of New York City.
A separate tornado hit the Long Island village of East Moriches,
said Suffolk County fire communications spokesman Jay Sardone.
   Two people were treated for cuts from shattered glass and two
people were injured in separate auto accidents during the storm,
said Putnam Hospital Center spokeswoman Marjorie Schneider. One of
the car crash victims was admitted to the hospital, but his injuries
were not believed to be life threatening; the others were treated
and released.
   Both the Putnam and Long Island hospitals were operating on
emergency generators.
   About 10,000 Long Island Lighting Co. customers were without
power, the utility reported. ``It's a complete wipeout,'' said
utility spokeswoman Sue Roschak.
   A tornado tore off roofs and walls in a 250-unit condominium
development in Carmel, severely damaging 35 homes and damaging 35
others, said Putnam County spokesman Ken Lott. Red Cross spokesman
Larry Mackler estimated 200 people were left homeless.
   ``You're looking at these condos and the front walls are just
gone,'' said Eric Gross, a reporter for radio station WVIP who lives
in Carmel.
   ``You can look in and see their furniture on the second floor,''
he said. ``People told me they heard this horrible wind, looked
outside their windows, grabbed their kids and ran into the basement.
There are trees, five, six and seven feet in diameter that snapped
like matchsticks. Cars overturned and others were crushed.''
   Gross, who was on the outskirts of Carmel when the tornado hit,
said the storm lasted no more than two minutes.
   The Red Cross set up an emergency shelter at Carmel High School
with 200 cots, but virtually no one had gone to the shelter by early
Tuesday. People either stayed at the development to keep watch on
their property or stayed with friends and relatives, Lott said.
   Hundreds of Putnam County homes were without power and utility
crews were out working on downed power lines, said spokesman Mark
Welte of New York State Electric &amp; Gas, which serves the area.
   The Long Island tornado roared through a private airport,
demolishing a trailer that housed a skydiving school and injuring a
man inside. A small airplane was destroyed and several were damaged.
The man was hospitalized in good condition.
   In central Massachusetts, a series of ``mini-tornadoes'' knocked
out power and telephones, felled trees and damaged homes in the
Princeton, Steling and West Boylston areas.
   Most of the damage, however, was in woods, said Tom Holmes, chief
meteorologist at the National Weather Service's Worcester station.
   No injuries were reported.
   About half of West Boylston, a town of about 6,000 people, was
without electricity or phone service.
   More than 3,000 people in western Massachusetts were also without
power, said John Gustavsen of Northeast Utilities.
   Mini-tornados are small tornados 50 to 100 feet in length that
touch down briefly. Holmes termed the storm a ``super-thunderstorm.''
   In 1953, a tornado in Worcester and surrounding areas killed 90
people.
   In Connecticut, tornadoes were reported in Bantam in the state's
northwest corner and in the New Haven and Hamden areas, where the
mayors declared states of emergency. Heavy rain and golfball-size
hail fell in some areas.
   Waterbury Mayor Joseph Santopietro imposed a 10 p.m. curfew to
keep curious townspeople from hampering the storm cleanup. The city
also opened a shelter at Kennedy High School for those whose homes
were damaged.
   At least five homes in Hamden were destroyed and an industrial
park damaged when a tornado wound through the town around 5:30 p.m.,
police said.
   A 12-year-old girl was killed when a tree fell on the tent she
was in at Black Rock State Park in Watertown in west central
Connecticut, state police said. Three other girls in the tent, part
of a church group from Stratford, were injured and taken to
hospitals in Waterbury.
   Thirty-seven people were treated in New Haven hospitals or minor
injuries, and 27 people were treated at Waterbury Hospital for
mostly minor injuries, although several people suffered broken
bones, officials said.
   More than 112,000 people in northwestern and southern Connecticut
were without power, said spokesmen for Northeast Utilities and
United Illuminating.
   ``Every crew we have is on the road and then some,'' said United
Illuminating spokesman Robert Fort, who estimated it would take 24
hours to restore power to all customers.
   Some the approximately 600 National Guardsmen on duty Monday
night were dispatched to Hamden and Waterbury to help assess the
damage, said Jon Sandberg, a spokesman for Gov. William A. O'Neill.
   In northern New Jersey, twisters left behind downed electrical
wires and fallen trees, but no injuries were reported.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
