ID: 141	RANK: 52	SCORE: 14.437730
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900314-0088 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-03-14-90 1307EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a PM-Tornadoes-Heat 4thLd-Writethru a0579 03-14 1015</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Tornadoes-Heat, 4th Ld - Writethru, a0579,1043</SECOND>
<HEAD>Twisters in Texas, Kansas, Heat Wave Elsewhere: Make Way For
Spring</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Leads with 12 grafs to recast and update with Texas tornadoes
today, Kansas barricades and disaster declarations, picking up at
8th graf previous, ``Wind flattened.''</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos KO8, GR1</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By ARTHUR ALLEN</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   More tornadoes struck today in Texas, a day after swarms of
tornadoes veered across the Plains and smashed farmhouses while the
East had a second day of a winter heat wave.
   Thunderstorms brought flood warnings today to Oklahoma, Texas,
Illinois, Iowa and Wisconsin. Four to 5 feet of water stood in an
Interstate 43 underpass on Milwaukee's north side.
   ``We're on alert,'' said Milwaukee County emergency director Lev
F. Baldwin. ``Let's face it, there could be some worse problems
today. Rivers and creek beds are all swollen. And if we get this
additional rain we could have some more flooding.''
   Snow was the problem today in Wyoming. Ground blizzards stirred
up by wind gusting to 50 mph forced the Wyoming Highway Patrol to
close a 45-mile stretch of Interstate 80 between Cheyenne and
Laramie. Several jackknifed trucks also contributed to the closure.
   At least two tornadoes caused an undetermined amount of damage
today in central Texas, while wind of more than 50 mph blew over
trailers and highway signs and downed power lines across northern
parts of the state.
   No injuries were immediately reported from a twister which hit
the small community of Mitchell, Texas, south of Hillsboro.
Authorities said another tornado flipped over a mobile home,
uprooted trees and toppled power poles near Belton, Texas.
   ``We have fire trucks en route. There is damage _ to what extent
I do not know,'' said Joe Creamer, a Hill County sheriff's
dispatcher.
   On Tuesday, tornadoes touched down in Kansas, Nebraska, Iowa,
Oklahoma and Texas. At least two people were killed, 29 injured and
scores of houses wrecked.
   ``The damage is about twice of what we thought it was last
night,'' Civil Defense worker Leo Zadina said today of tornado
damage in Lawrence, Neb. He estimated more than 50 houses were
damaged in the town of about 350 people.
   One tornado ripped a 100-mile path in a 2{-hour tear through
southeastern Kansas. It lingered in Hesston, Kan., a town of 3,000
people, long enough to damage 75 to 100 houses. A 6-year-old boy
died. A mother and her teen-age son, originally listed as missing,
were found safe.
   Extensive damage prompted authorities to cordon off the town of
4,000, barricading all roads and guarding heavily damaged
residential areas and businesses. A Highway Patrol officer stood
guard outside the Hesston State Bank, which lost its roof, windows
and part of a wall.
   Kansas Gov. Mike Hayden declared eight counties disaster areas
today.
   Wind flattened several farm buildings in southern Wisconsin.
   Dan Roeske, a fence company worker who rode out the storm in a
metal building about 15 miles south of Madison, said: ``It was like
being inside a drum that someone was banging on.''
   Walnut-size hail fell at Groom, Texas. Wind blew over a trailer
and knocked out power to many residents today at Ennis, about 45
miles south of Dallas.
   The funnel-spinning warm front brought balmy weather to much of
the country east of the Rockies.
   ``I always feel confused when I feel good in the unusually warm
weather we're having nowadays, because I know it's related to the
greenhouse effect,'' said Ellen Spiro, a New York video maker.
   The National Weather Service said the heat came from a
high-pressure system pumping Gulf of Mexico air northward.
   A full week before the first day of spring, summer came to New
York City. The high of 85 was 38 degrees above normal and 15
degrees higher than the 1929 record.
   Lenny and Robin Wayne, tourists from Los Angeles, took a few
spins around the Rockefeller Center ice skating rink and left early.
   ``It's too hot to ice skate,'' Wayne said.
   ``It makes you want to fall on the ice,'' his wife said.
   The warmth was expected to last until Thursday, then ``it'll
just get a little cooler,'' said meteorologist Robert McElhearn.
   Michigan hardware stores that were selling rock salt and snow
shovels two weeks ago shifted gears Tuesday, as customers started
buying fertilizer and seeds. ``But they aren't buying fans yet,''
said Mike Manning, a salesman at Pointe Hardware store in Grosse
Pointe Park.
   Record highs for the date were registered in Atlantic City,
N.J., where it was 86; Baltimore 85; Charlotte, N.C., 86; Chicago
71; Cleveland, 76; Concord, N.H., 69; Detroit 73; Indianapolis 75;
Montgomery, Ala., 85; Norfolk, Va., 84; Philadelphia 84;
Providence, R.I., 77; Raleigh-Durham, N.C. 88; Richmond, Va., 89;
Rochester, Minn., 63; and Washington, D.C., 87.
   In Hesston, the 6-year-old who died was one of seven people
huddled in a basement when the chimney and fireplace crashed
through. The boy's 12-year-old brother was injured.
   The same tornado killed an elderly woman near Goessel, Kan., 10
miles from Hesston, and damaged 19 farmhouses in surrounding Marion
County, said Sheriff Ed Davies.
   Twenty-five National Guardsman were called out Tuesday night to
prevent looting in Hesston, said city administrator Jay Wieland.
The guardsmen or replacements may be used in the cleanup today, he
said.
   At a church in the north Texas town of Elbert, officials
monitoring the gubernatorial primary vote took a breather Tuesday
to watch a tornado.
   ``We just stood in the rain ad watched it go by,'' said election
judge Bernard Gilmore. The twister caused no major damage.
   At least nine Iowa counties were visited by twisters, including
one that destroyed a firehouse, 10 homes and three businesses in
Worthington, near Dubuque. Fifty residents were given shelter by
the Red Cross.
   Tornadoes wrecked part of Lawrence, Neb., injuring three people,
and derailed 24 empty Burlington Northern Railroad cars near Grand
Island.
   Authorities declared a disaster area at Sutton, Neb., after a
twister ruptured a tank of dangerous anhydrous ammonia.
   Meanwhile, up to 8 inches of snow fell late Tuesday in the
Nebraska Panhandle. Snow also blanketed parts of Montana, Idaho,
Arizona and Colorado.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
