ID: 141	RANK: 56	SCORE: 14.208844
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900315-0010 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-03-15-90 1405EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a PM-StormsRdp 3rdLd-Writethru a0603 03-15 1062</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Storms Rdp, 3rd Ld - Writethru, a0603,1089</SECOND>
<HEAD>Tornado Hurls Truck Atop Roof; Heat Wilts Cherry Blossom Festival</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: SUBS 3rd graf, `In Florida...', with 4 grafs to UPDATE with
tornado today in Mississippi. Picks up 4th graf pvs, `Near
Columbia...'.</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserColor WI4</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By JOHN DONNELLY</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Tornadoes in the nation's midsection tossed tractor-trailers
around like toys and a record-breaking heat wave wilted plans for
the annual cherry blossom festival in Washington. Heavy rain
threatened flooding in the Midwest.
   On the heels of that heat wave, a snowstorm today closed schools
in Minnesota and surprised western Iowa. Wyoming police closed
sections of Interstates 80 and 25 because of blowing snow, and
North Dakota expected blizzard conditions.
   In Florida, a bishop asked God for rain to relieve the region's
19-month drought. And in Indiana today, a tornado preparedness
drill was called off to avoid confusion with the real storm front
predicted to be heading into the state.
   More severe thunderstorms like those that have brought twisters
to the Plains this week spread over Mississippi today in advance of
a slowly moving cold front and spawned yet another tornado.
   The tornado cut a path of destruction across rural George County
in the southeastern part of the state. Five people, including three
children, were injured when it smashed their mobile home.
   ``It knocked my trailer over, picked it up and dropped it back
again,'' said Rai Smith, 21, in a telephone interview from her
hospital room in Lucedale. ``When it all stopped, the walls became
the floor and the bathroom door was directly above me.''
   Near Columbia, Mo., a tornado damaged five businesses Wednesday
night, blowing tractor-trailers ``like matchsticks,'' said Richard
Head. He said his auto dealership was damaged by an 18-wheeler
dropped onto the roof.
   At least four tractor-trailers were blown about 100 feet across
a road, said Mike Poe, spokesman for the Boone County, Mo., Fire
Protection District.
   A tornado or high wind also damaged several mobile homes in the
area. No injuries were reported. High water kept many roads closed
this morning, but a cleanup was under way, officials said.
   ``I think we were very fortunate,'' Mike Sanford, the county's
director of emergency preparedness said today after an aerial tour.
``These were, comparatively speaking, minor events.''
   ``I was scared. Really scared,'' said Santiago Munoz, whose
trailer was damaged. ``My wife, she said, `God, God, God, God, God
take care of us.'''
   In Fordyce, Ark., about 40 miles southwest of Pine Bluff, five
people were injured by a tornado Wednesday. Bill Setterman, chief
sheriff's deputy, said three homes were destroyed and roofs and
porches were ripped off other homes.
   He said rescuers found one of the injured ``wrapped up like a
pretzel'' in his home.
   Two twisters in central Texas flipped mobile homes, tore off
roofs and toppled utility poles Wednesday.
   In Nebraska and Kansas, volunteers spent Wednesday and today
clearing up debris from dozens of tornadoes that ripped through on
Tuesday. In one town alone, Hesston, Kan., twisters killed two
people and injured 23.
   The 50 National Guard troops sent to help in Hesston were
expected to pull out today. About 1,000 people, including
volunteers from the Mennonite Disaster Service, helped the town
clean up.
   ``We feel as Christians this is one way of sharing God's love
with people who are hurting,'' said Marvin Toews, a farmer who
coordinated activities.
   East of the Mississippi Valley, at least 31 cities reported
record or record-tying high temperatures Wednesday, the third day
of unseasonable warmth.
   The records included 85 at Baltimore, 75 at Detroit, 76 at
Indianapolis and 86 at Washington's National Airport. The high at
Indianapolis erased a record on the books since 1875. Buffalo,
N.Y., registered 78 degrees.
   But the warm spell was definitely over on the northern Plains,
where up to 10 inches of snow was forecast today in eastern North
Dakota, with northerly wind blowing at 25 to 45 mph expected to
create near blizzard conditions.
   Heavy, wet snow mixed with sleet and freezing rain socked
southwestern Minnesota today, forcing the closing of at least 28
schools. Up to 10 inches of snow was possible. And up to 9 inches
had already fallen by midday in western Iowa, where meteorologists
said the storm caught them offr-guard.
   Farther west, the Wyoming Highway Patrol closed sections of I-80
and I-25 and some other highways because snow blown by 25 mph wind
cut visibility nearly to zero.
   Cherry blossoms in the nation's capital will peak today and
Friday because of the unseasonable warmth and will be gone by the
April opening of the annual Cherry Blossom Festival, said National
Park Service spokeswoman Marja Morris.
   ``They'll only last four or five days,'' she said.
   Tulips, though, are about three weeks ahead of schedule and will
flower in time for the cherry blossom festival, she said.
   A cold front was expected to end the record-breaking warm
weather tonight.
   Fruit farmers in New Jersey fear the heat may have fooled their
blueberries, peaches and nectarines into budding before freezing
temperatures end.
   ``The weather is making the peaches say, `Ooh, isn't it nice,''
said Genie DeCou, who runs a 500-acre peach, nectarine and apple
farm in Shiloh.
   Thunderstorms in the Midwest dumped heavy rain, which was
compounded in Wisconsin by a dam burst on a pond leading to the
Trempealeau River. But Arcadia, Wis., Police Chief Patrick
Grzadzielewski said the river was receding.
   ``Everything we've been doing up to this point has been
preparing for the worst and, hopefully, that will not happen now,''
he said.
   In Vernon County in west-central Missouri, 8-year-old Travis
Koehn of Walker was found dead Wednesday after falling into a
swollen stream.
   In St. Petersburg, Fla., Roman Catholic Bishop John Favalora is
praying for rain. ``I am confident that the Lord will hear our
prayers,'' he said in a message broadcast every hour on the local
Catholic radio station.
   The Indiana tornado drills had been scheduled for early
afternoon and evening today. Warning sirens were to sound and
schools and other public facilities were to conduct drills. But the
same front that spawned the torndoes in the Plains was heading
eastward, officials said.
   Steve Haines, a meteorologist with the National Weather Service
in Indianapolis, said the drill was postponed until Friday to
alleviate any confusion. ``They'll think it's the real thing,''
Haines said. ``We don't want to confuse the two.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
