ID: 141	RANK: 77	SCORE: 13.639235
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890221-0226 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-02-21-89 2324EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-StormsRdp 1stLd-Writethru a0744 02-21 0905</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Storms Rdp, 1st Ld - Writethru, a0744,0921</SECOND>
<HEAD>Tornadoes, Storms, Move Through Dixie</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: Leads with 14 grafs to UPDATE with construction worker killed
in North Carolina, quote from school secretary, Florida temperatures in
80s but cold snap forecast, pump lowered in Kentucky. Picks up 11th graf
pvs, `The Ohio's...'. SUBS second-to-last graf, `In South...' with two
grafs to UPDATE with possible tornado in South Carolina.</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos LX4, LX5, VIC1, FLO1</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Storms and tornadoes besieged the South on Tuesday, ripping a
roof off an elementary school in North Carolina, causing sewers to
back up in Alabama and dumping still more rain on flood-weary
Kentucky and Tennessee.
   A mass of warm and humid air spawned the severe storms and
twisters in a wide band from the Gulf Coast states to New England,
with Georgia, Alabama, Tennessee, Kentucky and the Carolinas the
hardest hit.
   In North Carolina, a house under construction near Lillington
collapsed in the high winds, killing one worker and injuring three
others, authorities said.
   Wind tore off a quarter of the roof at a one-story elementary
school in Morven, N.C., while classes were in session, said
sheriff's dispatcher Elaine Lear in Wadesboro. No one was injured,
and pupils were sent home.
   ``We had just had our tornado drill last week so that children
knew exactly what to do,'' said school secretary Gloria Truman.
``They were out of the classroom and in the hallway in about 15
seconds. They were perfect. You could not ask for them to be any
better.''
   Also in south-central North Carolina, the wind flipped over
several small planes at Anson County Airport. Four people received
minor injuries when the wind tossed around trailer homes near Eagle
Springs and Zion's Grove, said a dispatcher.
   Up to 3,500 customers were without electricity in the Rockingham
and Wadesboro areas, Carolina Power and Light spokesman Kyle Hampton
said.
   Temperatures reached the high 80s in some Florida cities Tuesday,
but a cold snap was expected to push readings into the teens by
Wednesday. The forecast forced the National Weather Service to
cancel its annual statewide tornado drill planned for Wednesday
because severe weather was on the way.
   ``You don't want a test going on when you have the real thing,''
said forecaster Ray Biedinger.
   Kentucky and Tennessee, which logged up to 11 inches of rain last
week, received more rain Monday and Tuesday, sending rivers rising
again. Temperatures were expected to dip below freezing overnight.
   The storm system dumped more than 3 additional inches of water on
parts of southern Kentucky before rains began to subside Tuesday
afternoon.
   South of Louisville, crews lowered a second pump by helicopter to
the Lebanon Junction levee after the Rolling Fork of the Salt River
overflowed its banks. Officials said the pump being used to remove
flood water from inside the levee couldn't keep up with the latest
rainfall.
   Police said the rain has contributed to the death of at least two
people in Kentucky _ a 19-year-old woman killed when her car hit a
truck on a rain-slick highway and a man whose van was swept away by
flood waters Thursday. Officials were still searching Tuesday for a
second man who had been in the van.
   In western Kentucky, the Green River crest is being delayed by
flooding on the Ohio River, which was expected to crest at Owensboro
at 44 feet, 4 feet above flood stage.
   The Ohio's high level has backed up operations at the Owensboro
Riverport Authority. Grain can't be loaded onto barges again until
water levels fall enough for the barges to move under a fixed
loading spout, said port director Janet Douglas. She didn't expect
normal operations to resume until later in the week.
   The neaby Owensboro Grain Co. can load barges because its dock is
on higher ground, said traffic manager Ron Edge, but the high water
levels have prevented unloading incoming soybean shipments.
   Heavy rains blocked sections of at least 170 roads in 56 of
Kentucky's 120 counties on Tuesday, said Don Armstrong, a spokesman
for the state Division of Disaster and Emergency Services. He said
as many as 2,000 Kentuckians have evacuated their homes since last
week. The exact number was unknown because many people left on their
own.
   Storms brought 2 more inches of rain to parts of Tennessee,
flooding a few roads, but no evacuations were ordered, authorities
said.
   In southeastern Alabama, a tornado cut a path about a mile long
near Wicksburg early Tuesday, damaging several roofs and bringing
down trees and power lines, said Bobby Clemmons, director of
emegency management services in Houston County. School in the mostly
rural county was called off.
   The heavy rain flooded streets and homes in Florence, Ala., in
the northwest corner, causing the sewer system to overflow, but only
one family was evacuated, said George Mangum, director of Lauderdale
County Emergency Management.
   In South Carolina, high wind swept through Lexington and
Chesterfield counties, overturning mobile homes and uprooting trees,
authorities said.
   The storms may have spawned a tornado that a Chesterfield County
deputy saw touch down near Jefferson, said Everette Campbell, the
jail administrator for the sheriff's department. Several trailers
and turkey barns were damaged but no injuries were reported, he said.
   About 500 utility customers in southwest Georgia were without
power Tuesday morning, but service was restored to all but a few
isolated areas by midday, said Teresa Callaway of Pataula Electric
Membership Corp.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
