ID: 141	RANK: 78	SCORE: 13.587381
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880510-0024 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-05-10-88 0040EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-StormsRdp 1stLd-Writethru a0745 05-10 0750</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Storms Rdp, 1st Ld - Writethru, a0745,0767</SECOND>
<HEAD>High Wind Damages Kentucky Town, Leaves One Dead; Hail Storms in
Midwest</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: LEADS with 16 grafs to UPDATE with storm damage in Kentuck,
one dead, Ohio weather, picking up 8th graf ``Quarter-sized...''</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Powerful winds ripped through the center of a Kentucky town
Monday, causing widespread damage and killing one person, while
hail storms battered homes and cars in a four-state area southeast
of Lake Michigan.
   A day earlier, as many as 82 tornadoes swept through the Midwest.
   In Middlesboro, Ky., wind gusts blew roofs of downtown
buildings, shattered windows and leveled the top floor of a
furniture building, officials said.
   ``It's not just a few shingles, it's entire roofs,'' said Lt.
Woody White of the Middlesboro Fire Department. ``The buildings we
can see (from fire department building), the roofs are gone.''
   One person was killed and there were numerous injuries, said
Sgt. Jimmy England of the Middlesboro Police Department.
   `Oh Lord. When I was on the floor, I just saw my life, I just
thought I was gone,'' said Lemodee Gilbert, 20, who is six weeks
pregnant. ``Well I've got a bunch of cuts and bruises, but you
know, thank God I'm alive. I just thank God I didn't lose it.''
   Mayor Troy Welch declared an emergency and was trying to reach
the governor's office to ask for help from the National Guard.
   Weather officials said they could not immediately determine if a
tornado had struck. The city of 11,000 is in southeast Kentucky,
bordering on Tennessee and Virginia.
   A low-pressure system over the upper Mississippi Valley and
north of the Great Lakes produced the tornadoes and threatened to
stir up more twisters or thunderstorms Monday in southeast lower
Michigan, Ohio, southeast Indiana and north-central Kentucky,
forecasters said.
   ``It was unusual to have so many reports of tornadoes in one day
as occurred yesterday,'' Lyle Alexander, a meteorologist at the
National Weather Service in Kansas City, Mo., said Monday.
   The weather service received 82 reports of tornadoes Sunday in
Illinois, Wisconsin, Iowa, Indiana and Arkansas, but some may be
downgraded after further investigation, he said.
   Few injuries were reported, but an Indiana man was killed Sunday
when high winds collapsed a building under construction, Lake
County Coroner Daniel Thomas said. At the outset of the violent
weather Saturday, a 29-year-old woman and her 2-year-old daughter
died after a tornado struck a mobile home in Gretna, Neb.
   Wind clocked at 81 mph broke up a car show Sunday near Rockford,
Ill., by tossing tents, debris, and portable toilets.
   ``One outhouse flew right past me and then I got hit by another
one as I was running away,'' said Dwight Dunlop, 21.
   Thunderstorms packing winds of up to 70 mph rolled across Ohio
on Monday, dropping hail, knocking down trees and power lines, and
blowing over airplanes at the Burke Lakefront Airport in Cleveland.
   There were reports of tornadoes in western Cuyahoga County in
northeast Ohio and in Butler County in southwest Ohio, but the
National Weather Service said they could not be confirmed.
   Quarter-sized hail fell Monday in east-central Indiana, and hail
and heavy rain halted traffic on Interstate 70 near Greensburg,
authorities said. The weather service warned residents in part of
Rush County to seek shelter in reinforced buildings because of hail
driven by 40 mph winds.
   High winds knocked down trees Monday afternoon near Alpena in
northeast Michigan. Pea- and marble-sized hail was reported across
much of the state's Lower Peninsula.
   About 2,300 homes and businesses in the Grand Rapids area and an
additional 2,000 in the Lansing area were left without electrical
service Monday from storms that first reached the state late
Sunday, Consumers Power Co. spokesman Paul Knopick said.
   At least 160 reports of thunderstorms with wind gusts over 50
mph, some with baseball-sized hail, occurred Sunday from Texas to
Minnesota.
   Several thousand homes lost electricity for several hours Sunday
in Iowa, and in the Chicago area, winds gusting up to 55 mph
blacked out 40,000 customers, utilities reported.
   An air traffic controller at Chicago's Midway Airport complained
of a duststorm as strong winds swept through the city. Midway and
O'Hare airport officials said some flights were delayed.
   In north-central Wisconsin, two people were hospitalized with
injuries Sunday after high winds with rain and hail struck their
mobile homes in Marathon County. A woman was injured Sunday night
when a mobile home was blown over in Wabash County, in northern
Indiana, police said.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
