ID: 141	RANK: 83	SCORE: 13.361753
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890711-0084 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-11-89 1108EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a PM-StormsRdp 1stLd-Writethru a0486 07-11 0987</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Storms Rdp, 1st Ld - Writethru, a0486,1011</SECOND>
<HEAD>Tornadoes, Storms Kill 2, Spread Damage in 4 States; Midwest Sizzles</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: LEADS with 24 grafs to UPDATE with morning clean-up efforts,
authorities searching for possible victims, name of dead girl, lightning
injury; Long Island power outages; Picks up 21st graf, `In Massachussets...'</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto NY7, NY8</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By JOHN DONNELLY</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Thunderstorms unleashed rare tornadoes that smashed through the
Northeast, hurling a trailer through the air, flinging a small plane
off a runway and ripping roofs off dozens of homes. At least two
people were killed, dozens injured and hundreds left homeless.
   National Guardsmen and police dogs searched through tangles of
flattened homes and toppled trees today for victims in Connecticut,
although there were no residents reported missing.
   A heat wave, meanwhile, scorched the Midwest and at least three
cities opened ``cooling centers'' to give residents an escape from
temperatures that hovered around 100 degrees Monday. No relief was
in sight, and officials in Illinois worried about drought. Heat was
a factor in one death in St. Louis.
   In the Northeast, tornadoes struck from northern New Jersey to
central Massachusetts. Hardest hit were coastal Connecticut and two
southeastern New York towns and a Long Island village. Thousands
were left without electricity.
   Scattered thunderstorms boomed over southeastern New York,
southern Connecticut and northern New Jersey. In a half-hour, 4.4
inches of rain poured in Oxford, Conn. Golfball-sized hail was
reported in several spots.
   ``This is the worst storm I've seen in 20 years of forecasting,''
said Mel Goldstein, director of the Weather Center at Western
Connecticut State University in Danbury. ``It's a major disaster for
that region.''
   As a precautionary measure, state police with trained dogs
searched for people who might have been trapped in the rubble.
Utility workers raced to cut off live wires and gas leaks while
scores of state police tried to seal off dangerous areas.
   Twelve-year-old Jennifer Bike was killed when a tree fell on her
tent at Black Rock State Park in Watertown Monday night and three
other girls inside were injured, police said. Two of the girls
remained in Waterbury Hospital early today in stable condition.
   A man died in New York City when he stepped into a puddle that
was electrified by exposed wires at an excavation site.
   Elizabeth Ferri, 40, of New Fairfield, Conn., was struck in the
head by lightning while walking her dog in the front yard. She was
knocked unconscious, but was was sent home from the hospital after
treatment.
   Hospitals in Waterbury and New Haven alone treated about 75
people, most of them for cuts and bruises. A 4-year-old New Haven
boy who fell from a second-floor window was in critical condition
with head injuries.
   In Waterbury, Conn., the storm tore off roofs, uprooted trees on
the city green, and bent the tip of a flagpole. Streets were
littered with glass.
   Mayor Joseph Santopietro imposed a 10 p.m. curfew.
   John Calamo, deputy director of civil preparedness in Hamden,
said 40 to 60 homes suffered heavy damage but no major injuries were
reported. The storm also did major damage to an industrial park, a
16-unit townhouse condominium and an auto body shop and the 25 cars
inside.
   ``There's probably three-quarters of a square mile of
devastation,'' he said.
   Brian Johnson, a tenant at the condominium, said the tornado
demolished his kitchen and sent kitchen knives flying into his
living room. ``My neighbor found her refrigerator in her living
room,'' he said.
   More than 112,000 people in northwestern and southern Connecticut
were without power, said spokesmen for Northeast Utilities and
United Illuminating.
   Fifty miles north of New York City, a tornado overturned cars and
damaged homes in Carmel and Southeast township. Officials declared a
state of emergency for all of Putnam County.
   At a condominium complex in Carmel, 70 units were damaged, half
of them severely, said the county's public information officer, Ken
Lott. Dozens were left homeless.
   ``You're looking at these condos and the front walls are just
gone,'' said Eric Gross of Carmel, a radio station reporter for WVIP
in Mount Kisco. ``You can look in and see their furniture on the
second floor.'' No serious injuries were reported.
   On Long Island, a tornado roared through Spadaro Airport in East
Moriches, hurling a trailer into the air and dropping it in pieces
across the airfield, witnesses said.
   A man inside the trailer, which served as a skydiving school, was
blown out and treated for cuts at a hospital.
   The wind picked a small plane off the runway and dumped it upside
down away into woods 100 feet away. Several other planes also were
damaged.
   In Suffolk and Nassau counties, the tornado and a second storm
knocked out power to 57,000 Long Island Lighting Co., but the lights
were back on in all but 5,000 homes by 5 a.m., said utility
spokeswoman Sue Roschak.
   In Massachusetts, a series of ``mini-tornadoes'' _ small twisters
50 to 100 feet in length _ knocked out power and telephones, felled
trees and damaged homes in the Princeton, Steling and West Boylston
areas.
   Most of the damage was in woods, said the National Weather
Service.
   In New Jersey, twisters left behind downed electrical wires and
fallen trees, but no injuries were reported. One tornado was spotted
near the George Washington Bridge over the Hudson River.
   The Midwest's heat spurred officials to open cooling centers, or
large air-conditioned rooms, in Chicago, St. Louis and Cincinnati.
   High temperatures Monday included 101 degrees in Chicago; 100 in
Moline and Rockford, Ill.; 98 degrees in St. Louis; and 97 degrees
in Peoria, Ill.
   Weather officials at the Quad City Airport in Moline said Monday
was the 28th consecutive day without measurable rain _ tying a
record for rainless stretches during a growing season that was set
in July and August of 1947.
   Lake Michigan was popular: more than 240,000 people sought relief
at Chicago beaches Monday.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
