ID: 141	RANK: 93	SCORE: 12.986500
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP881128-0099 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-11-28-88 1147EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a PM-StormsRdp 5thLd-Writethru a0538 11-28 0836</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Storms Rdp, 5th Ld - Writethru, a0538,0852</SECOND>
<HEAD>Tornadoes Kill Five in N.C.; Minnesota Snowstorm Strands Travelers</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Subs the 10th graf to CORRECT that I-90 reopened today, not
Sunday.</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By STEPHANIE NANO</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Killer tornadoes swept through North Carolina today, destroying
churches and homes and killing five people, and a blizzard in
Minnesota halted thousands of holiday travelers, stranding many of
them in small towns overnight.
   The tornadoes left at least 143 people injured, officials said.
Raleigh City Manager Dempsey Benton Jr. said nine houses were
destroyed and 44 damaged.
   Gov. Jim Martin said 15 tornado touchdowns were reported in seven
counties. The last tornado strikes were near Bayboro in Pamlico
County and near Manteo in Dare County, both on the Atlantic Coast.
   ``It was like a train, like you hear people say. It was like a
jet coming down too low,'' said Lisa Lanier, who lives at a Raleigh
apartment complex struck by a tornado.
   Later in the morning, the storms moved into eastern Virginia,
pushing over trees and bringing heavy wind and rain, and a tornado
near Windsor cut power to much of the area, the National Weather
Service said.
   In the southern Minnesota town of Jackson, with a population of
4,000, at least 2,000 motorists stranded by snowstorms spent part of
the night in a National Guard Armory, a school, four churches and
many private homes, said Police Chief Richard Seim.
   At Rothsay, Minn., a 50th wedding anniversary celebration at
Hamar Lutheran Church was canceled because of the weather and the
family donated the food to 250 stranded motorists, said Pastor Paul
Magelssen.
   At least 500 people waited out the storm at the Jackson Best
Western motel in the lobby, coffee shop, dining room and lounge,
said manager Darrell Gilbert.
   Snow blasted by wind gusting to 70 mph cut visibility to 100 feet
at times Sunday in Morris, where the University of Minnesota-Morris
was closed today.
   The Minnesota State Patrol closed 80 miles of Interstate 90 from
the South Dakota border to Fairmont in southwestern Minnesota during
Sunday afternoon because of whiteout conditions and a 20-mile
section of eastbound I-94 from Fergus Falls to Rothsay in western
Minnesota following multicar pileups. The patrol reopened I-94
Sunday evening but I-90 remained closed until early today.
   On the blocked section of I-94, it was ``one big accident with
more than 100 cars involved,'' said patrol Lt. Wes Geve. No injuries
were reported.
   Most people resumed travel late Sunday night and early today
after the wind dropped to 10 mph, said dispatcher Denny Vollan at
the state highway office in Windom.
   The 1,000 people sheltered at the armory in Jackson left in
groups during the night as conditions improved, and the last two
cars left before 8 a.m., said Staff Sgt. Jeff Gay. Most of the 500
to 600 people stranded at the high school in Sherburn left late
Sunday, head cook Dorothy Miller said today.
   The snowstorm that began Saturday in Minnesota dumped up to 16
inches of snow at Aitkin. An accident Saturday that killed an
Illinois man was blamed on ice and poor visibility.
   There were snowdrifts 5 feet high in Rothsay, residents said.
Blizzard conditions and near-blizzard conditions were present in
some southwestern and central Minnesota communities, Harrison said.
   Temperatures dipped into the teens and winds gusted to 35 mph
over much of the state, lowering wind-chill readings to minus 30 in
some areas, he said.
   Patti O'Leary, of suburban Minneapolis, was traveling home with
her daughter after visiting her parents for Thanksgiving in Fargo,
N.D., and ended up at the church in Rothsay.
   ``There was a semi in the ditch on my right, a semi in the ditch
on my left and that was enough for me,'' O'Leary said. ``I went to
the gas station and they said the church was open so I thought that
is where I'm going and that is where I'm staying until it's clear to
go.''
   Elsewhere, a snowstorm in Utah that began Friday night dropped up
to 50 inches at the Alta Ski Resort east of Salt Lake City. The
storm caused numerous traffic accidents, including a collision that
killed a 21-year-old Brigham City man.
   In California, dense fog at Fresno's airport forced a Delta Air
Lines jetliner with 137 people aboard to be diverted for refueling
at Edwards Air Force Base, about 60 miles north of Los Angeles.
   In Florida, a small plane flying into stormy weather with
apparent engine trouble broke apart as it crashed Sunday into a
swamp in the Panhandle, killing all four aboard, officials and
witnesses said.
   In Texas, a man was killed Saturday and another injured when
their single-engine airplane plunged into a house in fog in Port
Lavaca, authorities said. Two people in the house were not injured.
   In the small northern Mississippi town of Ruleville, Gov. Ray
Mabus declared a state of emergency Sunday, a day after a tornado
destroyed four homes and damaged at least 38 others as well as three
schools.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
