ID: 141	RANK: 94	SCORE: 12.955939
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900210-0142 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-02-10-90 2141EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-StormsRdp 3rdLd-Writethru a0623 02-10 0965</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Storms Rdp, 3rd Ld - Writethru, a0623,0985</SECOND>
<HEAD>Four Dead as Storms Rake Georgia, Carolinas</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Leads with 13 grafs to UPDATE with California traffic
accidents attributed to fog, and with additional power outages.
Picks up 13th graf pvs: `At least ... .' ADDS 2 grafs with
conditions elsewhere in nation. No pick up. This STANDS for
AM-Weatherpage Weather.</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto TUS1,2</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Severe thunderstorms slashed through parts of the Southeast with
tornadoes and high winds overnight and early Saturday, killing four
people, injuring dozens, knocking out power to thousands and
damaging buildings and automobiles.
   In the Atlanta area, two people died Saturday morning when trees
fell into their bedrooms, and a woman in north-central Louisiana
was killed Friday night when a wind gust flung her mobile home 30
feet, authorities said.
   ``We had a band of severe storms that developed over northeast
Texas and spread eastward during the afternoon,'' said Ernest
Ethridge of the National Weather Service. ``We've had rainfall
across the area of 4 to 14 inches.''
   Meanwhile, dense fog may have contributed to two serious
automobile accidents, including a head-on collision near Palo Alto,
Calif., leaving left four people injured, three severely, the
California Highway Patrol said.
   The thunderstorm line, moving east overnight, brought reports of
tornado touchdowns in Louisiana, Georgia, Florida and the
Carolinas, and high winds at one point knocked out power to 112,000
utility customers in Alabama and 300,000 in Georgia.
   Ethridge said winds up to 50 mph knocked down trees, and pea- to
golfball-size hail knocked out windows in buildings and cars in
northern Louisiana.
   In Calhoun, La., Shirley Robinson, 47, died and her 5-year-old
grandson Darrell Robinson suffered minor injuries Friday night when
the gust flipped her trailer home almost 30 feet, Ouachita Parish
sheriff's deputies said.
   The storm knocked out power to about 10,000 Louisiana Power &amp;
Light Co. customers, and the blackout continued into Saturday
morning for about 2,100 in Sterlington, said LP&amp;L district manager
Bill Turnbough.
   Georgia authorities said Elizabeth Stevens, 72, of Norcross died
when a 3-foot-thick pine tree fell into her bedroom, and Mantrell
Crowley, a 10-year-old boy was killed by a tree that fell on his
bedroom in southwest Atlanta.
   In Henry County, south of Atlanta, Thomas A. Henderson, 69, was
killed shortly after 6 a.m. when he was crushed by a tree as he
stood near his mailbox, according to county Coroner Ronnie Stewart.
   By midafternoon, repair crews had restored power to 200,000
customers in metropolitan Atlanta, but isolated areas could be
blacked out until Sunday, said Georgia Power Co. spokesman Trip
Cagle.
   Alabama Power Co. estimated 112,000 homes and business without
electricity in the southern two-thirds of the state, and called in
repair crews from Mississippi and Florida, said company spokesman
Mike Casey.
   The worst outages were in Montgomery, where 27,500 were out, and
in the Birmingham area, where 25,000 were in the dark. The company
reported 16,000 customers without power in the Anniston, Talladega
and Sylacauga area, plus 3,250 in the Phenix City area.
   At least 24 people were injured, two of them seriously, in
Alabama's Talladega County, and Sheriff Jerry Studdard said at
least 15 mobile homes were demolished. National Guard troops
cleared fallen trees that closed U.S. 280.
   The storms brought gusts of more than 80 mph in Atlanta and
Macon, with tornadoes damaging structures in Columbus, Americus and
other parts of northeastern Georgia.
   Columbus police Maj. Ross McCain said tornadoes touched down in
the central and east portions of that city, inflicting substantial
damage to buildings, but no injuries were reported.
   In Americus, authorities said a tornado touched down about 6:30
a.m., ripping the roof off a convenience store and flinging it 150
yards to land atop a house, where a man sleeping inside was injured
slightly.
   ``I was getting up to go to work when the rain started and I
looked out the window and saw the tornado,'' said Thomas Griffin, a
resident. ``Then I saw the store when it started falling apart.''
   In Douglas County, west of Atlanta, a wind storm slammed into a
trailer park north of Interstate 20, overturning at least two
mobile homes and triggering three fires, said Assistant Fire Chief
Stewart Haas.
   Guy West, chief deputy sheriff in Upson County in west central
Georgia, said emergency workers rescued a woman and child who were
trapped in their mobile home after it was overturned by high wind
about 6 a.m.
   In Gwinnett County, two large stores sustained serious damage
but police were reporting no injuries.
   The storm line advanced into the Carolinas, bringing tornadoes
and slashing winds early Saturday to western North Carolina and
northwestern South Carolina, where two people received minor
injuries.
   At least one tornado touched down in western North Carolina's
Cleveland County, said sheriff's deputy Mike Branch.
   ``Several mobile homes were destroyed, also some houses with
carports blown off and lots of trees were blown down onto the
houses. There's also a lot of barns and outhouses that were
destroyed,'' Branch said.
   A twister also touched down Saturday in the Florida Panhandle
city of Milton, damaging 50 to 60 homes, but causing no injuries,
officials said.
   Mississippi authorities said winds gusting up to 60 mph late
Friday and early Saturday blew out windows and ripped off roofs in
central and southeast parts of the state, but there were no
injuries reported.
   Rainshowers which pelted the Northeast earlier Saturday moved
out to sea by nightfall, while snow in northern Maine diminished to
flurries.
   Heavy rain in the northern Pacific Coast region also began to to
dissipate, as winds gusted in parts of the Northwest. A high wind
warning was in effect for some of the higher elevations of
southeastern Wyoming Saturday night, and through Sunday for along
the front range of the Rockies in Montana.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
