ID: 141	RANK: 95	SCORE: 12.917431
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890712-0113 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-12-89 1142EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a PM-StormsRdp 1stLd-Writethru a0482 07-12 0820</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Storms Rdp, 1st Ld - Writethru, a0482,0841</SECOND>
<HEAD>Northeast Cleans up From Tornadoes; Twisters in Midwest</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: Leads with 2 grafs to recast, picking up at the 3rd graf previous;
Inserts 2 grafs after the 7th, ``Gusts of ...' to update with Plains rain;
and Subs 19th graf, ``More than ...' to update with utilities' new estimates
on outages.</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By JOHN DONNELLY</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Dozens of stunned homeowners were homeles after rare tornadoes in
the Northeast destroyed their property, and hundreds cut up fallen
trees and installed new windows. Thousands of homes remained without
power today
   Monday's violent storms cut a swath of destruction from northern
New Jersey to central Massachusetts. The tornadoes were blamed for
the death of a 12-year-old girl in Connecticut who was camping when
a tree fell on her tent, and for injuries suffered by hundreds.
   At least 50 homes and 40 businesses were demolished in one
Connecticut community, while 24 condominium apartments in a New York
town were shattered.
   A heat wave in the Midwest, meanwhile, brought temperatures in
the 90s for the second day Tuesday, but a ``cooling center'' was
largely ignored in St. Louis, where a second heat-related death was
reported this week.
   Thunderstorms chased the heat in northern Illinois, but lightning
struck three people, injuring two critically. The storms also
spawned tornadoes near Kankakee, Ill., and at Indianapolis and
Fairland, Ind., where twisters damaged an apartment complex, the
National Weather Service said. No injuries were reported.
   A storm also closed Chicago's O'Hare International Airport for 40
minutes Tuesday afternoon. Flight operations were back to normal
Tuesday night.
   Gusts of 75 mph blew a DC-3 airplane into a hanger at Fort Wayne,
Ind., the weather service said.
   Today, water stood up to 3 feet deep in sections of Kansas after
heavy rain fell during the night, the weather service said. Parts of
eastern Kansas got over 3 inches of rain, and 6 inches fell at
McFarland, and Emporia had water standing 3 feet deep on low-lying
sections of some roads, it said.
   Locally heavy rain also fell on sections of southern Nebraska and
southern Iowa, with 3.15 inches in two hours at Ottumwa, Iowa.
   In the Northeast, the weather service was waiting to investigate
the destruction before confirming that tornadoes hit the region, but
Fort Lee, N.J., police Capt. Thomas Pierson had no doubts.
   ``When something like that comes through, I call it a tornado,
even without Dorothy and Toto,'' he said. Damage to 18 New Jersey
communities was estimated at $2 million.
   In Connecticut, the damage was far worse _ estimated in the tens
of millions of dollars.
   Gov. William A. O'Neill viewed the destruction by helicopter and
car. He declared a state of emergency Tuesday and asked President
Bush for federal assistance.
   Hamden, Conn., was hardest-hit.
   Earthmovers roared into the city to clear a path through fallen
trees and utility poles in a 30-square-block area. The governor's
motorcade weaved through the streets to avoid the debris.
   ``It looks like a war zone,'' said Sen. Christopher J. Dodd,
D-Conn., who toured the area with O'Neill. ``It looks like a street
in London during the blitz.''
   Police using dogs to sniff through demolished buildings in
Hamden, which is about 30 miles south of Hartford, found seven
people trapped in three collapsed buildings, said Public Safety
Commissioner Lester J. Forst. He said they were taken from the
buildings unhurt. State health officials said about 250 people
suffered minor injuries.
   ``It becomes more and more of a miracle that more people weren't
injured or even killed,'' O'Neill said.
   Mayor John Carusone estimated damage at $50 million.
   He said at least 50 homes and at least 40 businesses were
demolished or so heavily damaged they must be torn down.
   More than 36,000 utility customers in the state remained without
power today. Northeast Utilities said all but about 5,000 customers
would have power by midnight tonight, and United Illuminating said
service would be restored to most customers today.
   In Waterbury and Hamden, some looting was reported. State
troopers and National Guardsmen patrolled Hamden's streets.
   Damage in Bantam, a section of the town of Litchfield, covered a
square mile, officials said. Among the buildings destroyed were an
historic church, the post office, the only service station and the
borough meeting house.
   In New York, Putnam County Executive Peter Alexanderson declared
a state of emergency for the county. He estimated damage at $20
million.
   At one condominium complex in Carmel, about 50 miles north of New
York City, officials determined that 24 apartments would have to be
torn down and 36 repaired.
   When it started to rain Monday night, Ellen Wheat called in her
cats.
   ``I tried to shut the door; I couldn't do it,'' she said. ``I
heard noises and I looked where the staircase was. The roof was
gone.''
   The cats were still missing Tuesday, and her second-floor
bedrooms have no roof or front wall.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
