ID: 255	RANK: 9	SCORE: 17.358595
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890111-0032 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-01-11-89 0317EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r i PM-Burma-Students 1stLd-Writethru   01-11 0673</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Burma-Students, 1st Ld-Writethru,a0406,0689</SECOND>
<HEAD>Amnesty: Burmese Students May Have Been Forcibly Repatriated</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: LEADS throughout with details, quotes. No pickup.</HEAD>
<DATELINE>BANGKOK, Thailand (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Thailand has forcibly repatriated
Burmese students to their homeland, subjecting them to possible
detention and harsh treatment by Burma's military government,
Amnesty International says.
   The London-based human rights organization said Tuesday that
Thailand on Jan. 6 forcibly returned 22 students who had fled
neighboring Burma after a bloody military coup Sept. 18.
   In a statement telexed to news agencies in Bangkok today, Amnesty
said it feared the 22 and other students previously repatriated by
Thailand may have been detained and abused by security personnel in
Burma.
   Thai authorities have denied forcing any students back and the
Burmese government claims they are treated well on their return.
   Amnesty International said its concern was based ``on increasing
evidence that many political prisoners arrested for having been
actively involved in the March-September uprising have been held
incommunicado without charge or trial since their arrest and that
some of them have been subjected to torture or other forms of severe
treatment.''
   Its concern was also based ``on information that Thant Zin, who
was repatriated last Dec. 26 with some 80 other students, is said to
have been arrested after arriving in his home town of Mergui in
Burma's southern Tenasserim Division. He has apparently been held
incommunicado since his arrest and his current whereabouts are
unknown.''
   The statement said the group of 22 students who were forcibly
repatriated included Sai Myon Wyn Tun and Kyai Moe, both age 23, who
had taken leading roles in the August and September demonstrations
for democracy in their hometown of Taunggyi in Shan State.
   It said the 22 were part of a group of 36 students of the Shan
ethnic minority whom Thai police rounded up two weeks ago in Mae
Hong Son province bordering Burma.
   The statement said: ``They are said to have repeatedly expressed
fears for their safety and to have petitioned the Thai authorities
not to be returned to Burma and eventually went on a hunger strike.
They are understood to have been forced to board a plane from Tak
airport on Jan. 6, 1989, by Thai army personnel. They 14 remaining
students are believed to be still held in Tak airport, pending
similar repatriation.''
   Thousands of students, who had been at the forefront of the
campaign for democracy, fled to Thai border areas controlled by
ethnic-based insurgents after military commander Gen. Saw Maung's
troops seized power and killed hundreds of unarmed demonstrators.
   Thailand initially promised the students temporary asylum.
   But that changed after Thai army chief Gen. Chavalit Yongchaiyudh
visited Burma on Dec. 14, becoming the first foreign dignitary to
visit since the coup.
   He and Saw Maung reached an agreement to repatriate the students,
and two processing centers were established, in northern Tak
province and another north of Bangkok.
   Amnesty International said that under the present policy,
students who did not return home faced two other choices: return to
the malarial jungles to fight alongside the insurgents or be tried
as illegal immigrants in Thailand.
   The Thai Cabinet on Tuesday extended to March 31 a deadline for
the students to return home. Chavalit has proposed to the Cabinet
that those who fail to report themselves for repatriation by then be
sent back after being charged with illegal entry, the Thai newspaper
The Nation said today.
   The U.S. State Department said on Jan. 5 that it was looking into
``credible reports'' that some students had been arrested on their
return and died in custody.
   The next day, Burmese government spokesman Kyaw Sann responded:
``Rumors about arrests and deaths of students in government custody
... are absolutely unfounded and malicious.''
   Two U.S. senators, Richard Lugar, R-Ind., and Thad Cochran,
R-Miss., discussed the issue with Chavalit in a meeting Tuesday in
Bangkok.
   The Nation said today that the senators were told by the general
the students were being offered the chance to return ``to continue
their studies and to build democracy by peaceful means.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
