ID: 231	RANK: 13	SCORE: 14.534580
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910322-0011
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910322-0011.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- In Concert:
   Celebrating Haydn
   ----
   By Heidi Waleson
</HL>
<DATE>
03/22/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A7
</SO>
<LP>
   New York -- If the pianist Andras Schiff were running
things, we wouldn't be carrying on about Mozart's
bicentennial. "Mozart doesn't need a year," says Mr. Schiff.
His candidate for celebration is Haydn, whom he believes is
the victim of "huge misconceptions."
   "It's Mozart's fault," Mr. Schiff says. "Somehow, we think
that if we love Mozart then we cannot afford to love Haydn.
In Germany, in Austria, he is a name, not more. Only the
Anglo-Saxons really like him."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   So Mr. Schiff recently came to this English-speaking if
not purely Anglo-Saxon stronghold with his own Haydn-boosting
campaign of concerts featuring the composer's late chamber
music. Mr. Schiff played a sonata on each of six programs at
the Metropolitan Museum. He then joined his wife, violinist
Yuuko Shiokawa, and cellist Boris Pergamenschikow for a trio
or two. The young mezzo Cecilia Bartoli stepped in to sing on
one program, John Shirley-Quirk on two others. A string
quartet, played by Mr. Schiff's Hungarian colleagues, the
Takacs Quartet (emigres like the pianist, they are now based
in Colorado Springs), finished out each evening.
   Americans normally don't hear much from Mr. Schiff these
days, except on records, but he makes many of them. He lives
in Salzburg ("it's peaceful there"), and even at the
relatively young age of 38, he is already tired of dashing in
and out of cities. What is more, he is cutting down on his
concerto engagements. "Orchestra concerts are the worst
prepared today," he says. "It's beyond my comprehension why
people like to go to them. I think they like to see a lot of
people onstage. I want to give up playing Mozart concerti.
It's such a frustration. There's no way to get a good
performance with one or two quick rehearsals, and you never
get more."
   Mr. Schiff's idea of a good time is to get down to music
with a small circle of friends. The Haydn event, first heard
in 1988 at Wigmore Hall in London, reportedly to great
acclaim, and headed next for Vienna, is just one example. Mr.
Schiff has his own little festival playground at Mondsee,
Austria, where for 10 days each fall he and his chums focus
on two composers. This year, Schubert and Janacek will be
dissected.
   In Cologne, he plays with a woodwind and piano quintet
(Heinz Holliger is the oboist) that is busy commissioning new
works from composers as thorny and Olympian as Elliott
Carter. He also estimates that at least half of his concerts
are solo recitals. His predilection there is also for
one-composer concerts. Lately his focus has been Bach, and
beginning in 1992, he will be playing the 18 Schubert sonatas
on six programs destined for Vienna, Budapest, London, Paris,
and . . . maybe . . . New York.
   Mr. Schiff says he was first attracted to Haydn's humor,
and from there to the composer's remarkably sophisticated
manipulations of the classical style. "Haydn always surprises
you," he says. "You know how the theme in a rondo always
comes back. Well, Haydn always delays it, and it never comes
when you expect it. It makes you laugh out loud. It's a
wonderfully bubbly feeling. But you play these things in
central Europe, and nobody laughs."
   With that kind of buildup, one would have expected the
Haydn Festival to be a cross between a romp and an
intellectual voyage into the labyrinths of the classical
style. But the first two concerts did not turn out that way.
Mr. Schiff's traversal of the C major Piano Sonata (Hob.
XVI:50) was promisingly light and crisp, but the Trio in F
sharp minor (Hob. XV:26) was ominously full-bodied and
somber, while the evening's second Trio, (D major, Hob.
XV:24) was downright dour.
   Gradually, one got the feeling of a different subtext at
work in this festival. Haydn, Mr. Schiff contends, is not
taken seriously. So what do we do to change that? Play him as
though he were Beethoven, whom everybody takes seriously.
   Beethoven's roots were certainly in Haydn's music, as the
festival's overly dry and pedantic program notes were at
pains to point out. So Mr. Schiff makes the association even
tighter. Reversing Roger Norrington's strategy, of injecting
some of Haydn's spirit into Beethoven, Mr. Schiff transfuses
Haydn with some raging Beethovenian torment.
   At the sold-out, seats-on-the-stage first concert, Mr.
Schiff performed the cantata "Arianna a Naxos" with Ms.
Bartoli, who has spectacular low notes and a beautifully
produced sound. She hit her emotional peak halfway through
the piece and found nowhere else to go. She also seemed a bit
constrained, as though she had little faith that her
strapless gown would hold its own if she really let loose.
The Takacs then finished up with an airless, middle-European
reading of the Quartet Opus 76 No. 1.
   There were happier moments at the more sparsely attended
second concert. The third movement of the Trio in E flat
(Hob. XV:29) erupted into a joyful, driving dance, as the
three players seemed to catch a mood and start to have a good
time. And the Takacs let up a bit on the drama in the Quartet
Opus 76 No. 2 and started to play clearly. It showed off
Haydn's twists and turns on their own merits, though the
overall mood was still closer to the unkempt Beethoven than
Haydn's tidy wig.
   Mr. Schiff did not give New York the Haydn who is newly
beloved in AngloSaxon halls. The English, the Americans and
the Dutch are the champions of "authenticity." Mr. Schiff is
Hungarian-born and trained, though he left his country in
1979 with no regrets. His impeccable playing, usually
note-perfect, splendidly colored, voiced and accented, is in
service to other gods, and his total immersion in the music
of this particular composer seems to have resulted in a
curious discrepancy between theory and practice.
   ---
   Ms. Waleson is a free-lance music writer based in New
York.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
