ID: 231	RANK: 68	SCORE: 11.843266
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911202-0087
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911202-0087.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   The Struggle of the Strings
   ----
   By Mark Swed
</HL>
<DATE>
12/02/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10
</SO>
<LP>
   New York -- The line of people on the waiting list snaked
from the box office of the Juilliard Theater around the
entire lobby. Inside, a who's who of New York's intellectual
community, its major modernist composers and its illustrious
musical figures filled the theater. At evening's end the
ovations were more rapturous than those typical for Pavarotti
at the Met. All this was for what was surely the most widely
dreaded concert of the season -- the Juilliard Quartet's
performance of all four of Elliott Carter's exceedingly
difficult, supposedly inscrutable, string quartets.
   The dread came from practically all quarters, and those
who admire Mr. Carter's music were maybe even more
intimidated by the prospect than those not eager to fathom
its complexities. The better you know the remarkable scores,
the more intense the experience of hearing each one. Four at
a sitting seemed way too much.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Then there was the Juilliard Quartet itself. Without a
doubt the most important string quartet of the second half of
the 20th century, the Juilliard may still exhibit some of the
nervy ferocity that made it so popular and controversial from
the start, but 45 years have taken their toll on intonation
and other ensemble niceties.
   In the end, however, it was a terrific concert. The
Juilliard Quartet played like the ensemble of old, only
wiser. Great musical issues were addressed in the most
compelling manner imaginable. And in the process Mr. Carter's
quartets came so dramatically alive that they surely won new
advocates that evening.
   Mr. Carter's music really is authentically difficult to
comprehend and to perform. The 82-year-old composer firmly
believes that musical arguments -- and his is among the most
argumentative music ever composed -- are a distillation of
experience not to be watered down. Even the expansive first
quartet from 1951, the work that put Mr. Carter on the map,
begins with four different musical ideas, played at four
different speeds, simultaneously. In the fragmented second
(1959) and fourth (1986) quartets, each instrument has a
distinct, multifaceted musical personality, and all four like
to talk at once. The dizzying third quartet is a clockwork
maze of different movements, two of them always played
simultaneously in unpredictable overlapping patterns by the
quartet divided into duos.
   Mr. Carter says that he has been greatly inspired in this
layering by Mozart opera ensembles, where characters express
conflicting thoughts and emotions simultaneously.
   A few days after the concert, the Juilliard's first
violinist and only remaining founding member, Robert Mann,
recalled with considerable relish the kind of excitement and
controversy the Juilliard has always generated. "We, of
course, had our own rather brash personality," Mr. Mann said
of the first ensemble that began as the resident string
quartet of the Juilliard School in 1946, when Mr. Mann was 25
and just out of the army.
   The Juilliard burst upon the scene with an unprecedented
dramatic boldness and originality, the equivalent in chamber
music of what Leonard Bernstein was about to bring to the
world of orchestral music or Maria Callas to opera. "Chamber
music," Mr. Mann said, "had become something of a specialized
hobby of people who literally wanted to contemplate the music
rather than experience it."
   The Juilliard set about to change all that. The players
hunted down the most arresting new music they could find, and
in 1948 created a sensation by being the first American
ensemble to play the practically unknown six Bartok string
quartets. They also played Schoenberg's first quartet for the
composer himself in his Beverly Hills home. Their
theatricality made Schoenberg say, "You know, you played in a
way I never conceived of it."
   "Those were his exact words," Mr. Mann said, "and our
hearts sank. But then he chuckled and said, `It's wonderful.
I want you to continue playing it that way.'"
   The Juilliard brought that same life-or-death intensity to
Beethoven and everything else they played. "We stood for
something," Mr. Mann said, "and you either liked it or you
didn't. There was no middle ground."
   In nearly half a century, the Juilliard has gone through
seven personnel changes, and it is no longer quite as
cantankerous as it once was. Mr. Mann has mellowed somewhat,
and his colleagues now -- violinist Joel Smirnoff, violist
Samuel Rhodes and cellist Joel Krosnick -- are all a
generation younger than he. But they still managed to play
Mr. Carter's quartets more emotional than ever. Mr. Mann says
that they have also helped to win Mr. Carter over to their
approach. The Juilliard has worked with Mr. Carter since the
'50s, and it gave the first performances of the second and
third quartets. Originally Mr. Carter had tried to get them
to concentrate on playing the scores exactly as written. But
Mr. Mann claims that last summer, when Mr. Carter attended
the rehearsals and recording sessions for a new Sony compact
disc set of the quartets, he pressed the players so hard to
delineate character that they took to calling him the wild
gypsy.
   "I have a feeling that great composers are aware that they
have composed something special, but not aware of all the
implications," Mr. Mann says. But Mr. Carter clearly knows
what Mr. Mann and his three partners have discovered in his
tumultuous quartets. These new recordings, just released,
contain some of the most gripping string quartet playing --
occasional intonation problems, notwithstanding -- found on
disc. They instantly join the Juilliard's renditions of
Beethoven, Bartok and Schoenberg as classic chamber music
recordings.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
