ID: 95	RANK: 9	SCORE: 29.582483

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-5451 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreas070_k_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EAS-94-070 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Laos </F>
<H3> <TI>   PASASON Hails `Success' of Keating Visit </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    PASASON Hails `Success' of Keating Visit </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   BK1204090294 Vientiane Vitthayou Hengsat Radio Network in 
Lao 0000 GMT 7 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> BK1204090294 </F>
<F P=104>  Vientiane Vitthayou Hengsat Radio Network </F>
<F P=105>  Lao </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [7 April PASASON editorial: "New Step for Lao-Australian </F>
Relations and Cooperation"] 
  [Text] By an invitation from His Excellency [H.E.] Khamtai 
Siphandon, prime minister of the Lao People's Democratic 
Republic [LPDR], H.E. Paul Keating, prime minister of the 
Commonwealth of Australia, led a government delegation to pay an 
official, friendly visit to the LPDR from 5 to 6 April. During 
the visit, H.E. Australian Prime Minister Paul Keating and his 
delegation were accorded a warm welcome by H.E. Prime Minister 
Khamtai Siphandon and the multiethnic Lao people. H.E. Paul 
Keating and the delegation paid a courtesy call on H.E. Nouhak 
Phoumsavan, president of the LPDR, in an atmosphere of warm 
friendship. It was considered a very significant event in the 
history of good relations between Laos and Australia. 
  An official consultative meeting to exchange views between 
H.E. Khamtai Siphandon and H.E. Paul Keating was held at the 
Prime Minister's Office in Vientiane in an atmosphere of 
profound friendship and mutual understanding. During the 
meeting, the two prime ministers informed each other about the 
domestic situation as well as lines and policies in their 
respective countries, the lines and policies which serve as a 
firm basis for effectively strengthening cooperation for the 
benefit of the peoples of Laos and Australia, thus contributing 
to the common trend of establishing and promoting peace, 
stability, friendship, and cooperation among various countries 
in the region and the rest of the world. 
  Noteworthy is that following the consultative meeting, the 
two sides reached an agreement on investment promotion and 
protection between the two countries. This agreement is 
considered an important basis for improving cooperation between 
the Lao and Australian peoples to a new level -- a level which 
will bring about ever greater benefits for the two countries. 
Following the meeting, the Australian Government pledged to 
continue its support and assistance to Laos. Regarding this, 
beginning in 1994, the Australian Government will establish a 
47.5 million Australian dollar four-year aid project for Laos. 
In addition, the Australian Government has decided to give, 
through the WHO, gratis aid in the form of food worth one 
million Australian dollars to Laos. It will also continue to 
support and encourage more and more Australian businessmen to 
invest in the LPDR. 
  During the visit, H.E. Paul Keating also attended the hand 
over ceremony of the Border Control Station at the Lao-Thai 
Friendship Bridge, which was built with gratis financial aid 
from the Australian Government and people as a gift to the LPDR. 
The assistance given to the LPDR by the Australian Government 
and people in building the Border Control Station as well as the 
Friendship Bridge and other projects in the recent past has 
substantially reflected the long-standing relations of 
friendship between Laos and Australia, which have fruitfully 
developed with each passing day. 
  The multiethnic Lao people highly assess the effective 
assistance in various fields given by Australia, and consider it 
an important contribution to the development of economic 
infrastructure for the LPDR. The multiethnic Lao people also 
would like to wholeheartedly hail the glorious success of H.E. 
Paul Keating and delegation on their visit to the LPDR, a visit 
which will contribute to further strengthening the already 
effective friendly relations and cooperation between Laos and 
Australia for the benefit of the Lao and Australian people as 
well as in the interests of peace, stability, friendship, and 
cooperation for the development in Asia-Pacific and the rest of 
the world. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
