ID: 148	RANK: 37	SCORE: 11.943925
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900320-0118 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-03-20-90 1707EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-Abortion-Guam     03-20 0611</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Abortion-Guam,0631</SECOND>
<HEAD>Opponents Hope to Overturn New Guam Abortion Law</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Wednesday time element is cq. Arraignment Scheduled for 5:30
p.m. EST</NOTE>
<DATELINE>AGANA, Guam (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Opponents of the most restrictive U.S.
abortion law are organizing in hopes of persuading voters in this
territory to overturn the measure in November.
   A court test of a section of the new law already was under way
Wednesday, less than 48 hours after Gov. Joseph Ada signed the
bill, which was unanimously passed March 8 by the Pacific Ocean
island's Legislature.
   The law prohibits abortions except when a pregnancy endangers
the life of the mother. It makes it a third-degree felony to
perform an abortion or aid in the procedure, a misdemeanor for a
woman to solicit or have an abortion and a misdemeanor for a person
to solicit a woman to have an abortion.
   Janet Benshoof, director of the American Civil Liberties Union's
Reproductive Freedom Project in New York, was to be arraigned
Wednesday on a misdemeanor charge of solicitation to commit
abortion.
   During a speech Tuesday at the Guam Press Club, Benshoof urged
woman needing an abortion to travel to Honolulu for the procedure.
   ``I was very specific in my breaking of the law,'' Benshoof
said. ``The information that I gave, which is now a crime, came
from the Honolulu Yellow Pages.''
   Two investigators from the territorial attorney general's office
taped the speech, and Attorney General Elizabeth Barrett-Anderson
filed the charge later in the day. Benshoof faces up to a year in
jail and a $1,000 fine if convicted.
   The attorney general had advised the Legislature before the vote
that the measure is unconstitutional. After the governor signed it,
she said, ``it is not my duty to decide the statute's
constitutionality but to enforce it.''
   A pro-choice group, Guamanians for Self-Determination, set an
organizational meeting for Thursday and pledged to fight the law.
The meeting was scheduled by about 35 women who met following
Benshoof's speech Tuesday.
   The law sets a referendum for the 130,000 residents of this
island about 1,500 miles east of the Philippines to decide whether
to keep the law.
   The issue of giving advice about abortions also was involved in
a federal appeals court ruling in Boston on Tuesday.
   The 1st Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals ruled that a federal
regulation that prohibits government-funded family planning clinics
from discussing abortion with clients is an unconstitutional
infringement on freedom of speech.
   The court said the speech at issue involves telling a woman
about an activity ``in which she has a constitutional right to
engage.''
   Elsewhere, Idaho's state Senate put off until Thursday a vote on
what could become the most restrictive abortion law of any state.
Supporters and opponents expect the bill to pass. Gov. Cecil Andrus
has said he is anti-abortion but has refused to say whether he will
sign or veto the measure.
   A filibuster in the Maryland Senate against an abortion-rights
bill continued for sixth day on Tuesday. The bill would allow
unrestricted abotions until a fetus is old enough to survive
outside the womb.
   In Laredo, Texas, the City Council on Monday passed a resolution
stating that life begins at conception. While a resolution is
merely an expression of the council's opinion, an anti-abortion
activist said he'll push for a city anti-abortion ordinance.
   Benshoof came to Guam on Sunday in hopes of dissuading Ada from
signing the bill. She was unable to arrange a meeting with the
governor.
   ``This is an issue that effects all women in the United States,
not just Guam,'' she said.
   Guam residents are U.S. citizens but cannot vote in U.S.
elections. It has an appointed governor and elected legislature.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
