ID: 148	RANK: 40	SCORE: 11.810326
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900323-0162 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-03-23-90 2219EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-AbortionRdp 2ndLd-Writethru a0752 03-23 0945</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Abortion Rdp, 2nd Ld-Writethru, a0752,0966</SECOND>
<HEAD>Guam Abortion Law Delayed; Md. Compromise Tripped Up By Committee</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: SUBS the first graf and grafs 8-11, beginning ``But the
House...,'' with 6 grafs to UPDATE with Maryland measures
apparently dead for this session.</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   A U.S. judge in Guam on Friday blocked the territory's new
abortion law, the nation's most restrictive, and a legislative
package that would let Maryland voters decide the abortion issue
lost a vote and appeared doomed.
   In Idaho, more than 50 junior high school students staged a
brief sit-in in the office of Gov. Cecil Andrus, protesting the
Legislature's passage of a law that would ban more than 90 percent
of the abortions performed in the state.
   They demanded that the governor veto the legislation, which was
approved Thursday and is the most restrictive abortion measure
passed by any state legislature.
   Pro-choice interests in California, Michigan, Wisconsin, Rhode
Island and North Carolina have threatened to boycott Idaho potatoes
if Andrus fails to veto the bill.
   ``Women can fight back,'' said Anne Nicol Gaylor, administrator
of the Madison based-Women's Medical Fund Inc., based in Madison,
Wis. ``We do not have to beg and plead for our rights any more.''
   Either the Guam law or the Idaho law could provide the basis for
a direct challenge to the U.S. Supreme Court's landmark 1973 Roe
vs. Wade decision that legalized abortions.
   The Maryland Senate early Friday approved and sent to the House
of Delegates a complicated compromise to end an eight-day
filibuster on the abortion issue.
   But the House Environmental Matters Committee voted 13 to 12
against the package Friday night.
   There had been a possibility that an attempt to revive the
proposal would be made on the House floor, but because of House
Democratic leadership opposition, the committee action most likely
ends the matter for the 1990 session.
   John S. Arnick, chairman of Environmental Matters, told that
panel before he cast the tie-breaking vote that the leadership's
recommendation was to defeat both bills ``for the sake of the
system.'' He said the compromise involved a ``convoluted system
that doesn't make sense in a lot of ways'' and warned that ``the
public would be cursed with confusion.''
   Under the compromise, an abortion rights bill permitting
unrestricted abortions during the early stages of pregnancy would
have become law. Voters would have been able to call a referendum
on the law in November through a petition drive.
   If voters then rejected it in the referendum, then a bill
sponsored by anti-abortion senators would have become law _ unless
it also was defeated by voters. That bill would have allowed
abortions in cases of rape or incest, to protect the mother's life
or if the pregnancy would produce serious and adverse effects on
the woman's health.
   The compromise required that both measures be passed by the
House and signed by the governor. If one of the measures was
rejected, the other one aldo would have died, but the committee
vote made all that moot.
   In Agana, Guam, U.S. District Judge Alex Munson issued a
temporary restraining order blocking enforcement of the territory's
new law, a few hours after a group of Guam residents and medical
groups filed a class-action lawsuit. He scheduled a hearing for
Monday on whether to extend his order.
   The plaintiffs included ``Maria Doe,'' a Guam woman who is eight
weeks pregnant and wants an abortion, the Guam Society of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, the Guam Nurses Association, an
Episcopal priest and three doctors.
   Defendants include Gov. Joseph Ada, who signed the bill into law
Monday, and territorial Attorney General Elizabeth
Barrett-Anderson, who advised the Legislature that the bill was
unconstitutional before it was approved.
   Rachael Pine, staff attorney for the American Civil Liberties
Union's Reproductive Freedom Project in New York, said the lawsuit
cites violation of constitutional guarantees of right to privacy,
due process, free speech, equal protection, guarantees of religious
freedoms and freedom from slavery.
   Guam's law prohibits abortions except when a pregnancy endangers
the life of the mother. It makes it a felony to perform abortion or
aid in the procedure, and a misdemeanor for a woman to solicit or
have an abortion, or for a person to solicit a woman to have an
abortion.
   The law provides for a referendum on the Nov. 6 ballot for Guam
voters to decide whether to retain or reject the law.
   Guam's law is more restrictive than the bill passed by the Idaho
Legislature.
   The Idaho bill would ban abortion except in cases of
non-statutory rape reported within seven days, incest if the victim
is younger than 18, severe fetal deformity or threat to the
mother's life or physical health. It would ban more than 90 percent
of the 1,500 abortions performed in Idaho annually.
   ``Idaho was one of the first states to give women their rights,
and now they want to take them away from us,'' said 15-year-old
Michele May, one of those protesting at the governor's office in
Boise. ``We can't let them do that.''
   If Andrus signs the bill, the law would take effect July 1, and
abortion rights groups have promised a quick court challenge. The
governor has not said what he would do.
   In Washington, D.C., Guam's congressional delegate worked to
head off retaliation from colleagues resulting from the abortion
law.
   Rep. George Miller, D-Calif., sent a letter to colleagues
Thursday, urging them to withdraw support for a bill to provide
commonwealth status for Guam.
   ``States and territories may have the right to pass laws that
deny women the right to choice, but no government has the right to
deny its citizens freedom of speech,'' Miller's letter said.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
