ID: 115	RANK: 43	SCORE: 8.457468
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910308-0143
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910308-0143.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Theater:
   Robert Wilson Adapts Ibsen
   ----
   By Edwin Wilson
</HL>
<DATE>
03/08/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A9
</SO>
<LP>
   Cambridge, Mass. -- One night last summer when director
Robert Wilson was preparing his new production of "When We
Dead Awaken" for the American Repertory Theater (ART) here,
he was sitting in a restaurant explaining to a friend that he
felt such a heavy, serious play needed something to lighten
the mood at times. His attention was then attracted by the
face of a tall, lean, elegant figure at another table. The
man's expression had just the kind of infectious warmth and
charm Mr. Wilson had in mind. Immediately he made his way
across the room and introduced himself.
   "I'm Robert Wilson," he said. "I'm Honi Coles," said the
other. The two men, one America's premier avant-garde
director, the other America's premiere tap dancer, had not
only never met, neither had ever heard of the other. Thus Mr.
Wilson, who has often operated on sheer instinct and
intuition, introduced into "When We Dead Awaken" three "knee
plays," short interludes in which the inimitable Mr. Coles
sings, recites poetry and leads a chorus line in a time step.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "When We Dead Awaken" was Henrik Ibsen's final play,
written in 1899 when the Norwegian playwright was 72 years
old. It is the story of Rubek (Alvin Epstein), a famous
sculptor in his final years, living in a sterile marriage
with his lusty young wife, Maya (Stephanie Roth). During the
play, Irene (played by two actresses, Elzbieta Czyzewska and
Sheryl Sutton) shows upyears before she had been the model
for Rubek's masterpiece. But though she posed nude for him,
and was in love with him, he refused to express his love to
herthe artist in him, he claims, would not allow it. The
play, perhaps Ibsen's most autobiographical, offers a
reappraisal of the artist's role; does the artist, in
fulfilling his mission, have the right to deny human
relationships and responsibilities?
   Juxtaposed with the abstract, antiseptic world of the
artist is the sensual, predatory world represented by a bear
hunter (Mario Arrambide) who appears on the scene. A man who
despises the arts, he immediately proves attractive to Maya.
In the end, the bear hunter and Maya leave together to follow
earthly pursuits, while Rubek and Irene climb to the top of a
snow-covered mountain -- two people spiritually dead who will
be awakened in the afterlife to which they move when they are
buried in an avalanche.
   Taking place at the same time as the production of "When
We Dead Awaken" at ART is an arresting exhibit at Boston's
Museum of Fine Arts of Robert Wilson materials, including
artifacts from his productions, drawings of scene designs
(works of art themselves) and a videotape documenting his
career and one of his productions. On the video, a frequent
collaborator of Mr. Wilson's, the German playwright Heiner
Muller, comments that words are unimportant, even an
anathema, to Mr. Wilson --  "It's what happens between the
words that interests him," Mr. Muller says, and adds: "His is
a theater of experience, not discourse."
   Mr. Wilson's theater pieces deconstruct the surface of
characters and language. Speeches are broken up, partly
spoken by the characters, but with other words and phrases
reproduced on tape; some words are spoken at an arbitrarily
high pitch and others normally, and certain passages are
repeated over and over again. "When We Dead Awaken" is one of
Ibsen's shortest plays, but Robert Brustein, artistic
director of ART, mindful of Mr. Wilson's aversion to
discourse, has developed an English version that has cut even
that brief text in half. The result is not a production of
"When We Dead Awaken," but a Robert Wilson theater piece
"inspired by" or "in response to" the Ibsen play. In place of
character, plot, emotional confrontations, Mr. Wilson
substitutes his stage pictures, which, it must be said, are
the most exciting to be found anywhere in theater today.
   The setting is monumental-giant paintings of Norwegian
landscapes that take up the entire stage. Characters assume
poses like statues, moving one hand slowly, and sometimes
turning in place like mannequins on a turntable. As always
with Mr. Wilson, the lighting is magical: Characters'
sculptured faces are isolated in circles of white light
against a black void; beams cut across the stage at arbitrary
angles; layers of light turn the entire stage into a stunning
chiaroscuro.
   Aiding Mr. Wilson in creating the scenery and costumes is
designer John Conklin. Along with the striking visual images
there is a sound score made up of voices, wind, and
electronic effects created by Hans Peter Kuhn. And
interspersed with the major sections of the piece are Mr.
Coles's knee plays. In one, for example, Mr. Coles and Mr.
Epstein sing a blues song and then the entire company comes
on stage to do a tap routine. In true Brechtian fashion, the
somber figures who have been moving in slow motion like
statues suddenly break into a time step.
   What is the final effect of all this? The story itself,
including what we assume Ibsen meant for us to get out of it,
is only partially realized. The irresistible attraction that
the ribald, animalistic bear hunter has for Maya is made
abundantly clear, as is the contrast between this kind of
life and the rarefied spiritual life of Rubek. What is not so
clear is the idea of an artist at the end of his days
confronting his own past and the premises on which he has
based his career. The anguish that the spurned Irene has
suffered and the agony of the artist coming to terms with the
price he has paid for the choices he has made are not fully
realized, perhaps cannot be realized in Mr. Wilson's scheme.
   At the same time, "When We Dead Awaken," with its
mysticism, its elegiac lyricism, its vast Norwegian
landscapes, make a fitting background against which Mr.
Wilson has created one of his astonishing theater pieces. In
his inimitable fashion he develops a series of tableaux
vivants that are part painting, part choreography, part
architecture, part "son et lumiere", but blended into a whole
that ultimately cannot be explained, only experienced.
   "When We Dead Awaken" is a co-production of the ART and
the Alley Theater in Houston, and is underwritten by AT&amp;T
On-Stage. It continues here through this weekend and plays in
Houston May 22-26.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
