ID: 115	RANK: 64	SCORE: 7.693595

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-56385 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drlat086__s94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-LAT-94-086-S </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Feb 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> MEXICO </F>
<H3> <TI>   Reports, Document on Pre-Rebellion Chiapas </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Reports, Document on Pre-Rebellion Chiapas </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    Indian-Language Religious Materials </H4>

<F P=102> 94CA0097E Mexico City PROCESO in Spanish No 901, 7 Feb 94 pp 
22-23, 25 </F>

<F P=103> 94CA0097E </F>
<F P=104>  Mexico City PROCESO </F>
<F P=105>  Spanish </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Enrique Maza] </F>
  [Text] The year was 1972. In Chilon, a Tzeltal area, the 
Morales Elizalde brothers, Mardonio and Ignacio, were 
enthusiastically translating the Bible into Tzeltal. They wanted 
to translate Exodus before any other book. Ignacio would say: It 
talks about the escape from Egypt, the move from servitude to 
freedom, the rebellion of the slaves, and their emancipation. It 
talks about the quest for the promised land. And they translated 
the Book of the Jewish Exodus. 
  In 1987, in the heart of the Lacandon Forest, Tzeltales, 
Tzotziles, Choles, Tojolabales, and mestizos from 117 ejidos and 
24 small villages gathered together in a multiethnic 
organization with its own unique identity. It was the exodus of 
the Mayas in search of the promised land, a new land, and a new 
life. 
  Las Canadas is a portion of the jungle in which the Union of 
Unions established itself in the late 1980's. It was formed by 
some 6,000 families living on ejidos and in small villages in 
the ravines, valleys, and plateaus of the eastern mountain range 
in the state of Chiapas. Ninety percent of its members had been 
peons on the corn, cane, ranching, and coffee estates in the 
municipality of Ocosingo. The other 10 percent are Indians from 
the north and Highlands of Chiapas. 
  The permanently resident rural estate peons left the estates 
and headed for the Desierto de la Soledad. It was the start of 
the exodus in the 1930's, a steady march that intensified in the 
1960's and lasted into the 1980's. They populated the jungle and 
organized in it. 
  Researcher Xochitl Leyva Solano has studied this exodus and 
its causes in a book the first version of which was presented as 
a paper at the Second International Mayanist Congress, which the 
Center for Mayan Studies and the Yucatan Institute of Culture 
organized in Merida in August 1992. A later version is 
summarized here. 
  The sense of community among the Indians is born mainly of 
two social practices: one that is pastoral and the other that is 
political and ideological. Pastoral activities were promoted in 
the jungle, drawing their inspiration from the major Church 
events of the 1960's, particularly the Second Vatican Council in 
the early part and the Medellin Bishops Conference towards its 
end, as well as liberation theology. 
  The political and ideological action was conducted by 
political factions and groups that emerged after the 1968 
student movement, which went beyond partisan and electoral 
political activity with the idea of going to the people and 
helping them. Many of their members were from the urban middle 
class. They were social workers who joined the social struggles, 
spurred the rise of independent peasant movements, or 
established themselves in the guerrilla movements in Guerrero, 
Chihuahua, and Sonora. In the cities of Monterrey, Durango, 
Torreon, and Chihuahua they helped organize the working-class 
colonias and urban social movements. They were groups like Union 
of the People (UP), Popular Line (PP), and the Guiding 
Ideological Organization (OID). 
<H5>  The Religious Community </H5>
  Pastoral action stemmed from the urgent need to create an 
identity and a sense of community, of belonging. First among the 
larger group, the poor, and then among a more specific group, 
"those of us who constitute a community," the collection of men 
and women who live in the same colonia and share an activism, a 
creed, a system of office-holding, a territory, a history, roots. 
  Liberation theology led them to analyze the real world, as a 
starting point, and to discover that "man has been crushed and 
dispossessed," and to demand that he be liberated from such 
oppression in today's world, in accordance with the Gospel of 
Saint Luke: "The Lord has sent me to announce the good news to 
the captive and to liberate all the oppressed." Hence the 
commitment to transform today's world, in which the poor are 
victims "of structural domination," in the words of Bishop 
Samuel Ruiz: "If we follow the option of the Gospel, we have to 
dismantle the structures that foster domination." 
  The permanently resident rural estate peons and the peons 
who 
emigrated into the jungle echoed this assertion and emphasized 
the social and ethnic distinction between them and their bosses. 
They were also able to identify with other Chiapas Indians with 
whom they had common problems: the Choles, Tzeltales, Tzotziles, 
and Tojolabales, as was made evident at the Indian Congress of 
1974 in San Cristobal de las Casas, where four shared problems 
were identified: land, trade, health care, and education. The 
congress had been a government initiative, but it wound up as a 
place where the Indians of Chiapas came together. 
  Liberation theology was the escape hatch from a past of 
"oppression and misery" on the estates. In the new colonias in 
the jungle they had to break drastically with the past and opt 
for a liberating alternative. They saw their days on the estates 
as an era of serfdom and poverty, toil and cruel masters. Hence 
the peasant war and liberation. In the pastoral action of the 
diocese they found the language and inspiration they needed to 
struggle against this past and rebuild their identity. 
  Liberation theology was complemented by the text of the 
Bible, especially the Book of Exodus: "The communities in the 
jungle were living their exodus." This is the book that tells of 
the rebellion of the Jewish slaves in Egypt and their exodus 
through the desert until they found a land on which they could 
settle and live, "the promised land." God ordered them to leave. 
From 1972 to 1974 the Book of Exodus was translated into 
Tzeltal, and there were discussions in the communities about 
freedom, faith, hope, and love. At first the missionaries 
summarized the material. Later, Indian catechizers did the 
writing. The lessons were then compiled in a catechism entitled 
"We Are Seeking Liberty" in the Tzeltal language. It draws an 
analogy between the migration into the jungle and the Jewish 
exodus. The sense of "we" thus emerged. 
  The catechism: "The Lord said to the Israelites when they 
were living as slaves: `I have seen the miserable state of my 
people. And now the cry of the sons of Israel has come to me. I 
mean to deliver them out of the hands of the Egyptians and bring 
them up out of that land to a land rich and broad where milk and 
honey flow.' God wants us to depart for freedom like the Jewish 
people of old, who lived in the lands of another people, called 
Egypt. The land did not belong to them; they worked as slaves 
and suffered much hardship. Then God spoke to the heart of one 
of the leaders: `I have seen the miserable state of my people, I 
have heard their appeal to be free of their slave-drivers. I 
have come to free you from your suffering and I am going to 
bring you to a better land.' And God said to Moses: `I order you 
to bring my people out of Egypt.'" 
  "God wants us to leave everything that crushes us. The word 
of God tells us that as a community we must leave to seek 
freedom. If we seek betterment and freedom, God will be with us. 
When the Israelites lived as slaves, they had to leave and fight 
for their freedom. When our forebears lived as servants, they 
too had to struggle together to win their lands. They were men 
of great faith. True freedom has not come yet. We must gather 
strength in our hearts and struggle and suffer much yet. We must 
fight against poverty, hunger, and injustice" (Exodus 3:7-12; 
Catechism 28, 51, 78, 106). 
  Expectations of a "new life" in the "promised land" in the 
jungle had been created. Saint Paul, in his letter to the 
Ephesians, speaks of the "new man." The Tzeltal catechism echoes 
him: "The new man is not a man alone, but rather a community 
man, united with all his brothers by the Spirit. Together we 
have a single thought, a single job, a single heart with one and 
the same Hope (Catechism 114)." 
  A reaffirmation of life in the community was needed in the 
search for an identity and new methods of organization. These 
reflections focused on issues such as the land and food, God's 
law and man's law, a given way of life (culture), the need for 
collective work, and shared decision-making. "Thought" is an 
individual's greatest strength and leads to action, "praxis." 
Indian culture was reaffirmed. 
  The residents of a colonia, meeting in a plenary session, 
issued regulations governing all spheres of life in society. 
"Through all that we do as a community we form a single heart in 
Christ. The work and love of the community is what brings us to 
freedom. The community is something that we must build day by 
day" (Catechism 30, 83, 101). 
  It was revolutionary to assert that social power was to be 
found in the thoughts of pioneer Indians. The catechizing 
process was a threat to the status quo. All were encouraged to 
become involved. What was needed was to express one's thoughts, 
to speak out, to read the word of God, to sing, to debate at the 
assemblies, to come out for or against resolutions, to erase the 
differences between ethnic and linguistic groups, to share a 
utopia: building the kingdom of God on earth, which guided work 
and life every day. Pastoral activities were eminently political 
because they threatened the dominant power structure. 
<H5>  The Political Community </H5>
  After the 1968 movement, a group of professors, students, 
and 
workers began waging a different struggle, whose watchword was 
"Let the people decide for themselves." They had "to integrate 
into the struggles of the working people, place themselves in 
service to the people, and help them organize and become more 
aware, so that they could carry forward their struggles." Live 
with the masses, stand by them in their daily struggle, and give 
them resources that will help them confront the "bourgeois, 
exploitative" enemy. 
  Activists from the Union of the People began arriving in the 
jungle in 1976 to work with the Catholics, pioneers, and colonia 
residents for whom the religious groups no longer sufficed to 
meet their demands for land, services, and infrastructure. Two 
years later the "northerners," activists from Popular Line, 
arrived. UP and PP were absorbed by a larger group, the OID. The 
organization that had called the Indian Congress reached its 
limit in 1977 and gave way to new political groups: PP, CNPA 
[National Coordinating Board for the Ayala Plan], CIOAC 
[Independent Federation of Agricultural Workers and Peasants], 
OCEZ [Emiliano Zapata Peasant Organization], PST [Socialist 
Workers Party], and others, which offered viable alternatives in 
the face of the new realities. 
  Proletarian Line (LP) arrived in Chiapas in 1978. In the 
Lacandon Forest it worked with Quiptic (the union of ejidos), 
with Land and Liberty, and with Peasant Struggle; in Simojovel, 
Tila, Sabanilla, Huitiupan, and El Bosque, with the ejidos and 
peons from the regional organization; in La Fraylesca, with the 
ejidos that had made up the 10 April Peasant Alliance; in 
Venustiano Carranza and Villas las Rosas, with the Indian 
community members. It teamed up with students, colonia 
residents, and workers. In 1979 it joined the struggle of 
Chiapas teachers. Some authors and analysts blame the LP for the 
destruction of the regional processes and the disintegration of 
influential peasant cadres. 
  Proletarian Line and Mass Line (LM), which were the 
ideological lifeblood of many political advisers swarming about 
the jungle, emerged as the result of a split with Popular Line 
over theoretical and tactical disagreements, mainly with regard 
to the relations that ought to exist between the rank and file 
and the leadership. There were also "fundamental disagreements" 
in the OID. 
  The political structure superimposed itself on the religious 
structure, and in spite of serious differences Line reinforced 
and invigorated the sense of community and the broader methods 
of organization, such as the unions of ejidos. Line started from 
the "deeply felt needs of the working people" and defended the 
idea of joining with the working class, of having the workers, 
peasants, colonia residents, students, small businessmen, shop 
clerks, and professionals march together. The Indians living in 
the jungle were being brought into a movement that went beyond 
the local level. 
  A 1979 Line Document says: "We must take part in and lead 
the 
struggles of the peasants for land, credit, etc., the struggles 
of the workers for higher wages, better benefits, against 
corrupt union bosses, etc., the struggles of the students for 
better teachers, to democratize education, for school buildings, 
for scholarships, etc., and the struggles of all social groups 
and the people in general for better living conditions." 
  The slogan "of the masses, by the masses, for the masses" 
meant the involvement of all, the expression of ideas, 
decision-making, promoting organization. "The people as a whole 
must take part in decision-making. Such participation means 
discussing several ideas. A pure struggle of ideas does not help 
the people; it is an exercise for bourgeois intellectuals. After 
discussions, decisions must be made. Resolutions and decisions 
chart the course. Making decisions is a political practice that 
unites comrades. We must have the broadest democracy, which 
means the wide-ranging input of ideas and opinions. Based on the 
people's most deeply felt demands, mass organizations must be 
formed." It also had its own utopia: a society free of 
exploiters and exploited. 
  The two movements, political and religious, ran parallel. 
The 
political groups came later, entrenching themselves in the 
religious movement and giving it a political bent. They both 
promoted community life and involvement; they established 
regulations, systems of office-holding, and commissions; they 
called for radical change spurred by the poor, and shared a 
utopia: the struggle here and now for a just, egalitarian 
society. 
  They had their differences, though. As far as the political 
leaders were concerned, the process was "guided." To the 
theologians, the process was "accompanied." The key point to the 
theologians was to revitalize Indian culture. As far as the 
political leaders were concerned, the revolutionary subjects 
were the proletariat, dispossessed peasants, and the working 
class. The mutual accusations were ongoing and obvious. Their 
differences of opinion reached the point that the Indians in the 
jungle expelled the northerners in the late 1970's. 
<H5>  The Agrarian Conflict </H5>
  Various timber companies had developed the Lacandon Forest 
last century. Later, the lands there were sold off, subdivided, 
or designated as national property. Some years into this 
century, great forest estates coexisted with great cattle 
estates, which the Indians called "fincas." As they moved into 
the jungle, the Indians of the exodus harmed powerful interests, 
including those of the government. 
  It was Luis Echeverria who decreed that communal assets be 
returned. Some 60 Lacandon families and some 30 colonias of 
Mayan Indians, comprising about 4,000 families in all, the 
Indians of the exodus, lived in the jungle. In a presidential 
decree Echeverria "returned" the entire Lacandon Forest, 614,321 
hectares, to the Lacandon Indians, ignoring the Mayas. The 
president spoke of restitution to the "rightful owners." 
Historians have proven that there is no continuous link between 
the Lacandons of history and today's Lacandons. The Tzeltales, 
Tzotziles, and Choles were excluded and legally expelled in 1972. 
  Hiding behind the presidential decree were business and 
timber interests, especially the National Finance Company 
(Nafinsa), which through the Lacandon Forestry Company, S.A. 
(Cofolasa) wanted to haul off the mahogany and cedar. No sooner 
had the jungle been deeded over to the Lacandons than Cofolasa 
signed a contract with them for some 35,000 cubic meters a year 
of timber (around 10,000 trees a year) over a 10-year period 
without a set price. 
  The government said that the Mayas had to be relocated in 
order "to preserve the forest." Some 20 colonias agreed to a 
relocation, thanks to the president's promise that they would 
have secure land tenure, utilities, and infrastructure; he never 
kept his promise. 
  Echeverria's decree was published in 1972. There was a 
pressing need to crowd them together again. Moves against the 
Mayas were not long in coming. The Indian assemblies, the 
discussions, and the decision-making then followed. They decided 
to reject relocation. This was the rallying point around which 
Quiptic, the Union of Ejidos, and the Union of Unions were 
formed and took action. The entire organizational structure that 
had been tried out day after day for such a long time was taking 
action and it grew strong in defense of the new land, which 
represented a new life, both of which had been shattered by 
presidential decree. 
  A new identity had been born. The Indians' experience of 
religion and politics charted the course for the agrarian 
struggle that was waged in the 1970's and 1980's. The Indian 
Congress had set the process in motion in October 1974, and it 
culminated in January 1994 with the armed uprising. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
