ID: 115	RANK: 86	SCORE: 6.957174
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910830-0116
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910830-0116.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Enterprise:
   Quick Success for Start-Ups Breeds Special Problems
   ---
   Perhaps Enviable, Difficulties Include
   Financing, Inventory, Staffing
   ----
   By Barbara Marsh
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
08/30/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B2
</SO>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Entrepreneurs whose companies enjoy a fast takeoff have
problems many would envy.
   But the problems are real -- and sometimes dire. Maya
Computer Co., a computer mail-order firm, grew to sales of
$10 million in 1990 from nothing in just three years. To fill
a deluge of orders, Maya raced to increase staff and build
inventory. Then, when demand dipped last spring, the
Waitsfield, Vt., company had to struggle with costly
overhead, excess inventory, dissatisfied customers, unpaid
vendors and a cash crunch.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Its president, Donald Mayer, says he lay awake nights
worrying about bankruptcy. Fortunately, he says, an investor
agreed to guarantee a $1 million interim loan until the
company can attract equity. And many vendors are sticking
with the company and orders are reviving, he adds.
   Instant success -- the stuff dreams are made of -- often
takes entrepreneurs by surprise. But when it happens, most
are unprepared for it, business experts say. Jerome Katz,
associate director of St. Louis University's entrepreneurial
center, says entrepreneurs psychologically "won't let
themselves think of a real success -- not just {hitting} a
home run, but a grand slam."
   Mr. Mayer, for one, says he was "blown away" by the swift
takeoff of a company he started in his living room. He
recalls his thrill at trade shows as people lined up to buy
his computers -- both new and used -- plus accessories. Among
other factors, sales rose faster than expected because the
company targeted a market niche for used Macintosh computers
that some competitors were ignoring, Mr. Mayer says. But
demand created pressure to fill orders and to build up
inventory and staff.
   In retrospect, Mr. Mayer wishes he'd hired better
accounting help so he could have accurately tracked growth.
He also learned the hard way that overhead expenses
associated with the hiring and training of staff can easily
outrun new employees' ability to get proficient.
   What's more, he cautions fellow entrepreneurs to
synchronize carefully their capital raising with growth
spurts -- something he didn't do. He suggests they take time
off from fighting fires to spend as much as a week to draw up
a business plan as a basis for raising money.
   "Growth can kill," says Gerald E. Hills, director of
entrepreneurial studies at the University of Illinois at
Chicago. A fledgling firm with inexperienced management often
makes the mistake of stocking too much inventory to meet a
sales surge, and can lose track of how much it is spending,
he says. Even for companies that seem profitable on paper,
the most common symptom of crisis is an interruption in cash
flow, he says.
   Mr. Hills cites the case of a young, rapidly growing
air-conditioning installation concern whose owner was tempted
to close down despite soaring sales. The firm found itself in
a cash squeeze because it paid upfront for inventory, but
customer payments didn't come in fast enough to cover costs.
The company solved its problem by obtaining a credit line
from a lender, he says.
   Sometimes the problem isn't so much fast growth as the
overconfidence that comes with it. This can breed a false
sense of security and cloud the entrepreneur's judgment.
That's how a Dallas travel service, Expense Management &amp;
Control Inc., tripped up.
   The company's annual revenues shot up to $7 million by
1988, its third year in business, says Barry Jones, the
president and a co-founder. The company's innovative,
computerized accounting system for tracking corporate travel
expenses is what drew customers.
   However, in its eagerness to get into business, the
company hadn't taken time to get the bugs out of the system,
he says. Sometimes faulty software feeding data from its
airline reservation system to its internal accounting system
created errors. As a result, airline-ticket data got lost or
misdirected, and clients were billed for the wrong amounts.
   Subsequently, the company ran up $5 million in unexpected
costs to fix the system and add personnel to do manually what
the system was supposed to do automatically. Struggling with
that enormous expense, plus other problems, the company filed
for federal bankruptcy-law protection to allow it to
reorganize.
   A large competitor, Houston-based Lifeco Services Corp.,
brought the company out of bankruptcy proceedings by
purchasing a majority stake. The reorganized company has been
renamed Integrated Travel Systems Inc. Mr. Jones says the
troubles might have been avoided if the company had given
itself more time to get its system up and running before it
hit the market.
   The Dallas company's problems show the hazards of
overspending. And indeed, most business consultants counsel
caution for starting entrepreneurs. Yet, fast growth can make
a mockery of prudence. Karen and Ian Scott, for example, took
a conservative, go-slow approach in launching their
baby-products catalog company. Former corporate managers, the
Scotts didn't throw their entire $1 million nest egg into the
firm. They didn't mortgage their home. And they didn't borrow
money.
   Exceeding all expectations, 1990 sales of their Deerfield,
Ill., company surged to $4.5 million after just three years
-- and could double again this year, the couple says. In
retrospect, they realize, their stinting on hiring and
leasing warehouse space created problems.
   The Scotts put off as long as possible hiring their own
office and warehouse employees, and they used a subcontractor
to take and fill orders. But they soon realized their
mistake: Customers began complaining about late shipments.
Though the company promised two-day delivery, the
subcontractor often took two weeks to get orders out, say the
Scotts.
   Mr. Scott says the company paid a "heavy price" in
customer image. Morton I. Kamien, professor of
entrepreneurship at Northwestern University's Kellogg School,
says, "If I {as a customer} can't get the stuff from you,
I'll go to another place and may not come back again."
   To stay on track, the Scotts decided to swallow thousands
of dollars more in annual payroll and warehouse expense so
the firm could handle everything itself. As a result,
customer complaints have declined.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
