ID: 269	RANK: 19	SCORE: 17.427467
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910208-0161
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910208-0161.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Maytag Reduces
   Payouts in Effort
   To Conserve Cash
   ----
   By Robert L. Rose
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/08/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A4
</SO>
<CO>
   MYG WNEWS
</CO>
<IN>
HOME ELECTRONICS, FURNISHINGS, APPLIANCES (HMF)
DIVIDENDS (DIV)
</IN>
<LP>
   Maytag Corp. cut its dividend nearly in half in a move
that underscores the appliance industry's deep slump and the
company's need to conserve cash.
   Calling it "the prudent thing to do," the Newton, Iowa,
appliance maker said directors trimmed the quarterly payout
to 12.5 cents a share from 22.5 cents and eliminated the
year-end dividend. The year-end payout, as much of a
tradition as the quarterly dividend, recently stood at five
cents a share.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The move is a painful one for Maytag as well as for its
holders. Partly because of its reputation as a reliable and
generous dividend payer, Maytag has an unusually high
percentage of individual shareholders, with more than 60% of
its shares outstanding in such hands. Many have held the
stock for years, and some have been receiving steady or
rising payouts from it since 1946.
   "Most people in Iowa probably own some Maytag," said Bob
LeBlanc, a stockbroker at the Newton, Iowa, office of Edward
D. Jones &amp; Co.
   The dividend reduction will save Maytag about $47.5
million annually. Since making two big acquisitions in the
late 1980s, the appliance maker has found itself with a large
debt load and facing increased demands for capital
improvements and a decline in per-share profit.
   The need to conserve cash grew even greater as the
recession and a deep plunge in consumer confidence hit the
appliance industry in recent months. On Monday, Maytag
reported a 68% decline in fourth-quarter earnings. Maytag's
1991 earnings also aren't expected to be much better than its
1990 net of 94 cents a share.
   Chairman Daniel J. Krumm said in a statement that although
the company is "very positive" about its future, "we simply
must respond realistically to the current depressed economic
environment in which we're operating." He said the company
foresees no significant improvement in conditions in the U.S.
or Europe in the near future.
   Analysts recently said a dividend cut looked likely, and
the market took the news in stride. In New York Stock
Exchange composite trading, Maytag shares closed at $12.375,
up 37.5 cents.
   Jerry R. Herman, an appliance industry analyst at Prescott
Ball &amp; Turben in Cleveland, said the cut increases the
company's financial flexibility and makes it easier to
explore acquisitions or alliances in Europe, where Maytag is
seeking to build a major appliance business.
   In the U.S., where Maytag sells appliances under the
Maytag, Magic Chef, Admiral and Norge names, the company has
frozen wages of salaried workers and laid off both salaried
and hourly employees. In addition to the U.S. appliance
slump, Maytag is grappling with a downturn at its Dixie-Narco
vending machine unit.
   Maytag also said its board named Leonard A. Hadley, chief
operating officer, to the additional post of president. The
move had been expected. The position was vacant, and Mr.
Hadley is seen as a likely successor to the 64-year-old Mr.
Krumm.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
