ID: 269	RANK: 9	SCORE: 22.474894
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910131-0070
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910131-0070.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Image to Protect:
   Maytag's Acquisitions
   Don't Wear as Well
   As Washers and Dryers
   ---
   Company Hears Complaints
   About Its Newer Brands;
   Sacrifices for Sake of Size
   ---
   A Close Look at the Dividend
   ----
   By Robert L. Rose
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/31/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<CO>
   MYG
</CO>
<IN>
HOME ELECTRONICS, FURNISHINGS, APPLIANCES (HMF)
CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)
</IN>
<LP>
   NEWTON, Iowa -- Few U.S. companies enjoy as solid a
reputation for quality as the one whose address here is One
Dependability Square.
   Maytag Corp. owes its success to its proficiency in making
appliances that just don't break. Its washers and dryers have
consistently won top ratings, and consumers have showered it
with letters of thanks. In the past, "nobody talked about
quality," says Tom Smith, the former head of Maytag's
research department. "We just did it."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Lately, however, Maytag has been hearing something new
from its dealers and customers: complaints, mostly about
shoddy workmanship. A range has a tinny feel, and its bottom
drawer is crooked. A washer makes a loud clank at the end of
the spin cycle. Consumer Reports magazine rates some
appliances sold by the company as among the worst around.
   Maytag's surprising problems don't end there. The company
needs to conserve cash, and next Thursday directors plan to
consider cutting the dividend for the first time since it was
reinstituted in 1946. Maytag's once-pristine balance sheet is
muddied by debt. The stock hit a five-year low in November,
though it has come back somewhat since then.
   The troubles stem from Maytag's decision to broaden its
market. In 1986, the company acquired the much larger -- but
less profitable -- Magic Chef Inc., which makes several
middle-to-bottom-of-the-line appliance brands, Magic Chef,
Admiral and Norge. In early 1989, Maytag also bought Chicago
Pacific Corp. and its Hoover Co. unit, the vacuum-cleaner
giant with a bit part in major appliances.
   The moves lifted Maytag into the big leagues of appliance
sales, along with Whirlpool Corp., General Electric Co. and
Sweden's AB Electrolux. Sales climbed from $684 million in
1985 to an estimated $3.1 billion last year (1990 results
will be out tomorrow or Monday). The Magic Chef acquisition,
via a $736 million stock swap, gave Maytag some brands to
challenge competitors in the market for lower-priced
appliances. And the Hoover purchase, for $961 million in cash
and stock, offered an entry into Europe after Whirlpool
scooped up businesses there and Electrolux moved into the
U.S.
   Maytag executives believe they had to assemble a full line
of appliances to gain clout with dealers and avoid becoming
shark bait in the 1980s takeover wars. "Over time, I think we
would have been squeezed out if we had not become a full-line
company," says Daniel J. Krumm, the chief executive since
1974.
   But the company is finding that bigger isn't always
better. The acquisitions weakened what had been the
healthiest balance sheet in the business: Long-term debt
soared to $845 million as of Sept. 30, from just $24 million
in 1985. Reducing the debt -- now nearly half of
capitalization -- has become difficult as the economy and the
appliance industry slide into recession for the first time
since the early 1980s.
   Another difficulty is the damage to Maytag's vaunted
reputation. The poorer-quality Magic Chef, Admiral and Norge
lines have often sat at the bottom of Consumer Reports'
appliance ratings. The range with the tinny feel, for
instance, carries the Maytag name but is manufactured at
Magic Chef's Cleveland, Tenn., plant.
   Some Maytag officials fear that the quality problems could
tarnish the image of its other Maytag-brand appliances. In
fact, Maytag says owners request twice as many service calls
for the Maytag range as the virtually identical Magic Chef
range. Customers, it seems, expect more of a Maytag.
   That has been true ever since 1907, when farm-equipment
maker F.L. Maytag introduced his hand-crank washer. Like
later Maytag washers, that Pastime model came with rugged
construction and aggressive promotion. "Nothing else could be
more sensible, or more appreciated by the bride," boasted a
1916 ad for a later version with an electric motor.
   The success of modern Maytag was cemented in 1949 with its
automatic washer, which was designed with the aim of staying
as simple as possible; parts that weren't there couldn't
break down. Maytag added a dryer in 1953 and a dishwasher in
1966. But it continued to aim at the high end of the market,
where sales weren't large but profits were. Its flagship line
of washers, which cost $100 or so more than competing models,
has a modest 13% market share. Maytag continually invested in
state-of-the-art manufacturing equipment.
   Then came the Magic Chef purchase. Magic Chef, basically a
range maker until it acquired Norge washing machines and
Admiral refrigerators in 1979, didn't spend heavily on
capital projects. Under its ownership, Admiral, once a leader
in refrigerator technology, fell far behind the competition.
A Maytag executive says Magic Chef made just three big
investments in Admiral's Galesburg, Ill., refrigerator plant
in the seven years it owned it: a warehouse, a paint facility
and an airplane.
   Executives from Newton, steeped in the fastidious "Maytag
way" of doing things, were shocked by their new sister
company. In Galesburg, refrigerators sometimes rolled off the
line with screws driven in crooked and temperature balances
askew. The plant's workers "had no pride" when Maytag took
over, asserts Richard J. Haines, Maytag division president
who oversees the plant.
   The cultures collided at a 1988 meeting of Admiral
managers and a Maytag executive, Leonard A. Hadley. Asked
when the Maytag name would replace the Admiral name on the
plant's water tower, Mr. Hadley snapped: "When you earn it."
   When Maytag decided to introduce its own refrigerator,
officials realized "we could not do with refrigerators what
we did with ranges -- just hang a name on it," Mr. Haines
says. The company pumped $60 million into the Galesburg plant
and made 1,100 engineering changes before turning out the new
refrigerator in 1989. The refrigerator, which generally
retails for some $200 more than a comparable Admiral, was
such a hit that Maytag had to ration supplies. Consumer
Reports rates the Maytag refrigerator far above the Admiral
and Magic Chef brands, which are made on the same line as the
Maytag.
   The Maytag-Magic Chef differences become clear in Newton,
a blue-collar city of 15,000 that once claimed six
washing-machine companies and the title "Washing Machine
Center of the World." On the loading docks at Newton plant
No. 2, Maytag workers unload huge coils of steel with zinc
coating. The finish, plus a zinc phosphate coat for paint
adhesion, inhibits rust from forming on Maytag appliances in
damp basements. Magic Chef and others don't bother with such
a finish.
   On the Maytag assembly line, a 400-ton press turns steel
disks into baskets that hold clothes in the wash cycle.
Another press turns the baskets inside out to toughen the
steel. Because the baskets are seamless, rust can't start
from a crack in a weld. And Maytag's latest advance is a new
transmission that has 40% fewer parts than its predecessor
had. The transmission, which turns the agitator in the wash
basket, is so reliable that most repairmen have never seen
it.
   The differences are apparent on the retail front as well.
Under the fluorescent lights of the Polk Bros appliance store
in the Chicago suburb of Melrose Park, Jerry Schissler, a
salesman, takes a quarter and strikes the top of a Maytag
Fabric-Matic. The double-coated porcelain finish doesn't
chip, as a surface that was simply painted might. He grabs
the Maytag's thick rubber drain hose and sets it next to the
flimsy plastic version made by others.
   Mr. Schissler, whose store sells nine brands of washers,
says he will sell a customer any brand but would rather sell
a Maytag. "I don't like to get back what I sell," he says.
   In its latest report on washing machines, Consumer Reports
continues to rank Maytag-brand washers ahead of the company's
other brands. The Maytag gets high marks for quality and
reliability. But the handbook for many quality-conscious
shoppers also notes improvement in the Magic Chef and Admiral
brands. The clank at the end of their spin cycle, which was
caused by the washers' tub brakes, is gone. "A bit of the
Maytag charm seems to have rubbed off on the brands new to
the Maytag family," the magazine says.
   Still, the Magic Chef model and the Admiral get low marks
for handling unbalanced loads, one of the many areas in which
the Maytag excels. And though up from the bottom, Magic Chef
and Admiral still are only in the middle of the washer pack.
   "We knew the Magic Chef products were not Maytag products
when we bought them," says Mr. Hadley, chief operating
officer and heir-apparent to Mr. Krumm. "Part of the
challenge was to improve them."
   But sometimes the company hasn't done as much as it could.
It dispatched an engineering team to Magic Chef to pull apart
its washers and suggest improvements but refused to allow
Magic Chef to use Maytag's new transmission. Mr. Krumm says
the Maytag brand must remain separate "so we don't meld it
all together into one kind of mediocre level of competitive
strength."
   Maytag's Hoover acquisition isn't faring any better. It
was completed just as the major-appliance business in the big
British market slumped. Mr. Krumm, who terms that market "a
total disaster," has ordered a manufacturing overhaul.
Elsewhere in Europe, Hoover is big in vacuums but less
important in major appliances.
   The acquisition "didn't get them anything" in Europe,
contends Lawrence J. Kremer, Whirlpool's senior vice
president for global procurement operations. Maytag's heavy
debt load and low stock price would hamper any push deeper
into Europe through acquisitions, although marketing
alliances are possible.
   Maytag's shareholders have gained little so far. The
company's after-tax return on sales fell to 4.3% in 1989 from
a robust 10.5% in 1985. One reason: Operating margins of the
Magic Chef brands are just half those of the 14% of the
Maytag brand, estimates Jonathan Goldfarb, a Merrill Lynch
analyst. Maytag shares, two-thirds of which are held by some
30,000 individual investors, traded on the New York Stock
Exchange in 1990 at about $10 to $20 -- almost the same range
as in 1985, adjusted for stock splits. (They closed yesterday
at $12.75, up 12 1/2 cents on the day.)
   In November, Maytag declared its 22 1/2-cent-a-share
quarterly dividend and its traditional year-end payout of
five cents. But Mr. Krumm cautioned that keeping dividends at
that level is "becoming more and more difficult to do in
today's challenging business environment."
   Some veteran Maytag workers feel betrayed by "Mother
Maytag." They protested the decision to move Maytag
dishwasher production from Iowa to Jackson, Tenn., by sending
the chairman a bouquet of black flowers. Maytag insists that
the new $42 million Jackson plant is necessary to centralize
dishwasher production and improve all its dishwasher brands.
   But employees here are skeptical. "One of our concerns is
they won't get the quality," says Bradley Bucklin, an
inspector on the dishwasher line. "They'll live on the
reputation we've built."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
