ID: 172	RANK: 55	SCORE: 5.170086
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900918-0095 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NY-09-18-90 1404EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r p AM-DisenchantedVoters 1stLd-Writethru a057 09-18 0837</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Disenchanted Voters, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0578,880</SECOND>
<NOTE>For release 6:30 p.m. EDT. Time set by source.</NOTE>
<HEAD>Survey Finds Growing Disenchantment With Both Political Parties</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Inserts new grafs 15-16 with Dem Party chairman comments</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By DONALD M. ROTHBERG</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP Political Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Americans are growing increasingly
disenchanted with the two major political parties, associating
Republicans with wealth and greed and Democrats with incompetence
according to a survey released Tuesday.
   ``Since 1987, there has been a significant upswing in feelings
of mistrust of political leaders, disillusionment with politics and
feelings of powerlessness,'' said the Times Mirror survey
titled``The People, the Press &amp; Politics 1990.''
   The study said the growing cynicism and economic polarization
among all but the wealthiest Americans ``threatens to subvert
traditional partisan politics or block the effective resolution of
social and economic issues.''
   Another finding was that while ``anti-communism is fading as a
factor in American politics, anti-Japanese sentiment has soared as
economic expectations plummet.'' Equally dramatic was the decline
in support for Israel.
   ``Dislike for the Japanese has become more mainstream,''
concluded the survey. ``It is no longer primarily concentrated
among the kinds of people who have been hit especially hard by
Japanese competition.''
   ``Growing dislike for Israel is evident across all demographic,
political and social groups, except among American Jews,'' the
survey said. But it also said that ``It is important to note that
the sharp decline in identification with Israel has not been
accompanied by a substantial identification with the causes of the
Palestinians.''
   President Bush fared as well in this as in other recent surveys,
with 76 percent giving him very or mostly favorable ratings.
   The findings were based on face-to-face interviews in May with
3,004 adults. A random sample of 1,000 was reinterviewed between
Aug. 19 and 25. The responses for the overall sample had a margin
of error of plus or minus 2 percentage points.
   The responses were analyzed by Princeton Research Associates and
compared to the findings of a similar study conducted in 1987.
   In the three years between the two studies, there was little
change in Americans' affiliation with the major parties - the
number of people identifying themselves as Republicans increased 3
percentage points, while those calling themselves Democrats
declined 4 points.
   The survey found 33 percent of the respondents called themselves
Democrats, 28 percent Republicans and 39 percent independents.
   ``Beneath this surface stability however, there are volatile
forces at work,'' said the study. It concluded that ``both parties
have declined precipitously in the public's estimation.''
   Even among people who are the strongest supporters of the
Democratic Party, the party was viewed as ``incapable of governing
America successfully and unclear on what it should stand for.''
   Despite the Republican success at holding the White House, the
survey concluded the party ``has been unable to capitalize on these
declining Democratic fortunes because the GOP itself is now seen by
a majority of the public as the political instrument of the
nation's rich and powerful.''
   Democratic Party chairman Ronald H. Brown said, ``I'm not at all
disheartened by those findings.'' He noted that the survey was
conducted at a time when the Republican president has very high
approval ratings, but that nonetheless it ``reinforces the point
that we've been trying to get across, namely, that the Republican
Party is the party of the privileged few.''
   Brown said his party must do a better job of getting across the
point that Republicans ``have been in charge of government for the
last decade. It hasn't been Democrats, and Republicans have failed
totally in managing this government.''
   The latest survey found growth in the already large numbers of
Americans feeling alienated from their government.
   Among the findings were these:
   -- Thirty percent said they agreed completely with the statement
that ``generally speakng, elected officials in Washington often
lose touch with the people pretty quickly.'' Three years ago, 22
percent agreed completely.
   -- The majority that felt people like themselves have no say in
what government does grew from 52 percent in 1987 to 57 percent in
1990.
   -- The number of people who said that elected officials care
what they think declined from 47 percent to 44 percent.
   -- Thirty-eight percent said they agreed completely with the
statement ``It's really true, the rich get richer and the poor get
poorer.'' That was an increase from 31 percent in 1987.
   Drugs far outstripped other matters when people were asked to
list the most important problems facing the nation.
   Thirty-six percent cited drugs, compared to 11 percent three
years ago. The federal deficit was named by 11 percent, the same
proportion as in 1987. Homelessness and the environment each were
listed by 8 percent. Fewer than 1 percent named either matter three
years ago.
   The proportion of people willing to spend more money to combat
drugs increased from 66 percent in 1987 to 73 percent this year.
   In both surveys, 67 percent said they would be willing to spend
more for the homeless and 35 percent would approve more funds to
aid blacks and other minorities.
   On abortion, the survey found 55 percent saying they opposed
restrictions on access to abortions. However, among Republicans and
those who lean to the GOP, 47 percent opposed restrictions and 48
percent favored them. Democrats and those inclined to support the
party opposed restrictions by a margin of 62 percent to 33 percent.
   When asked about attitudes toward Japan, 56 percent gave a
favorable opinion and 39 percent unfavorable. Three years ago, 69
percent viewed Japan favorably and 27 percent unfavorably.
   The greatest increases in unfavorable opinion toward the
Japanese occurred among whites, men, upper income earners and those
in the Western United States, the survey found.
   On Israel, 44 percent rated the country favorably and 45 percent
unfavorably. Three years ago, the split was 65 percent favorable
and 27 percent unfavorable.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
