ID: 172	RANK: 69	SCORE: 5.116392
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP881023-0096 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-10-23-88 0155EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u p BC-APElectionService 19thadd   10-23 1433</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-AP Election Service, 19th add,1,480,1483</SECOND>
<HEAD>BC-AP Election Service, 18th add,900</HEAD>
<HEAD>UNDATED: 23 Republicans.</HEAD>
<TEXT>
</TEXT>
<HEAD>100 United States Senators</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   
   Here is a look at the 100 U.S. senators:
   
   _ The political lineup going into this year's election: 54
Democrats, 46 Republicans.
   _ Terms: 6 years.
   _ Beginning of terms in the 33 seats at stake in this year's
election: Jan. 3, 1989.
   For candidates winning their first election to the Senate, that
will be the day they start their new job. For re-elected senators
or appointed ones who win election, that will be the day their
seniority is extended without interruption.
   For this year's winners who are former senators, those who had
left the job when they either retired, resigned or were forced out
of office because they lost at the polls, that will be the day they
return to the Senate.
   _ Congresses: Winners of this year's election will serve in the
nation's 101st, 102nd and 103rd Congresses.
   _ Senate seniority: Democrat John C. Stennis of Mississippi, who
began serving Nov. 5, 1947, ranks No. 1 in seniority among the
present senators.
   With Democrats in the majority, Stennis is president pro tempore
_ president for the time being _ of the Senate. The vice president
of the United States is the Senate's president under the
Constitution; when the vice president is absent, the president pro
tempore presides over the chamber.
   Stennis is retiring from the Senate instead of seeking another
six-year term in this year's election.
   _ Last change in Senate lineup: Republican David K. Karnes of
Nebraska, appointed by Republican Gov. Kay A. Orr, was sworn into
office March 13, 1987. As the newest senator, Karnes, who is
seeking election this year, ranks last in seniority among the
current members.
   Karnes filled a vacancy created by the death of Sen. Edward
Zorinsky, a Democrat, on March 6, 1987.
   According to Senate records, tracing the membership since the
first quorum was established April 6, 1789, Karnes is the 1,782nd
U.S. senator in American history.
   _ Senate size: Two seats are given to each state, as ordered by
the Constitution, meaning the Senate automatically grows when a
state joins the union. So, because the nation has 50 states now,
the Senate has 100 seats.
   _ Senate elections: Races are run on a schedule that spreads the
action evenly every two years, putting 33 seats at stake in one
election year, another 33 in the next election year, and the final
34 in the last year of the regular cycle.
   _ The 33 seats up for election this year are now held by: 18
Democrats, 15 Republicans.
   _ The 67 seats not up for election this year are held by: 36
Democrats, 31 Republicans.
   _ Senators, by sex: 98 male, 2 female.
   The women in the Senate are Republican Nancy Landon Kassebaum of
Kansas and Democrat Barbara Ann Mikulski of Maryland. Two is the
record for the most women serving there at the same time.
   In all, throughout history, 16 women _ 9 Democrats and 7
Republicans _ have been either appointed or elected to the Senate.
   In 1922, the first woman senator, Georgia Democrat Rebecca
Latimer Felton, was appointed by the governor Oct. 3 to fill a
vacancy created Sept. 26 by the death of Democratic Sen. Thomas
Watson, and she was sworn in Nov. 21. Because her successor,
Democrat Walter George, who had been elected Nov. 7 and took office
Nov. 22, purposely delayed presenting his credentials, she got a
chance to take the oath and make a speech on the floor.
   The first woman elected to the Senate was Arkansas Democrat
Hattie Wyatt Caraway. She first entered the Senate Nov. 13, 1931,
when she was appointed by the governor after the death of her
husband, Sen. Thaddeus Caraway. On Jan. 12, 1932, she was elected
to complete the unexpired term. She was re-elected in November 1932
and in 1938, and completed service in January 1945.
   _ Senators, by race: There are no blacks among the 100 senators.
   The last black to serve in the U.S. Senate was Republican Edward
William Brooke of Massachusetts. He was elected in 1966, began
serving Jan. 3, 1967; was re-elected in 1972; was defeated Nov. 7,
1978, in his bid for a third term, and left office Jan. 2, 1979.
   Brooke was the first black in the Senate since the nation's
Reconstruction after the Civil War, and only the third black
senator _ all of them Republicans _ in American history. He also
was the first black elected to the Senate by popular vote, and the
first to win a second term.
   Two blacks went to the Senate after the Civil War, having been
elected by the Mississippi Legislature. The first black senator _
and the first black member of Congress _ was Hiram Rhodes Revels of
Mississippi, who served after the state was readmitted to
representation in Congress in 1870.
   Revels took his Senate seat in February 1870 and served for a
term expiring March 3, 1871. The first black to serve a full
six-year term in the Senate was Blanche Kelso Bruce of Mississippi;
he held office from March 4, 1875, to March 3, 1881.
   In 1959, Democrat Daniel Ken Inouye of Hawaii was elected to the
U.S. House July 28 and began serving Aug. 21 as the first U.S.
representative of Japanese ancestry. He was first elected in 1962
to the U.S. Senate, where he started service Jan. 3, 1963.
   Democrat Spark Masayuki Matsunaga of Hawaii, a Japanese-American
who first won a U.S. House seat in 1962, was elected to the U.S.
Senate for the first time in 1976 and began service Jan. 3, 1977.
   
   
   
   Here is a look at the class of '88 _ the senators holding the 33
seats up for election this year, including six senators retiring
instead of seeking new terms:
   
   
   1. ARIZONA _ Democrat Dennis DeConcini, of Tucson, was born May
8, 1937.
   First elected: 1976.
   Began serving: Jan. 3, 1977.
   Election history: In 1976, DeConcini, a former county
prosecutor, was elected to the Senate with 54 percent of the vote,
beating Republican Sam Steiger, a congressman, for the seat vacated
by retiring Republican Paul Fannin. DeConcini got 400,334 votes to
Steiger's 321,236. DeConcini picked up 56.9 percent of the vote in
winning re-election in 1982 when he whipped Republican Peter Dunn,
a state legislator, who had claimed the Democratic incumbent was
too liberal for Arizona. DeConcini came away with 411,970 votes
while Dunn drew 291,749. Before coming to the Senate, DeConcini was
Pima County attorney, 1973-76.
   
   
   2. CALIFORNIA _ Republican Pete Wilson, of San Diego, was born
Aug. 23, 1933.
   First elected: 1982.
   Began serving: Jan. 3, 1983.
   Election history: In 1982, Wilson, who had been elected San
Diego's mayor three times, retained for the GOP a Senate seat being
given up by S.I. Hayakawa, who retired. Wilson first captured the
Republican nomination by overpowering a dozen rivals including
Congressmen Paul McCloskey, Barry Goldwater Jr. and Robert Dornam,
and President Reagan's daughter Maureen. Then Wilson won the
election with 51.53 percent of the vote, topping then-Gov. Edmund
G. Brown Jr., the Democratic nominee. Out of 7.8 million votes cast
in a multicandidate contest, Wilson received 4,022,565 to Brown's
3,494,968. Earlier, Wilson was elected mayor of San Diego in 1971
and was re-elected in 1975 and 1979. In 1978, Wilson lost a bid for
the GOP gubernatorial nomination.
   
   
   3. CONNECTICUT _ Republican Lowell P. Weicker Jr., of Greenwich,
was born May 16, 1931.
   First elected: 1970.
   Began serving: Jan. 3, 1971.
   Election history: In 1970, Weicker, an heir to the Squibb drug
fortune, won election to the Senate and took over the seat that had
been held by Democrat Thomas J. Dodd, who was censured by the
Senate in 1967 for using campaign money to pay personal bills.
Democrats picked Joseph D. Duffey, leader of Americans for
Democratic Action, as their nominee in 1970 and Dodd sought
re-election as an independent. Weicker came up with 41.7 percent of
the vote, while Duffey got 33.8 percent and Dodd drew 24.5 percent.
In 1976, Weicker won a second term, grabbing 57.7 percent of the
vote and beating Democrat Gloria Schaffer, Connecticut's secretary
of state. Weicker gained GOP renomination at the state convention
in 1982, defeating Prescott Bush Jr., brother of Vice President
George Bush, then captured a third term by drawing 50.39 percent of
the vote and beating Democrat Anthony Toby Moffett, a congressman.
Before becoming a senator, Weicker won a U.S. House term in 1968.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>MORE</NOTE>
</DOC>
