ID: 172	RANK: 81	SCORE: 5.031320
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP901218-0072 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NY-12-18-90 1122EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i PM-GulfRdp 6thLd-Writethru a0531 12-18 0779</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Gulf Rdp, 6th Ld-Writethru, a0531-536,0931</SECOND>
<HEAD>Europeans Reject Talks With Iraq Although US Wouldn't Object</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Leads with 22 grafs to COMBINE pvs, UPGRADES sourcing, UPDATES
with Iranian comment on possible war. Pickup 19th graf pvs, `In
Baghdad today...'</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos DHR1, NY6</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By ARTHUR ALLEN</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Secretary of State James A. Baker III today gave European allies
the go-ahead for talks with Iraq as long as ``mixed signals'' are
not sent. But the European Community decided not to hold such a
meeting now, officials said.
   In another development, Iraqi President Saddam Hussein was
quoted as saying any U.S.-Iraqi talks would be useless if the
American side only repeats United Nations demands to withdraw from
Kuwait.
   Meanwhile, thousands of Iraqi reservists reported to army units
today on call-up orders from their rulers for all able-bodied
33-year-old reservists.
   Iraq's Revolutionary Command Council said ``many heads will roll
and many thrones will fall,'' if war breaks out in the gulf.
   Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz had planned talks this week
with Foreign Minister Gianni De Michelis of Italy, the European
Community chairman.
   European leaders put the meeting on hold after talks that had
been scheduled for Monday between Aziz and President Bush were
scrubbed.
   Baker said today he had no problem with a European meeting with
Aziz.
   European Community foreign minsters reconsidered the matter,
then decided against any talks unless Iraq holds talks with the
United States first, officials said.
   ``A meeting will take place if Aziz goes to Washington first,''
said Irish Foreign Minister Gerald Collins.
   ``We must maintain the pressure on Iraq,'' said Jacques Delors,
president of the European Commission, the community's executive
body.
   The Iraqi Foreign Ministry today criticized the EC's earlier
refusal to hold talks, accusing the Europeans of trying to
``appease'' the United States.
   Baker, speaking at a news conference after a two-day meeting of
foreign ministers of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in
Belgium, said: ``We support ... any diplomatic efforts that might
result in a peaceful solution.''
   ``The one thing we do discourage,'' he said, ``are discordant
messages, mixed messages or mixed signals.''
   The Bush-Aziz talks on Monday were scrubbed over differences on
the timing of a subsequent trip to Baghdad by Baker.
   Saddam has sought to hold the meeting Jan. 12, which Bush says
is too late. Bush has said Saddam's intransigence on the issue
signals his lack of willingness to leave Kuwait as the coalition
lined up against him insists.
   A Turkish report today quoted Saddam as saying direct talks with
the United States would be useless if the American side merely
reiterates U.N. Security Council resolutions on the crisis.
   ``We have already read them (the resolutions), we know them and
we rejected them,'' Saddam told a Turkish television journalist in
an interview to be broadcast this week on state television.
Excerpts were released today.
   Saddam also repeated his demand that a withdrawal from Kuwait be
linked to a resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The
United States has repeatedly said the issues are unrelated.
   Iran's president, meanwhile, said if Iraq finds itself under
attack by the U.S.-led forces, the Baghdad government itself would
bear the responsibility.
   The official Islamic Republic News agency, monitored in Nicosia,
Cyprus, quoted Iranian President Hashemi Rafsanjani as saying ``we
are feeling very uneasy over the fact that the Iraqi people may be
hurt by the Americans.''
   But he told a group of college students in Tehran that ``the
responsibility for this rests with the Iraqi regime,'' IRNA said.
   Iran and Iraq fought a 1980-88 war, but Baghdad moved to make
peace with Tehran after it invaded Kuwait.
   In Baghdad today, Health Minister Abdul-Salam Mohammed Said said
that 2,042 children under age 5 have died of disease and
malnutrition because of shortages in baby food and medicine
resulting from a U.N.-ordered trade embargo. Said claimed on Dec. 3
that 1,416 children had died because of the sanctions.
   Iraq has offered no proof of the claims, and diplomats in
Baghdad have discounted the reports of shortages, noting that the
Security Council decided in October to allow shipments of essential
food and medicines to Iraq.
   In Iraq, thousands of reservists reported to their army units
today as part of a major military mobilization to counter a feared
offensive by the U.S.-led multinational force.
   On Monday, the Defense Ministry ordered all able-bodied
33-year-old reservists to report for duty by Thursday for short
periods of retraining before being assigned to active duty.
   It was Iraq's third major callup of reserves in recent weeks.
Most reservists served in the military during the 1980-88 war with
Iran.
   In other gulf-related developments:
   -Yevgeny Primakov, Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's top
aide on the gulf crisis, said the departure of 2,500 Soviet workers
from Iraq has been delayed only by technical matters and the desire
of many to remain until their contracts expire. There had been
speculation Baghdad was trying to hold the Soviet contract workers
as hostages.
   -The Japanese Foreign Ministry said today Japan would quickly
respond to a request from the U.S. military for $300 million worth
of vehicles, computers, medical supplies and other goods. Japanese
corporations plan to donate 20,000 stereo headsets to the U.S.-led
multilateral forces, the ministry said.
   -Prince Charles will visit British troops in the gulf this
weekend, Buckingham Palace said today. Charles' wife, Princess
Diana, will fly to Germany on Wednesday to visit families of
British soldiers serving in the region, the palace said.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
