ID: 278	RANK: 12	SCORE: 17.322615
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910306-0088
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910306-0088.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Who's News:
   Domino's Founder Yields Some Power
   After Conceding Failure to Sell Chain
   ----
   By Bradley A. Stertz
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
03/06/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B6
</SO>
<CO>
   LABOR WNEWS
</CO>
<IN>
RESTAURANTS, FAST-FOOD, CATERING (RES)
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)
</IN>
<LP>
   Domino's Pizza Inc.'s founder and owner, Thomas S.
Monaghan, ceded greater authority to a team of managers after
failing in his efforts to sell the nation's second-largest
pizza chain.
   Although Mr. Monaghan will keep his chairman's title and
his 97% ownership of the company, his role in day-to-day
operations will be primarily as a goodwill ambassador --
meeting with Domino's supervisors and franchise owners
nationwide.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The move fulfills the 53-year-old Mr. Monaghan's goal --
set about 18 months ago -- to wind down his involvement in
Domino's to pursue his interests in Roman Catholic religious
causes such as missionary work.
   He also has said he has lost interest in his Frank Lloyd
Wright collection and his fleet of classic cars -- though not
in his ownership of the Detroit Tigers baseball team. Mr.
Monaghan has installed his friend, former University of
Michigan football Coach Bo Schembechler, as president of the
Tigers. The two men have stirred controversy in Detroit with
the firing of the Tigers' longtime radio announcer, and with
suggestions that they would like to move the team from the
city to the suburbs.
   Last year Mr. Monaghan hoped he could quickly sell the
pizza business that he started 31 years ago out of a small
restaurant in Ypsilanti, Mich. Domino's is now based in Ann
Arbor.
   But weaker financial results by Domino's, tougher
competition from PepsiCo Inc.'s Pizza Hut chain, the
industry's largest, and decreased enthusiasm for leveraged
buy-outs on Wall Street torpedoed the chances for selling the
company.
   "It's apparent I'm not going to be selling the company
now," Mr. Monaghan said yesterday in a telephone interview
after a Domino's board meeting this week. Domino's officials
said working out an employee stock ownership plan to buy the
company remains a possibility, but only a remote one.
Domino's wouldn't disclose what, if any, offers it received.
   When Mr. Monaghan was searching for a buyer, he named
41-year-old P. David Black president of Domino's and gave him
increased responsibility for the company's operations. While
conceding he won't be cutting his ties by selling Domino's,
Mr. Monaghan solidified Mr. Black's position this week by
letting Mr. Black form his own management team. Major members
include Michael Raymond, 40, who becomes vice president for
marketing, research and development; Timothy Carr, 39, who
becomes vice president for administration and finance; and
Kevin Williams, 34, who remains as vice president,
operations.
   Operations is the job that Mr. Black held in the early
1980s, the period of strongest growth for Domino's. Mr. Black
started with the company as a delivery driver while in
college at the University of Florida. He became a franchisee,
and attracted Mr. Monaghan's attention while the owner was
touring Domino's stores.
   Domino's faces a range of challenges right now. The
company last year increased earnings 50% to $5.4 million. But
that's still a paltry return on sales of $2.65 billion, and
the increase compared with weak profits of $3.6 million in
1989. Moreover, Domino's opened just 224 stores last year,
its lowest growth rate in seven years.
   Mr. Black plans to refocus the company's attention on its
main business of pizza delivery -- a business that has come
under increased attack from competitors. Domino's will still
experiment with such things as take-out stores in malls,
airports and sports arenas, Mr. Black said in an interview
yesterday. But he said Domino's probably will pull back a
little from those projects.
   "Our focus will be the basics," Mr. Black said. "We have
to take steps that will make us more efficient and effective
in 1991."
   Domino's also will increase its push overseas, where Mr.
Black sees the greatest opportunity for growth. To highlight
the importance of overseas operations, Mr. Black switched the
company's chief financial officer, 46-year-old Doug Dawson,
to become vice president in charge of international business.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
