ID: 278	RANK: 18	SCORE: 16.139217
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910417-0033
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910417-0033.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Marketing &amp; Media -- Advertising:
   Grey Wins Domino's From Ross Roy Unit
   ----
   By John B. Hinge
</HL>
<DATE>
04/17/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4
</SO>
<CO>
   EK GREY IPG PCI
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
</MS>
<IN>
ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)
DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
ENVIRONMENT (ENV)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)
RESTAURANTS, FAST-FOOD, CATERING (RES)
</IN>
<GV>
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)
</GV>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
NEW YORK (NY)
</RE>
<LP>
   Domino's Pizza, beset by competitive pressures, awarded
its $60 million national account to Grey Advertising, dealing
a major blow to longtime agency Group 243 and its parent,
Ross Roy Group.
   In 1990, the pizza chain's account represented about 60%
of the small agency's total billings of $80 million. And the
account, which has been serviced at Group 243 for the past 15
years, was the major reason that Ross Roy bought the shop in
November 1988.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   A spokesman for Ross Roy, based in Bloomfield Hills,
Mich., wouldn't comment on how the loss would affect Group
243.
   Group 243 retains two regional pieces of Domino's
business, in the Southeast and in Canada. But those
assignments bill only a few million dollars. With only a
handful of other clients, massive cuts in the agency's
100-member staff seem inevitable. The spokesman also declined
comments on potential layoffs.
   For Grey, meanwhile, the Domino's account is the biggest
and most prestigious coup in a string of recent account
victories. Just this year, the publicly held agency has
picked up accounts that include the $20 million National
Dairy Board cheese account, the $15 million to $20 million
Gerber Baby Food business and the $10 million Dannon Yogurt
account. Industry executives suggested the Domino's account
may be the type of high-profile account that would help boost
the agency's creative reputation, which has been lackluster
for some time despite its recent hot streak.
   But the account is certain to give the agency a challenge.
Domino's has seen its dominance in the pizza-delivery
business threatened as giant Pizza Hut has muscled into home
delivery over the past 18 months. While Domino's share of the
total pizza market business is up slightly, at a bit less
than 20%, its share of the home-delivery market has been
sliding.
   Moreover, Domino's strong presence in the pizza business
-- it now has 5,400 stores world-wide -- has put the company
in a defensive posture. "They've been so successful at
getting market penetration, that they're reaching a point of
diminishing returns," says George Rice, chairman of GDR
Enterprises, a Chicago restaurant consultant.
   "It's going to be a slugfest," said Edward H. Meyer,
Grey's chairman, president and chief executive officer,
referring to Domino's battle with Pizza Hut, a unit of
PepsiCo. "We love that kind of competitive scrap."
   After putting its account up for review in January,
Domino's talked with many agencies -- most of them much
larger than Group 243. In early rounds of discussions,
Domino's talked with eight shops in addition to Group 243. In
the end, however, Domino's whittled its search to just Grey
and Group 243.
   Mike Raymond, Domino's vice president of marketing, said
Grey's food and retail experience, depth of resources and
"good chemistry" between the agency and Domino's management
were deciding factors in the move. Grey also creates ads for
the Red Lobster and Olive Garden restaurant chains, which are
owned by General Mills. This was the first review Domino's
has conducted since it hired Group 243.
   Ross Roy pulled out all the stops in its attempt to hang
on to the business. Although the pitch initially only
involved Group 243, people from the parent agency quickly got
involved. Company executives presented Domino's with a number
of different promotional ideas, and it went to the television
networks to help them create innovative programs that might
impress the client. It was Group 243 that worked with
Domino's and CBS in clinching a major sweepstakes program
called "Hot &amp; Fresh Watch and Win," which will run next month
during the so-called sweeps period.
   Like most other fast-food companies, Domino's has been
shifting more of its money out of traditional advertising
into promotions. The company was a major sponsor of NBC's
"Dark Shadows" TV show, sponsoring previews of the show's
pilot episodes in cities around the country.
   All of the agency's staffers rallied around the effort.
Last Wednesday, after the agency's executives showed final
presentations, about 300 Ross Roy employees dressed up like
Domino's drivers and staged a pep rally outside the pizza
chain's Ann Arbor headquarters. "Who are we? We're Ross Roy]"
they shouted. "What are we? We're No. 1] What do we sell?
Domino's Pizza. Have more fun]"
   Neither Grey, Ross Roy, nor any of the other agencies
involved in the pitch did any speculative creative work as
part of the pitch, Mr. Raymond, Domino's vice president of
marketing, said. Instead, the agencies were asked to
concentrate on strategic issues for building market share.
   Group 243's creative highlight came in the mid-1980s when
it launched the "Noid," a clay-animation figure that played
on Domino's 30-minute delivery guarantee. But the "Avoid the
Noid" ads were criticized in the ad community, and the
company scrapped the campaign last year. The ads were
replaced by the more pedestrian theme: "It's time for
Domino's Pizza."
   ---
   Lintas Resigns Bayer
                                                                                                       

   Lintas:New York resigned from handling the estimated $20
million to $25 million ad account for Bayer aspirin.
   Bayer marketer Glenbrook Laboratories, a unit of Eastman
Kodak, said it is reviewing the account for its entire
analgesic line, which includes Midol and Panadol as well as
Bayer lines. But a spokesman for the company wouldn't
disclose what agencies are involved in the pitch.
   Lintas, a unit of Interpublic Group, said in a statement
it "expressed regret" at the ending of the longtime
relationship. Agency executives couldn't be reached for
further comment.
   ---
   Ad Notes. . . .
                                                                                                       

   NO LOCAL ADS ON VIDEOS: The fledgling business of splicing
local ads into video rentals was struck a death blow by a
federal court in Kansas. The court permanently barred Video
Broadcasting Systems Inc., a Wichita company, from placing
local commercials on Paramount Pictures releases. Paramount
had filed suit against Video Broadcasting in 1989 after it
spliced ads such as one for Bosley's Tire Service onto video
rentals such as "She's Having a Baby." The injunction was
part of a settlement whose other terms weren't disclosed. The
injunction won't have much effect in practical terms; as
previously reported, after Paramount filed its suit, the
business of splicing local ads onto rentals all but dried up.
                                                                                                       

   CALIFORNIA BATHING: Ad agency Gumpertz/Bentley/Fried is
urging its advertising brethren not to bathe on Mondays to
help conserve water in drought-stricken Los Angeles. "Is that
morning shower so essential? There are alternatives like
cologne, perfume, deodorant, or a flyswatter for extreme
cases," reads a wall calendar, mailed by the firm along with
deodorant and moist towelettes to about 50 Los Angeles area
agencies this week. The agency, which does water conservation
ads for the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power,
insists its Dry Monday effort "isn't a gag": By going one day
a week without using water, the average person can conserve
as much as 15% of normal consumption, it notes.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
