ID: 278	RANK: 36	SCORE: 14.525720
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910815-0039
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910815-0039.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Marketing:
   Pizza Hut Tries to Cook Up a Ristorante
   ----
   By Laurie M. Grossman
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
08/15/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   GIS PEP
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
</MS>
<IN>
BEVERAGES (BVG)
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
FOOD PRODUCTS (FOD)
RESTAURANTS, FAST-FOOD, CATERING (RES)
SOFT DRINKS, MAKERS OF NON-ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES (SFT)
</IN>
<RE>
MINNESOTA (MN)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Pizza Hut, which has been focusing on home delivery, is
testing a new outlet where diners will drop in and sit for a
while.
   On Monday, the chain will open a beige stucco restaurant
in its headquarters city, Wichita, Kan., that, except for the
red roof, is a far cry from its other 6,725 fast-food pizza
joints around the country. The new restaurant will have
striped gondola poles on the outside and, on the inside,
antiqued ceilings, trellises with vines and stucco arches.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   And it will offer a lot more than Pepperoni and Double
Cheese. Among other things, its menu will include minestrone,
pasta, chicken caesar salad, and chocolate-drenched desserts,
as well as pizza. "We want to make a standard old red-roof
restaurant feel like a country Italian cottage," says Jeff
Christensen, vice president for new concepts. If the concept
is successful, Pizza Hut may redesign many of its existing
restaurants or start building new ones like it as soon as
next year.
   The new restaurant, to be called Pizza Hut Cafe, is a huge
departure for Pizza Hut's parent company, PepsiCo Inc. Until
now, Pepsi has stayed only in the fast food, or quick service
segment, of the restaurant business. With Taco Bell and
Kentucky Fried Chicken as well as Pizza Hut, PepsiCo has been
hugely successful. It has become the nation's biggest
restaurant company and its second-most profitable to
McDonald's Corp. (Pizza Hut currently is PepsiCo's most
profitable chain, posting a 22% increase in the latest
quarter.)
   The cafe business could be tricky for Pizza Hut, marketers
say. Some believe the new restaurant may have trouble shaking
its old image. "Pizza Hut is so strongly associated with
pizza, it's strange for them to do," says Ron Paul, president
of Technomic Inc., a food service consulting firm in Chicago.
"It is not seen as a full dinner house."
   Moreover, the new concept departs from the major tools
that have made PepsiCo's restaurants generally so successful:
mass merchandising, lots of speed and generous discounts. If
too much changes, Pizza Hut may clutter the power of its
name, some say. "It would muddy the image," says Bob O'Brien,
director of sales and market development at NPD Crest, a
market research firm in Park Ridge, Ill. "It would be like
trying to sell burgers at Kentucky Fried Chicken."
   But Pizza Hut Cafe is the chain's answer to two trends
that are currently plaguing many fast food chains.
Increasingly, fast food outlets are becoming not restaurants
but take-out and delivery places. Carry-out accounts for
about one-third of Pizza Hut's sales. Delivery comprises
nearly a third of sales and is expected to swell to about
half in five years.
   Profits from that business are growing at double-digit
rates, while profits from the dine-in business grew 3% to 4%.
Consequently, Pizza Hut is building 450 delivery and
carry-out only units this year, compared with 100 new
sit-down restaurants. "We've seen a flattening in dining-in
business," says Mr. Christensen. "As we extend that out, it's
not a pretty picture." But the dine-in setting has higher
margins, so the chain doesn't want to miss the opportunity to
sell pizza to those customers.
   Moreover, it is the casual dining part of the restaurant
business that is growing rapidly, not fast food. That
segment, which includes such chains as Chili's Grill &amp; Bar,
Olive Garden and Bennigan's, grew 5% in terms of traffic last
year, according to NPD Crest. Analysts say there is a growing
demand for such restaurants as baby boomers tire of fast
food. "They're riding a demographic wave of aging boomers,'
says Michael Mueller, restaurant analyst with Montgomery
Securities. "As people get older and their taste preferences
get more sophisticated, mid-priced chains are in a good
position to provide that."
   Pizza Hut wants in on the action. Italian food is also one
of the most rapidly growing restaurant segments, according to
the Restaurant Consulting Group in Evanston, Ill. Other than
mostly regional chains, the only current national player is
266-store Olive Garden, which is owned by General Mills.
   "We've let competition get in front of us. They've
redefined that casual dining niche," says Mr. Christensen.
"We need to do things to freshen up and make us more
competitive."
   Pizza Hut's new restaurant will have 185 seats, about
double the number in its usual restaurants. It will carry
many of Pizza Hut's traditional pizzas at slightly lower
prices and dinner entrees will range from $2.95 to $5.95.
Still, the store is expected to have a higher average ticket
than a traditional Pizza Hut because it will have more
courses and more individual-serving items. The average ticket
is expected to be $14, compared with $10 at Pizza Hut. The
annual store revenue is expected to be $1 million, compared
with $600,000 to $700,000 at a Pizza Hut.
   The new concept is still expected to rely on pizza for
upwards of half its sales. "It still has the same red roof it
had before," says Steven Reinemund, president and chief
executive officer of Pizza Hut Worldwide. "That's more than
symbolic."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
