ID: 278	RANK: 38	SCORE: 14.417976
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910116-0105
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910116-0105.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Pizza on Earth: The Pie Bible
   ----
   By James P. Sterba
</HL>
<DATE>
01/16/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   True or False?
   1. On Dec. 16, British customs inspectors at Gatwick
airport seized 50 Chicago-style pizzas bound for Baghdad
after discovering that they were topped with 17.6 pounds of
weapons-grade mozzarella.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   2. In 1309, Genghis Khan gave Marco Polo a round piece of
untanned yak hide -- a crude Mongolian antecedent of the
modern sail-cat and Frisbee -- which Marco took home to Rome,
where his Aunt Sophia, mistaking it for crust, loaded it with
anchovies and baked it.
   3. Warren Beatty introduced pizza to middle America in the
1961 movie, "Splendor in the Grass," by asking the
now-immortal question: "Hey, what is pizza?"
   The answers: false, false and true. If you got any wrong,
you're obviously not reading the only national magazine
devoted exclusively to pizza: Pizza Today.
   Did you know that you can get a pizza that looks like Bart
Simpson at Camerina Trattoria and Pizzeria in Oakland, N.J.?
Or that the San Francisco Bay area is now "the cutting edge
of pizza making" in America? Pizzaiolos (pizza makers) there,
says Pizza Today, take their "art" so seriously that "their
craft is perhaps the best in the country."
   Pizza Today is the official magazine of the National
Association of Pizza Operators, people devoted to the pizza
of possibilities, warmth, family togetherness, the flag and,
of course, a solid, recession-proof revenue stream. Each
month PT selects one of these fine Americans to feature as
Pizza Maker of the Month.
   Last June's PT took a look at pizza's role in the movies.
The Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles flick, in which our heroes
stuff themselves with Domino's pizza to celebrate, did for
pizza what "E.T." did for Reese's Pieces. The turtles movie,
PT says, continues the trend in "pizza-oriented heroism"
started in "Mystic Pizza" and "Do the Right Thing." The
article says "cinema's first great pizza scene" was Mr.
Beatty's in "Splendor in the Grass." Driven from Kansas to
Yale by Natalie Wood's sexual frigidity, he is found boozing
in sorrow by a spicy waitress who invites him out back for
some pizza. He pops the pizza question, she takes him "out
back" and answers it so well he marries her.
   Pizza Today can be a bit predictable, with "Pizza Horror
Stories" in its annual October Halloween issue and, you
guessed it, "Pizza Love Stories" for Valentine's Day in
February. You won't find out much about pizza's dark side in
PT -- no chart tracking high-speed delivery smash-ups, for
example. PT's Letters to the Editor column is impossible to
confuse with the Penthouse Forum. Sample: "I really enjoy
reading your magazine . . ."
   We called up Paula Werne, the editor, at PT headquarters
in Santa Claus, Ind., and she told us that Americans eat more
than 30,136,986 slices of store-made pizza a day. That's 350
slices a second. They spend more than $25 billion a year on
it, and sales growth has averaged 11% annually in the past
five years.
   The 53,000 pizza outlets listed in various Yellow Pages,
she says, now outnumber burger joints. And 60% of them are
one-store mom-and-pop operations. The top three chains, in
reverse order, are the family-owned Little Caesars
Enterprises, with 2,700 outlets and $1.13 billion in 1989
sales; privately held Domino's Pizza Inc., with 5,225 stores
and $2.5 billion in sales; and the humongous PepsiCo
Inc.-owned Pizza Hut, with more than 7,500 outlets and 1990
sales of $4 billion, which is about $300 million more than
the entire gross national product of Costa Rica.
   The anchovy was pizza's biggest bummer, and it still
stands as the most-loathed topping. Pepperoni remains top
topping, although the trend over the past decade has been to
position pizza as a health food instead of the beloved greasy
kid stuff and college-town food it was in the '60s. Hence:
high-fiber crust, low-salt sauce, fresh veggies, low-fat
meats and low-fat, low-salt cheese, such as the unspeakable
"mozzarella analog" (fake cheese).
   Pizza persons are honest about everything but their
cheese. They lie through their teeth about cheese. On PT's
annual cheese survey, they always say they use only 100% real
cheese. "We don't believe them," says Ms. Werne, politely.
   Pizza makers are besieged. Nearly half the nation's
supermarkets offer fresh pizza and some will even deliver it.
McDonald's is test-marketing pizza that Pizza Hut, in ads,
dismisses as "McFrozen" and a "Mcstake," and in one TV spot
has a woman say, "It sounds like something my ex-husband
would eat."
   Publisher Gerry Durnell started Pizza Today in the back of
his Santa Claus Pizza outlet in October 1983 and now sends
out about 50,000 copies monthly (6,937 to paid subscribers)
in 43 countries, including Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Israel.
   PT is full of ads for ovens and tomato sauces and
Thinsulate-lined delivery bags. But the hottest product
advertised in PT these days is called Throw Dough, a fake
pizza skin "molded from a safe, non-toxic substance," a
"secret polymer," to look and feel like the real thing so
that pizza makers don't have to twirl real dough.
Dough-throwing contests, using these fakes, the ad says, are
great for generating "high-interest newspaper articles that
have real photo opportunity appeal." Afterward, "simply wipe
off the Throw Dough" with a damp cloth. "Always ready, the
official Throw Dough practice pizza relieves the anxiety of
customers waiting for their pizza order, and creates
additional interest that quickly translates into increased
sales," the ad says.
   Steven Carb, Throw Dough's inventor, told us over the
phone that it's only been on the market since October but
"thousands" have been sold. Throw Dough, he says, will be
allowed to be used in the freestyle improvisational tossing
event today at the 1991 Pizza aahlympics part of Pizza Expo
'91, the industry trade show held in the New Orleans
Superdome.
   For $9.95 apiece, though, Throw Dough is slow. Delivery
takes two weeks.
   Pizza Today is published monthly by ProTech Publishing and
Communications, P.O. Box 114, Santa Claus, Ind. 47579.
Subscriptions: $18 a year.
   ---
   Mr. Sterba is a senior writer for the Journal in New York.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
