ID: 278	RANK: 39	SCORE: 14.382003
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910109-0050
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910109-0050.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Marketing &amp; Media -- Advertising:
   Another Media Trade Magazine
   Enters a Dismal Market for Ads
   ----
   By Patrick M. Reilly
</HL>
<DATE>
01/09/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B6
</SO>
<CO>
   PEP OMC SHW WPPGY AFP GREY
</CO>
<IN>
ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
BUILDING MATERIALS (BLD)
RESTAURANTS, FAST-FOOD, CATERING (RES)
</IN>
<LP>
   Even in the midst of an advertising recession, the media
world's fascination with itself seems unending. It reaches a
new high next Monday with the launch of Media Week, yet
another magazine to report on the news, personalities and
workings of the media.
   Media Week, published by A/S/M Communications Inc., joins
an already crowded field of advertising and media trade
magazines, not to mention daily newspapers like this one,
which also report on the field. At last count, the group
included Advertising Age, Inside Media, the New York Times,
Washington Post, USA Today, Folio, Magazine Week, Variety and
Electronic Media, as well as the sister publications of Media
Week, A/S/M's own Adweek and Adweek's Marketing Week. Behind
them is a burgeoning field of newsletters, including Media
Industry Newsletter and the new European Media Business &amp;
Finance, based in London.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The crowded field faces a miserable advertising
environment. Ad pages in the leading media publications, such
as Advertising Age and Adweek, have been falling since 1985.
Their core advertisers, media companies and magazines, are
suffering through hard times and thus have severely
curtailed, or even stopped, advertising.
   Industry executives expect the added heat from Media
Week's entry to result in at least one casualty, as the
titles fight for a share of a shrinking ad pie.
   Media Week was born from Marketing &amp; Media Decisions, a
moribund trade magazine that Affiliated halted when it
purchased the magazine in October for its subscriber list.
With a team of veteran trade reporters, some lured from
competing publications, A/S/M gutted the magazine. Its
monthly publishing frequency was dropped, and it got a
stylish makeover by magazine designers Walter Bernard and
Milton Glaser.
   Media Week will apply heat on Cowles-Media Co.'s Inside
Media, which has won critical praise for solid reporting and
a colorful writing style. But Media Week can exploit Inside
Media's weakness: Inside Media publishes biweekly in a field
where rumors and news travels at lightning speed.
   "News changes so quickly, if issues are two weeks apart,
that's a disadvantage," says Beth Rockwood, director of media
planning at Young &amp; Rubicam.
   Hershel B. Sarbin, chief executive of Cowles Business
Media, says there are no plans to change the frequency of
Inside Media. "There's no reason to change a successful
formula," he says.
   Inside Media's circulation is 20,000; Media Week's will be
15,000. Those aren't big numbers, but both publications land
on the desks of media buying and planning executives who
decide how advertisers' money is spent. "Media departments in
the 1990s will be the most interesting part of ad agencies,
internationally and domestically," says Geoffrey Precourt,
editor of Agency magazine and a vice president at Hill,
Holiday, Connors, Cosmopulos.
   A/S/M has the war chest to bankroll a trade magazine war.
A/S/M is a unit of Affiliated Publications Inc., a savvy
publisher whose properties include the Boston Globe as well
as Billboard magazine.
   A/S/M has put Media Week in a network with Adweek and
Adweek's Marketing Week as a package buy for advertisers. To
accommodate shrinking ad budgets, advertisers can buy Media
Week alone or all three publications.
   The three publications are supposed to offer impressive
coverage of advertising and media, but there is deep
skepticism whether there will be enough readers and
advertisers for Media Week. "Honestly, I don't have time to
read another media publication," says Les Zeifman, group
publisher of Straight Arrow Publishers Inc., publisher of US
and Rolling Stone.
   On Monday, US will launch a $1 million trade ad campaign
from Goldsmith/Jeffrey, but it will run only in Advertising
Age, Adweek and Inside Media. "We'll look at Media Week when
they can prove they reach agency decision makers," says Mr.
Zeifman.
   Others feel Media Week, because it's a weekly, will only
add to the glut of hard news reporting, instead of providing
analysis and in-depth reporting. "What we need are longer
journalistic pieces, not just scoops," says Valerie Muller,
media director, Pedone &amp; Partners.
   But Media Week editorial director Craig Reiss will mix
scoops with reporting on pop culture. Some of the quirky
features planned include "Trendicators," pointing to the
latest in a variety of areas, such as film, music and comedy.
The column "Psycho-G's," a play on "demographics," will use
man-on-the-street interviews and photographs to do a turn on
perception and reality. "Yo, Demos" will explore demographics
of the black consumer. Lewis Grossberger will contribute his
twisted, stream-of-consciousness "Media Person" column, which
had originated in the defunct 7 Days magazine.
   "Media buyers have to know what's going on, not just how
to crunch numbers," says Media Week's Mr. Reiss. "We'll
provide them a check on the state of the American psyche."
   ---
   Pizza Hut's Ad Change
                                                                                                       

   Pizza Hut Inc. for now has stopped running an ad that
depicts workers at rival Domino's Pizza preferring Pizza Hut
pies. But the Wichita, Kan., pizza chain insists the move
isn't in response to complaints from Domino's.
   The 60-second spot showed two casually dressed young men,
sitting on a roof atop a Domino's store and ordering a pie
from Pizza Hut. In the end, the men return to work wearing
Domino's caps. The ad, which began running early last week,
was created by BBDO, New York, a unit of Omnicom Group.
   A spokesman for Domino's, Ann Arbor, Mich., complained
that the ad was a "characterization of our employees as being
everything from stupid to sloppy." Domino's executives met
with their rivals at Pizza Hut Monday and lodged gripes with
the television networks.
   But Pizza Hut said it had planned to halt the spot anyway
in favor of a 30-second spot that discusses price. That ad
doesn't show the Domino's workers, but shows consumers
replacing a Domino's phone number with Pizza Hut's. The chain
may run the first ad again in the future, but will alert
Domino's "out of courtesy," said a spokesman for Pizza Hut, a
unit of PepsiCo.
   That's fine with Domino's. "We just wanted it off the air
-- for whatever reason," said the Domino's spokesman.
   ---
   Ad Notes. . . .
                                                                                                       

   PAINT ACCOUNT: Sherwin-Williams Co., Cleveland, awarded
the creative portion of its estimated $9 million to $12
million paint stores account to the Chicago office of J.
Walter Thompson, a WPP Group unit. Media buying continues to
be handled in-house. Incumbent Wyse Advertising, Cleveland,
and Grey Advertising, New York, had also been finalists for
the job.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
