ID: 278	RANK: 66	SCORE: 12.173783
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910129-0109
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910129-0109.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Advertising:
   Super Bowl Stars
   May Score Few
   Endorsements
   ----
   By Joanne Lipman
</HL>
<DATE>
01/29/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   PEP LA DIS TAXES CPB DNB WNEWS CBS GE OMC CCB FCB
</CO>
<IN>
ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
RESTAURANTS, FAST-FOOD, CATERING (RES)
TEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX)
BEVERAGES (BVG)
SOFTWARE (SOF)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)
</IN>
<LP>
   It's the kind of Cinderella story advertisers love: Jeff
Hostetler, the New York Giants' earnest second-string
quarterback, called from the bench to lead his team to a
heart-stopping Super Bowl victory.
   Under normal circumstances, Mr. Hostetler might well hit
the endorsement jackpot. But these aren't normal times. Ad
executives say Mr. Hostetler has limited endorsement
potential, even though America loves underdogs-turned-winners
-- and Mr. Hostetler is a wholesome family man with two
adorable kids. Advertisers already gripped by the recession
and wary about inappropriate ads in wartime just aren't
willing to take a chance on a new face, they say.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   There's a "flash-in-the-pan fear," says Arthur Kaminsky,
president of Athletes &amp; Artists, a talent agency. Sponsors
are afraid "that they would design a program around him, and
that then he would go back to the bench."
   As it goes for Mr. Hostetler, so it goes for the rest of
the Super Bowl players. Ad executives say no new endorsement
stars emerged from Sunday's game between the Giants and the
Buffalo Bills. That's partly because there wasn't any single
superstar responsible for the victory, nor were there any
standout personalities, like the Chicago Bears' William
"Refrigerator" Perry in the 1986 Super Bowl.
   But much of the blame lies with the advertisers
themselves. Stung by the recession and the Persian Gulf war,
advertisers are cautious and afraid; those who might have
gambled on a new sports star aren't so quick to offer big
money any more. "Since consumers are spending less,
advertisers feel there's no point in spending a lot of
money," says David Burns, of Burns Sports Celebrity Service
in Chicago, which matches athletes with sponsors.
   What's more, endorsement opportunities for the winners are
more limited because of the war, Mr. Burns says. With
terrorism fears putting a damper on travel, companies are
cutting back on the sales meetings where they often trot out
sports stars as speakers, he says.
   In the current environment, few advertisers are willing to
risk their budgets on a new name. PepsiCo, for one, ran a
Super Bowl commercial in which San Francisco 49ers
Quarterback Joe Montana appeared -- and his team didn't even
make it into this year's contest. The soft-drink maker had
considered substituting footage of Bills Quarterback Jim
Kelly, but decided against it because "Jim Kelly isn't nearly
as recognizable as Joe Montana," says Bill Katz, an executive
vice president of Pepsi's ad agency, BBDO, a unit of Omnicom
Group.
   Certainly, there have been some endorsements featuring
Super Bowl players, but virtually all so far have been minor
league. Mr. Hostetler was paid to wear an L.A. Gear T-shirt
and a Diet Pepsi hat during his post-game interview; both
companies declined comment on payments, but ad executives
estimate that L.A. Gear paid about $20,000 while Pepsi paid
$10,000 to $15,000. Neither company currently plans to use
him in any national ads.
   "As much as I like the guy, the fact is his future isn't
certain, and that puts a pall on his bankability," says
BBDO's Mr. Katz, who says Pepsi's plans regarding Mr.
Hostetler are "up in the air." Mr. Katz adds, "I don't see
national endorsements coming out of the game" for any
players. "I see a myriad of local opportunities," but no
major stardom on the level of Joe Montana or Chicago Bulls
basketball star Michael Jordan.
   Companies are "absolutely" more cautious about signing up
new sports heroes in the current environment, adds Sandy
Saemann, an L.A. Gear executive vice president. "That's true
about everything. People are cautious about spending."
   Mr. Hostetler's representatives couldn't be reached. But
Craig LaMaster, who handles finances for Ottis Anderson, who
was voted the game's most valuable player, says the current
environment has indeed put a damper on potential
endorsements. Mr. Anderson, the Giants' star running back,
appeared yesterday in a one-shot Disney World commercial, but
he isn't expected to land the kind of major endorsements his
predecessors counted on.
   In years past, "an MVP of a Super Bowl could probably
expect $1 million in endorsement dollars -- and I don't think
that's going to happen this year," says Mr. LaMaster of St.
Louis-based LaMaster &amp; Fitzer, a financial planning firm. "I
think there still are some opportunities out there, but I
think they're going to be fewer and they may not be for right
now."
   Mr. LaMaster says that in better times, the phone rings
off the hook after a key player contributes to a Super Bowl
victory. But this time around, he is the one calling
advertisers, trying to scare up endorsement contracts for Mr.
Anderson. He figures his best bet is to find sponsors
interested in using Mr. Anderson for ad campaigns during next
fall's football season: "You have to find someone who thinks
the war is going to be over by the fall."
   Ironically, ad executives say the Super Bowl player with
the most endorsement potential may be Mr. Kelly, the losing
quarterback. With his all-American good looks, Mr. Kelly "had
more star quality" than any of the Giants players, says Lesa
Ukman, publisher and president of sports specialist Special
Events Report in Chicago.
   Conversely, Buffalo kicker Scott Norwood, who in the last
seconds of the game blew the Bills' chance at victory by
missing a field goal, may have lost himself a small fortune
from endorsements in the process. If he had made the kick and
won the game, he would have been a hero. Missing that one
kick, Ms. Ukman says, "probably cost him $500,000."
   ---
   Domino's Opens Review
                                                                                                       

   Domino's Pizza put its $50 million ad account, which has
been handled by Group 243, Ann Arbor, Mich., up for review.
   The pizza chain, also based in Ann Arbor, said the review
reflected changes in the industry, rather than
dissatisfaction with Group 243. "We want to see who else is
out there, and see if we have the best resources available,"
a Domino's spokesman said. Group 243, a unit of Ross Roy
Group, which created the "Domino's Pizza Delivers" theme,
will participate in the review.
   Domino's said it would give primary consideration to
agencies with over $200 million in billings, but said it
wasn't yet talking to any agencies. The Chicago office of J.
Walter Thompson, rumored to be a contender, said it wasn't
pitching the account. A spokeswoman for Lintas:
Campbell-Ewald, Warren, Mich., also rumored to be a
candidate, wouldn't comment.
   Domino's has faced increasing competition as PepsiCo unit
Pizza Hut has entered the pizza-delivery business. Earlier
this month, Domino's lodged gripes with networks about a
Pizza Hut ad that it said depicted Domino's employees as
sloppy.
   The Domino's account is believed to be Group 243's biggest
account. Agency executives couldn't be reached yesterday.
   ---
   Ad Ban Irks L.A. Gear
                                                                                                       

   L.A. Gear is huffing and puffing over the refusal by CBS
and NBC to air a new commercial for its Catapult sneakers,
and says it plans to file a formal protest if it can't
resolve the dispute.
   The commercial, which stars Utah Jazz forward Karl Malone,
uses the tagline, "Everything Else Is Just Hot Air," an
apparent blow to two heavily advertised competitors -- Nike's
Air and Reebok's Pump. The networks, getting all too literal
in the view of L.A. Gear, said that claim isn't
substantiated.
   "We don't mind aggressive advertising," said Matthew
Margo, a CBS vice president. "But when advertising becomes
overly denigrating, we try to apply the Queensbury rules to
ensure that there's no punching below the belt." He said a
competitor, which he declined to name, had been asked to
revise similar copy in the past.
   But Sandy Saemann, L.A. Gear executive vice president,
said his company has no plans to drop the tagline. "If it
means major alterations in the content and meaning of the
spot, we won't alter it," he said, calling the rejections "a
very high level of double standards."
   ABC, which ran the commercial during the Super Bowl, said
it has no problems with the ad and will continue to run it.
   ---
   Ad Notes. . . .
                                                                                                       

   AD TAX: A New Mexico state representative has introduced a
bill that would put a 5% levy on all advertising purchases of
in-state media. The tax, which would be imposed on both
broadcast and print buys, would be used to fund alcohol
rehabilitation through the state's Community Alcohol
Treatment and Detoxification Fund. Rep. Albert Shirley (D.,
Church Rock), the bill's sponsor, said a hearing on the
measure is scheduled for next week.
                                                                                                       

   WHO'S NEWS: Valentine Zammit was named chief financial
officer at Bozell, New York. Mr. Zammit, 43 years old,
succeeds Joe Caggiano, 65, who keeps the vice chairman post.
. . . Nielsen USA, a unit of Dun &amp; Bradstreet, promoted
several top executives: John H. Costello was named chief
operating officer of Nielsen Marketing Research USA; William
G. Jacobi was promoted to president and chief operating
officer of Nielsen Media Research; and Robert R. Brown was
named Nielsen's chief information officer.
                                                                                                       

   SLOGAN RESUSCITATED: In a campaign breaking tomorrow for
V8 vegetable juice, Campbell Soup Co. revives the slogan,
"Wow] I could have had a V8]" The slogan, which began its run
in the late '60s, hasn't been used in ads for seven years.
FCB/Leber Katz Partners, the New York office of Foote, Cone &amp;
Belding, created the ads.
                                                                                                       

   BASEBALL: The New York Yankees named LeDonne &amp; Wilner, a
small New York agency that specializes in entertainment, to
handle its ad account, formerly at Grey Advertising.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
