ID: 278	RANK: 76	SCORE: 11.693860
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910325-0175
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910325-0175.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Marketing:
   Firms Learn That Subtle Aid to Schools
   Can Polish Their Images, Sell Products
   ----
   By Hilary Stout
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
03/25/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   DJ CL BRNO VON SWY X.SNS PEP
</CO>
<IN>
ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
RESTAURANTS, FAST-FOOD, CATERING (RES)
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
FOOD RETAILERS AND WHOLESALERS, CONVENIENCE STORES (FDR)
DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)
CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS (HPR)
</IN>
<LP>
   In the interest of education, the parishioners at St.
Rocco's cathedral in Johnston, R.I., are buying most of their
groceries at Stop &amp; Shop.
   That's because the New England supermarket chain donates
Apple computers and equipment to schools that collect enough
sales receipts from its stores. St. Rocco's parish elementary
school has amassed nearly $1.5 million of sales slips from
Stop &amp; Shop and its sister Bradlee's discount store chain
over the past year-and-a-half -- good for nine computers, a
printer and a stack of software.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Across the country, companies are finding new ways to help
schools -- and themselves -- by tying their businesses to
education. But unlike the rage that greeted Whittle
Communications L.P. of Knoxville, Tenn., when it began
beaming its Channel One into schools, many of the current
promotions are finding more favor among educators.
   With Channel One, a satellite TV-news program for school
children that includes commercials, "the child is directly
exposed to it," says Lillian Brinkley, president-elect of the
National Association of Elementary School Principals. But if
a program provides a benefit without being intrusive, or "if
the instructional emphasis is the key, I don't think the
schools have a big problem," says Ms. Brinkley, who is
principal of Willard Model School in Norfolk, Va.
   "No one is trying to erase the connection between business
and school, but it's got to be a good working connection,"
says Bill Honig, the superintendent of California public
schools and a leading critic of Channel One.
   Many parents agree, despite some reservations. In the name
of literature, Jay Tolson of Arlington, Va., finds himself
patronizing PepsiCo Inc.'s Pizza Hut, despite his abiding
conviction that "the only thing more frightening than a warm
Pizza Hut pizza is a cold one." But Pizza Hut's national
"Book It" program offers a free individual pan pizza to Mr.
Tolson's first-grade son, Ben, each month for meeting a
reading goal set by his teacher.
   Mr. Tolson says he does wonder if rewarding a child's
academic achievement with consumer products "might ultimately
damage or impede the child from learning to appreciate
something for its intrinsic value. On the other hand," he
says, "it may be a very effective, beguiling way of luring
him to do something he might not otherwise do."
   With state and local budgets increasingly pinched,
business aid -- even if it's tied to patronizing a particular
establishment -- is becoming vital to many schools' efforts
to obtain equipment they otherwise couldn't afford.
   Through some bottlers, PepsiCo will donate a dime to
schools for every specially marked Pepsi bottle cap a school
returns. Buy enough soda and students can raise money for
anything from new baseball bats to new textbooks. The PepsiCo
program is similar to one pioneered several years ago by
Campbell Soup Co. and others.
   Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. recently launched TEAM (Together
Educating America's Minds). The company donates a portion of
what consumers pay for a TEAM T-shirt or to call a TEAM 900
line to school programs, including some in the buyer's state.
For their charity, TEAM benefactors receive coupons for
discounts on the pharmaceutical company's products.
   Stop &amp; Shop is just one of dozens of supermarket chains --
including Giant Food, Safeway, Shop Rite, Von's, Bruno's and
Publix Supermarkets -- that offer Apple or IBM computers in
return for cash-register receipts from their stores. The
Madison, Conn., school system gathered $4.3 million of Stop &amp;
Shop and Bradley's sales slips by setting up collection boxes
in libraries, senior centers, restaurants and the town hall.
In return it has received 24 computers, 18 dot-matrix
printers and six laser printers.
   "In this economic climate, there's no way we could have
acquired that much equipment in that short a period of time,"
says assistant superintendent Robert Wolfe. He says he hasn't
any problem with the business tie-in; the school didn't ask
townspeople to shop at Stop &amp; Shop, just to donate their
receipts if they did.
   Register tapes documenting $250,000 of grocery purchases
from Stop &amp; Shop, for example, nets a school an Apple
Macintosh Classic 2/40; and $125,000 in tapes and Apple IIE
color computer.
   Other businesses provide educational aids. Dow Jones &amp;
Co., the publisher of The Wall Street Journal, is developing
a classroom newspaper for a high school audience.
Colgate-Palmolive Co. has a "Dental Health Classroom
Program." The company helps schools promote dental hygiene by
distributing a packet with, among other items, a tube of
Colgate toothpaste, a plastic ring that says Colgate
Superstar Magic Club and a glossy pamphlet for parents on how
to "teach your child the 5 easy steps to proper oral care."
(They include brushing with a fluoride toothpaste, "such as
Colgate Junior," and using an "extra gentle child's
toothbrush, like Colgate Junior.")
   Domino's Pizza Inc. doesn't explicitly tie academic
achievement to its product. Its Count on Domino's math
program, sponsored in conjunction with the National Council
of Teachers of Mathematics, doesn't give away pizza or
require purchases of pizza. It just sends schools a kit of
math word problems, although some of the problems include
dominoes and pizza.
   Some companies insist they go to great lengths to avoid
marketing in the classroom. PepsiCo's Pizza Hut puts its logo
only on the certificate children present to the restaurant
for achieving their goal. The logo is absent from a wall
chart the company sends schools to mark students' progress as
well as the Book It button the child gets with the pizza.
Each teacher sets the number of books students must read to
win the pizza.
   "I never had any sense it was too commercial," says Frank
Miller, principal of Page Elementary School in Arlington,
about his school's participation in Pizza Hut's Book It
reading program and computer programs at two area
supermarkets.
   But while companies say their intentions are altruistic,
they acknowledge the fringe benefits. "We also are hoping
students who receive computers from the store will be
shoppers shopping at Giant in the future," says Mark Roeder,
a spokesman for Giant Food Inc. Boris Weinstein, a spokesman
for the Book It program, says: "We do know it has a positive
effect on business."
   That was apparent one recent evening when five-year-old
William Griggs went to a Pizza Hut in a Virginia suburb of
Washington, D.C., to claim the free pan pizza he earned for
reading aloud with his parents.
   Of course, the kindergartener didn't make the trip to the
restaurant by himself. While William got a $1.99
tomato-and-cheese pan pizza for free (of which he ate two
bites before falling asleep in the restaurant booth), his
mother, sister and another adult spent $15.81 for a
sausage-and-green-pepper pizza, two light beers, an orange
soda and a Pepsi. Multiply that by the 16 million children
going to Pizza Hut to claim their Book It pizza each month.
   Some detractors complain that the programs best serve more
affluent school districts -- those, for example, where
parents spend lots of money at supermarkets or can afford a
night at Pizza Hut.
   With that in mind, St. Rocco's School donated $10,000 of
the $460,000 of sales slips it collected this year through
the Stop &amp; Shop Apple computer program to "a less fortunate
school," says Sister Mary Carol Gentile, the school
principal.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
