ID: 142	RANK: 27	SCORE: 6.354848
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900514-0206 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-05-14-90 1319EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>a e AM-APArts:CircusCouples Adv17   05-14 1208</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-AP Arts: Circus Couples, Adv 17,1252</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv17</NOTE>
<NOTE>For Release Thursday AMs, May 17, and Thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>Love Under the Big Top: They Really Fall Hard</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By KILEY ARMSTRONG</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>NEW YORK (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Laurie Reker, with the greatest of ease, fell
for Jid Gutty on the flying trapeze.
   Marcia and Luis Palacio domesticated one another; now, the two
lovebirds train tigers together.
   Circus performers traditionally have kept their acts in the
family, handing down taming, teetering and tight-wire techniques
for many generations. Now, ``outsiders'' _ performers who weren't
born into circus dynasties _ are juggling love and careers under
the Big Top, too.
   At the Ringling Bros. and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus, such acts
include The Palacios; The Flying Guttys (he's ``circus,'' she's
``outsider''); Tommy and Tammy Parish, natives of Neodesha, Kan.,
who love to clown around together; and American-Canadian animal act
Lee and Judith Stevens, who consider themselves parents of 16: two
kids and 14 baboons.
   ``Before, when a child was born into a circus family it was
taken for granted they would continue the act,'' Judith Stevens
said. ``Now, you're here because you are very good _ not just
because you were born here.''
   ``My father worked 43 years at something he couldn't stand,''
added her husband. ``We're here because we want to be.''
   The Stevenses met in Canada in February 1985, while working at a
different circus. They married four months later; two years after
that, they took the baboons on their ``honeymoon'' _ a working trip
to Bermuda.
   ``We're just normal people doing unusual jobs,'' Judith says.
``In a lot of ways, it can be real hard; we never go home from
work.''
   The Stevenses often travel with their sons, Alexander, 3{, and
Sebastian, 2. In all, 20 children _ newborn to 14 years old _ tour
with this community-on-wheels, which employs 150 performers and 200
other workers. School-age children study twice a day with Natalie
Osbourne, a dancer and certified teacher. Younger kids can stay at
the traveling day-care center.
   ``It's a special day for a child to go to the zoo or the circus;
my kids have that every day,'' said Judith.
   Alexander sometimes appears in the baboon act. ``He loves to do
it,'' his mother said. ``He says, `Mommy, where's my costume?'''
   But the Stevenses are no stage parents. Judith fantasizes that
her sons will grow up to be doctors or lawyers: ``Isn't that always
a mother's dream?''
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   Marcia Palacio's mother never dreamed that her daughter would
work in a cage with three tigers, two lions, three leopards, two
bears, two hyenas and a wolf. Neither, for that matter, did she.
   ``My father's never seen the circus,'' said Palacio, who is from
Staines, England. ``When my mother saw me work, she went through
two packets of cigarettes. I heard her scream.''
   It all started nine years ago, when the former ballet dancer,
then known as Marcia Spence, met animal trainer Luis Palacio, a
native of Tijuana, Mexico.
   First, they became a couple; then, they became co-workers.
Marcia started tending baby animals, learning the ropes from Luis,
who had worked for circuses since he was 11 years old. In 1988, she
stepped into the cage with her husband and the big beasts.
   ``I was terrified,'' she recalled.
   But she went into it with her eyes open.
   On July 18, 1986, during another circus in England, Marcia
Palacio had watched in horror from outside the cage as a lion bit
and slashed Luis. The badly mauled trainer finally returned to work
in May 1988, with a jagged scar across his jugular.
   ``Marcia went through the whole thing,'' Luis said. ``She was
there when it happened, and there through the surgery. She nursed
me and learned to change the tracheotomy and do injections.''
   After he recovered, Ringling had an opening for a two-person
act. Despite the job hazard she'd witnessed, Marcia wanted to try
it.
   Now, Luis performs with several animals at the front of the cage
while Marcia controls the remaining animals at the rear. At the
finale, Marcia rides a tiger around the ring.
   ``It's very difficult to separate the relationship inside the
cage and outside,'' said Luis. ``Sometimes, when she makes a
mistake, I scream at her; that's how I was taught. But I'm
growing.''
   The two relax by sightseeing. But even a brave lion-trainer has
fears. Asked if they saw the Empire State Building while working in
New York City, Luis shrugged.
   ``We'd have to go up,'' he said. ``I don't like going up.''
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   Going up is no problem for Jid and Laurie Gutty. Flying 32 feet
above the floor is their equivalent of a day at the office.
   Laurie had just graduated from high school in Pompano Beach,
Fla., nine years ago when she saw Jid, a native of Bogota,
Colombia, practicing his trapeze act at an Orlando campground. At
first they were just friends; it was the trapeze that made her
heart flutter.
   ``I fell in love with it,'' she said. ``Something told me it was
a way for me to do something special.''
   First time she flew, ``I cried. I was very scared of the height.
But I knew in my heart I could do it somehow,'' she said.
   After years of physical conditioning, Laurie became the only
American woman to master a triple aerial somersault.
   Now, Jid is her husband, as well as her catcher. His face lights
up when he talks about the circus _ and about his wife's
accomplishments.
   ``I love what I'm doing,'' he said. ``When an audience responds,
when people like me, I feel proud. And I'm proud of what she's
doing, too.''
   How do they balance the demands of living and working together?
   ``You have to communicate a lot,'' he said. ``You need to talk
to each other all the time on the trapeze.''
   ``It's very hard,'' said Laurie. ``You have to separate your
personal life from your professional life. And you still have to
trust each other: Even though you're arguing, you still know he's
there to catch you.''
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   The danger is even present for Clown Alley veterans. Tommy
Parish ticks off accident stories involving stilts and a runaway
elephant cart.
   ``Nothing serious _ a few broken bones,'' said Parish, whose
clown cowlick and bulbous, red schnoz belie a modest, shy
personality.
   But the pratfall is no pitfall for a two-clown couple.
   Especially the Parishes, who became hard-core circus fans while
growing up together in Kansas.
   Twelve years ago, Tammy Parish was attending ``regular-people
college'' when her husband-to-be went to clown college in Florida
and won a job with Ringling. She followed his career path a year
later. Since then, they estimate they've played to more than 55
million people.
   Their clowning carries over into their personal lives.
   On Valentine's Day, Tammy sang her undying love for Tommy,
accompanied by an original accordion arrangement. Then, she hit him
with a pie that was hidden in a big, red heart. ``I can't carry a
tune in a bucket, but Tom was touched, anyway,'' she says.
   The Parishes say they have it better than other circus couples.
When tempers flare, noted Tammy, ``We have access to foam hammers.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Thursday AMs, May 17</NOTE>
</DOC>
