ID: 142	RANK: 75	SCORE: 4.474839
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911025-0181
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911025-0181.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Zimbabwe Makes Living With Wildlife Pay
   ----
   By Terry L. Anderson
</HL>
<DATE>
10/25/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14
</SO>
<IN>
ENVIRONMENT (ENV)
INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)
</IN>
<NS>
ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)
TRADE ISSUES (TRD)
</NS>
<RE>
AFRICA (AF)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
ZIMBABWE (ZI)
</RE>
<LP>
   On a recent trip to southern Africa, I was pleased to find
thriving wildlife populations. For example, in the Zambezi
River Valley of northern Zimbabwe -- an area twice the size
of Maryland -- there are 2,000 elephants, 56,000 cape
buffalo, 2,000 lions, 230,000 impala, and 50,000 warthogs.
Such wildlife numbers stagger the imagination. Can a
developing country such as Zimbabwe maintain them? A
market-based program holds promise, and provides lessons for
the U.S. as well.
   In the Third World there is constant tension between rural
development and maintenance of the ecological base for such
development. As regions develop, wild, indigenous flora and
fauna give way to domesticated species. Forests are cleared
for crops; cattle displace wildlife. This often leads to
depletion of soil fertility, soil erosion and
desertification. Throughout southern Africa, traditional
communal land tenures have been replaced by fields separated
by barbed wire; wells and dams have moderated the pressures
from drought but also have reduced wildlife habitat.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Conflicts with development are particularly significant
when it comes to the large mammals, such as elephants,
rhinos, lions and leopards. These animals kill people and
livestock and destroy crops -- and thus are viewed as a
nuisance. At the same time, their ivory, horns and skins
command high prices. It is little wonder that locals often
work for the elimination of wild animals.
   Believing that markets are the heart of the problem, many
environmental groups advocate suppressing markets and prices
and substituting an "environmental ethic." For example, many
governments -- taking their lead from such groups -- have
signed the treaty that bans the ivory trade in order to save
elephants.
   Such approaches, however, offer little hope for long-term
success. Fidelis Lungu, a wildlife manager in Zambia, tells
about his experience taking an elephant poacher to court. The
judge asked several local villagers to testify. When asked
why they helped the poacher, one man responded that he
received a bag of sugar; another, that he received a pair of
pants. Under subsistence conditions, an environmental ethic
easily gives way to survival.
   While visiting researchers with the World Wildlife Fund's
Multispecies Project in Zimbabwe, I learned about an
alternative to trade bans. Zimbabwe's Department of National
Parks and Wild Life Management has developed a program that
shifts responsibility for wildlife management from the state
to local councils. Known as Campfire (Communal Area
Management Program for Indigenous Resources), the program is
based on the principle that the benefits from wildlife must
go to those who pay the financial and social costs of having
to coexist with wild animals: Locals are encouraged to
"profit" from wildlife resources.
   Campfire has been implemented by several Zambezi River
Valley councils, two of which illustrate the importance of
incentives.
   The Nyaminyami District Council, which initiated the
Campfire program in 1989, sold permits that year to hunt 14
elephants, 82 cape buffalo and 26 lions and leopards. These
permits generated more than $120,000 in 1989. In addition,
meat from sport hunting and herd reduction to control
populations was provided to the natives, and compensation for
damage to crops and livestock was paid.
   A report from the World Wildlife Fund estimates that the
total "wildlife dividend" in 1989 -- the profit from these
programs -- increased household incomes by 15% to 25%. Though
the program is still in its infancy, it appears to reduce
poaching and habitat destruction, as the local people begin
to view wild animals as a valuable asset.
   The nearby Guruve District Council, which also entered the
program in 1989, has not fared as well, primarily because it
has not allowed local people to benefit much from the
program. This council earned less profit than did the
Nyaminyami council, partly because it chose to divide its
wildlife quota between its own communal safari company and a
private one. Because of bureaucratic inefficiencies, the
council's safari company earned net profits that were 60%
less than those earned by the private enterprise.
   More significantly -- in contrast to the Nyaminyami
district, where compensation was paid for crop and livestock
damagethe locals in the Guruve district have received no
compensation. The council claims to have retained its
earnings from hunting in a "reserve fund," which it says will
be invested in wildlife. But the locals who must bear the
cost of living with the wildlife are seeing no immediate
return. Because the wildlife benefit-cost ratio has not
changed, the World Wildlife Fund report concluded that the
locals "will continue to regard wildlife as a liability
rather than an asset, and act accordingly."
   Wildlife in the U.S. could benefit from the innovations of
Campfire. Although some American ranchers are able to earn
money from wildlife by charging fees for hunting access, in
most instances state agencies maintain control over wildlife
management. As a result, those who bear the cost -- such as
ranchers whose crops are eaten by deer and elk -- often have
little opportunity for wildlife dividends.
   An exception is the White Mountain Apache Reservation. As
long as elk are within the Arizona reservation's boundaries,
they are the responsibility of the tribe, and the tribe is
managing the wildlife for profit. Careful monitoring of
animals and their habitat has enabled tribal wildlife
managers to sell about 50 permits a year for bull elk, at
$15,000 each. (Even at that price they have a queue.) The
revenues and jobs provided to tribe members give them a
direct incentive to husband their wild animals.
   The lesson from these programs is clear: "If it pays, it
stays." By establishing a local proprietary interest in
wildlife, including the ability to profit from it, it is
possible to sustain wild animal populations in the face of
development. What is economical is also ecological.
   ---
   Mr. Anderson, an associate of the Political Economy
Research Center in Bozeman, Mont., is co-author of "Free
Market Environmentalism" (Pacific Research Institute and
Westview Press, 1991).
</TEXT>
</DOC>
