ID: 142	RANK: 79	SCORE: 4.445887
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890914-0221 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-14-89 1204EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>a a BC-EXP--Voyager-Interstellar Adv18   09-14 1172</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-EXP--Voyager-Interstellar, Adv 18,1208</SECOND>
<HEAD>$adv18</HEAD>
<HEAD>For release Monday, Sept. 18, and thereafter</HEAD>
<HEAD>Voyager Beyond The Planets _ A Trek to The Stars</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By LEE SIEGEL</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP Science Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>PASADENA, Calif. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   In a billion years, when drifting
continents have reshaped Earth's face and humans are extinct or
changed by evolution, Voyager 2 will still be cruising the stars.
   ``It's mind-boggling. We're actually going out to the stars,''
said Bruce Brymer, Voyager's lead mission controller at NASA's Jet
Propulsion Laboratory. ``This spacecraft is going to outlive us.
It's going to be out there forever.''
   In August, Voyager 2 swept past Neptune and its icy volcanic moon
Triton _ the last planetary exploration in an incredible 12-year
journey that also took the spacecraft past Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus
and more than 50 moons.
   Now, Voyager 2 is speeding into the loneliest part of its trek:
the Voyager Interstellar Mission. With Voyager 1, it will study the
sun's magnetic field, solar wind, and ultraviolet light from distant
stars and galaxies.
   Like Pioneers 10 and 11 and Voyager 1, which explored Jupiter and
Saturn, Voyager 2 also will search for the edge of the solar system.
   The Voyagers are expected to return information to Earth until
about 2015 or 2020. Contact eventually will be cut off by some
malfunction, by exhaustion of the probes' plutonium power
generators, or when their thruster fuel runs out, leaving them
unable to point antennas at Earth.
   Then, the robot explorers will pass among the stars, each
carrying a 12-inch copper record of sounds and sights from Earth in
case they are found by a spacefaring civilization. ``Hopefully they
will understand our peaceful and humble attempt at knowing and
exploring the great unknown,'' Brymer said.
   For now, Voyager 2's work is more mundane.
   ``The interstellar mission is sort of anticlimactic. There's no
real drama expected. We're suffering from the blues a little bit,''
he said. ``It's almost like postpartum depression. We've gone
through such highs with the spacecraft. There's a great sense of
melancholy now. It's like none I've sensed before.''
   Voyager 2's encounter with Neptune officially ends Oct. 2, when
it will be 34.7 million miles past the planet, going 37,337 mph. It
will be 2.83 billion miles from Earth, and will have traveled 4.46
billion miles since 1977.
   Until December, Voyager 2 occasionally will glance at Neptune and
dark space to improve the accuracy of observations its cameras and
instruments made during the Neptune flyby, said Voyager project
manager Norm Haynes.
   Pictures of empty space let engineers measure how much sunlight
reflects off Voyager into its cameras. A computer can subtract the
light from Voyager's Neptune and Triton photographs, producing
clearer prints, Haynes said.
   In April, most of the planets will be positioned for one of the
Voyagers to take photographs for assembly into a single picture of
the solar system. ``The planets are small and there's lots of dark
space out there,'' he said. ``Maybe it will give people a better
impression of the vastness of things.''
   Then engineers will turn off Voyager 2's TV cameras and its
infrared and visible light sensors.
   Voyager's Interstellar Mission officially starts Jan. 1, but the
spacecraft already is using its remaining sensors to make the kind
of measurements it will continue to collect for years. Ultraviolet
light and cosmic ray sensors study distant galaxies and stars, and
also black holes and pulsars _ remnants of stars that died in fiery
supernova explosions.
   Both Voyagers also will keep measuring magnetic fields,
electrically charged particles that make up solar wind, and waves in
that wind.
   If the Voyagers and Pioneers survive, one or more of them may
detect the ``heliopause,'' where solar wind yields to interstellar
wind some 5 billion to 14 billion miles from the sun. Many
scientists consider it the edge of the solar system.
   By about 2020, the Voyagers will lose contact with Earth.
   ``My electrical energy is fading, and I am feeling old and
useless,'' says Voyager 2's imaginary voice in ``The Voyager Neptune
Travel Guide,'' a National Aeronautics and Space Administration
publication. ``The planet which gave me life said goodbye. I will no
longer hear its voice, nor it my heartbeat.''
   Then, Voyager will approach the stars, passing them like distant
beacons in an incredible void.
   In the year 20,391, Voyager will pass within 3.21 light years,
18.9 trillion miles, of Proxima Centauri, the nearest star. Some
24,000 years from now, it should pass through the Oort Cloud, a vast
spherical cloud of comets that other scientists consider the true
edge of the solar system.
   ``Then Voyager makes for the open sea of interstellar space, free
of the sun's gravity and wandering forever in the Milky Way galaxy,
going once around the center of the galaxy once every
quarter-billion years,'' said Cornell University astronomer Carl
Sagan.
   NASA estimates that in the year 40,176, Voyager 2 will fly 1.65
light years from Ross 248 _ the first time it will be closer to
another star than to the sun, which will be 1.99 light years from
Voyager.
   In the year 296,036, Voyager 2 will make its closest approach to
Sirius, the brightest star visible from Earth.
   Deep space is very benign, so dust and cosmic rays will erode
Voyager 2 extraordinarily slowly.
   In a billion or more years, Sagan said, ``there will be no more
humans because we'll be extinct or we'll be somebody else. There
will be no human artifacts left on Earth. Continental drift will
completely change what the continents look like.
   ``But this brave spacecraft will be there, a surviving artifact
of our species and our times.''
   Perhaps one day, aliens in a starship may find one of the
Voyagers, then play the copper record.
   They will hear greetings in 60 languages from Chinese to Welsh to
Urdu, including a 7-year-old boy offering salutations from Earth's
children.
   There also is the music of many cultures, from Chuck Berry's rock
'n' roll to Mozart, Bach and Beethoven.
   The aliens will listen to the sounds of surf, wind, rain and
thunder; croaking frogs and laughing hyenas; a train, a truck, a jet
and a rocket; a baby crying and lovers kissing.
   The record also holds 115 electronically encoded photographs or
diagrams showing humans, the Earth and other planets, human
chromosomes, a fetus, the Golden Gate, the Grand Tetons and the
Great Wall of China.
   And the extraterrestrials will read a message written July 16,
1977, by Jimmy Carter, then president of a nation on a little planet
that, two months later, dared send a bit of itself to the stars:
   ``This is a present from a small distant world, a token of our
sounds, our science, our images, our music, our thoughts and our
feelings.
   ``We are attempting to survive our time so we may live into
yours. We hope someday, having solved the problems we face, to join
a community of galactic civilizations. This record represents our
hope and our determination, and our good will in a vast and awesome
universe.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Sept. 18</NOTE>
</DOC>
