ID: 154	RANK: 11	SCORE: 11.764262
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891022-0009 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-10-22-89 2354EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a PM-SFQuake-County-Glance     10-22 0537</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-SF Quake-County-Glance,540</SECOND>
<HEAD>County-by-County Damage, Deaths and Injuries</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Here is a county-by-county summary of death, injury and damage
reports from Tuesday's earthquake as gathered from the California
Office of Emergency Services, other agencies and reporter
observations:
   ALAMEDA COUNTY (Oakland and communities east of San Francisco
Bay) _ Mile-and-a-quarter-long section of upper deck of Interstate
880 in Oakland collapsed, with 38 bodies recovered from the freeway
wreckage so far. One man, 57-year-old Buck Helm of Weaverville, was
found alive in the wreckage Saturday and was in critical but stable
condition at a hospital Sunday.
   Up to 150 people were evacuated from a housing project Sunday
when severe cracks were found in another section of I-880 that
borders their apartments. The County Office of Emergency Services
says Oakland sustained 95 percent of the county's 349 injuries and
$1.5 billion-plus in damages. The OES reported 200 businesses,
including nine residential hotels, and 1,400 homes were damaged, at
least 10 buildings destroyed and 600 people displaced.
   SAN FRANCISCO _ Ten deaths, 566 injuries, 1,800 people
displaced, most in the devastated Marina district. Property losses
estimated at $2.5 billion.
   Sixty residential buildings were destroyed in the Marina. More
than 1,000 apartment buildings damaged, but no citywide figures
were available Sunday on the total number of buildings damaged.
About 2,000 Marina residences, including those damaged beyond
repair, remained without gas and electric service Sunday. The two
main state office buildings near the Civic Center are closed
indefinitely because of major structural damage.
   SAN MATEO COUNTY (borders San Francisco to south) _ No deaths,
282 injuries, damage estimated at $350 million. 600 homes damaged,
320 in Pacifica. Three businesses destroyed and 600 damaged. Facade
of the Amfac Hotel in Burlingame collapsed, injuring seven.
   SANTA CRUZ COUNTY (south of San Mateo) _ Four deaths, all in
Santa Cruz, 862 injuries and 4,500 people displaced. Damage
estimated at $1 billion, including $83 million to the city of Santa
Cruz, where six downtown commercial buildings must be razed.
Watsonville, Capitola, Scotts Valley and Boulder Creek also
hard-hit.
   Houses in the Santa Cruz Mountains, site of the 6.9 quake's
epicenter, and along the coast lost to fires and landslides.
County-wide, at least 275 homes destroyed and 2,066 damaged.
Several mountain passes closed by landslides and fissures in roads.
   SANTA CLARA COUNTY (city of San Jose and communities on
southeastern end of San Francisco Bay) _ Five deaths, 650 injuries
including 93 people admitted to hospitals. Damage estimate $560
million. Sixty-five homes and six businesses destroyed. Damage,
including the most minor to severe, to 104,000 dwellings and 384
businesses, according to city reports to county OES. Thirty
buildings collapsed in Los Gatos, on fringe of Santa Cruz
Mountains. Highway 17 in Scotts Valley, east of Santa Cruz, closed
by rockslide.
   SAN BENITO COUNTY (south and east of Santa Cruz) _ No deaths.
Seventy-five minor injuries. Damage estimate $100 million. Twelve
commercial buildings and light industrial buildings heavily
damaged. Thirty-two single-family homes destroyed, 92 homes damaged.
   MONTEREY COUNTY (south of Santa Cruz) _ Two deaths, six
injuries. Seventy homes damaged. Damage estimate $100 million.
Salinas sustained $3.6 million in damage to 15 homes and 29
businesses. Moss Landing Marine Lab, a university research
facility, destroyed.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
