ID: 154	RANK: 23	SCORE: 10.203819
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891023-0181 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-10-23-89 2147EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-SFQuake 4thLd-Writethru a0769 10-23 1334</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-SF Quake, 4th Ld-Writethru, a0769</SECOND>
<HEAD>Helm Improves as Hope Gone for More Survivors</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: INSERTS two grafs after 22nd pvs, bgn, In San Francisco ...,
to update with governor calling special legislative session, firing head
of highway collapse probe; INSERTS 2 grafs after 12th, Since their ...,
with Mrs. Helm comments at I-880; SUBS grafs 2 and 20, to show smooth afternoon
rush hour</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By RICH CARTIERE</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>SAN FRANCISCO (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Freeway survivor Buck Helm improved Monday
but crews searching the collapsed highway where he was rescued gave
up hope others would be found alive. The death toll from last
week's earthquake climbed by three to 62.
   Bay area commuters, after conquering heavy morning traffic and
rough seas on the first full workday since the quake, faced few
afternoon traffic tangles. In Congress, relief legislation worth
$2.85 billion moved toward a vote Tuesday.
   ``We're very certain nobody's up there alive. We've searched,
searched, researched, triple-searched,'' said Oakland police Lt.
Kris Wraa, referring to the crumpled 1\-mile stretch of Interstate
880 where huge slabs of concrete teetered in the rain.
   Asked if officials had given up hope of finding another
survivor, she said, ``That's fair wording.''
   With rescue efforts suspended, crews began dismantling a shaky
100-yard section, officials said.
   Kyle Nelson of the California Department of Transportation,
whose job is to make the structure was safe for rescuers, called it
extremely dangerous. ``Given the right conditions of rain and wind,
it could have collapsed,'' he said.
   Near the freeway, authorities Monday evacuated additional homes
after ordering 150 residents of a housing project to leave Sunday
because of fears that more of the highway could fall. Thousands
have been left homeless by the quake.
   ``We were all scared,'' said Charles Burns, who carried a Bible
and other books to a middle school where evacuees were being
sheltered.
   There was good news, however, for Helm. He was no longer in
pain, his kidney function continued to improve and his condition
was upgraded from critical to very serious, Dr. Floyd Huen said.
   ``We hope that as soon as tomorrow, he will be down to
serious,'' Huen said.
   The 57-year-old longshoreman, who spent four days trapped under
the freeway rubble in his Chevrolet Sprint before being rescued
Saturday, was awake and was given a writing tablet and pencil so he
could start responding to questions while on a respirator.
   His former wife, Lorrie Helm, has read him news accounts of his
ordeal and he seems to understand, she said.
   ``His love for us and our love for him is one of the major
things that kept him going,'' Mrs. Helm said at a news conference
with other family members.
   ``He's always been there when I needed him, and this is when he
needs us.''
   Since their parting, the two have remained good friends, she
said. ``We've been divorced for four years and he never gave up. I
would say that's a positive attitude.''
   Later, stopping at the collapsed freeway, Mrs. Helm exclaimed,
``Oh my God. I don't see how anyone could make it out alive,''
according to Oakland Police Sgt. Jack Huth.
   ``And then she reflected on it a minute and said, `Well, if
anyone could, Buck could.'''
   Commuters returned to the earthquake-ravaged transit system
Monday, many boarding extra trains or a flotilla of ferries because
the Bay Bridge from Oakland to San Francisco remained closed.
   The Bay Area Rapid Transit system carried twice the normal load
and ferry passengers had to stomach rough seas and whipping winds.
   ``I've just been through hell, but heck, I have to admit I made
it through it,'' said John Trowbridge, a commuter who normally
would have driven across the Bay Bridge but instead rode a ferry
that lurched constantly, battling swells that washed across the tip
of the boat.
   ``It can only get better, this can't get much worse,'' he said.
   In clear weather during the evening rush hour, few traffic
bottlenecks were reported.
   Damage from Tuesday's 6.9-magnitude quake topped $7 billion,
surpassing Hurricane Hugo as the costliest natural disaster in U.S.
history, according to the Independent Insurance Agents of America.
   In San Francisco alone, 750 to 1,000 buildings need extensive
repair, Mayor Art Agnos told the city-county Board of Supervisors
Monday. He estimated damage in the city at $2.2 billion to $3.2
billion.
   Gov. George Deukmejian announced he would call a special
legislative session within two weeks to work out the state's
response to the devastation.
   Also Monday, the governor fired Ian Buckle, the earthquake
expert hired to probe the the I-880 collapse, saying his defense of
the state transportation department in an op-ed article jeopardized
the inquiry's impartiality.
   Two more deaths were reported in San Francisco, and in the beach
town of Bonny Doon, Calif., north of Santa Cruz, workers uncovered
the body of 41-year-old man, identified as Gary Phillip West,
buried by a landslide during the quake. His car had been found
Sunday.
   One San Francisco victim, an unidentified woman, was found in
fire rubble in the Marina district. The other, a 68-year-old woman
from Sweden, died of injuries sustained at a downtown hotel.
   So far, 38 bodies have been pulled from I-880. Dozens remained
missing and authorities said they are sure some remain entombed in
the freeway. Thousands were injured and homeless from the quake.
   At a Salvation Army warehouse filled to the rafters with donated
supplies, a dozen volunteers Monday prepared goods to be sent to
quake victims.
   Donors continued to bring plastic bags full of clothes, sleeping
bags and food to the warehouse, which held items ranging from
seltzer water to canned soup.
   ``People are just very generous,'' said Gordon Helms of the
Salvation Army. ``They're very concerned about the needs of other
people.''
   A House committee approved a $2.85 billion quake aid package,
and the full House is expected to act Tuesday. The package is more
than the White House supported, but more than $1 billion under the
request from the California congressional delegation.
   Presidential press secretary Marlin Fitzwater said the aid could
be extended without an increase in the gasoline tax or other new
federal taxes. Congressional sources said lawmakers were putting
off determining how to pay for the package.
   ``There is an urgent need for help for people now,'' Sen. Pete
Wilson, R-Calif., told the Senate Environment and Public Works
subcommittee on transporation and Resources.
   Yet for many in the Bay area, a scenic and diverse region of 6
million, life was actually quite normal throughout the past week.
Damage was confined to distinct areas of the major cities, although
destruction was widespread through Santa Cruz County towns.
   And Monday's commute, slow but not paralyzing, underscored how
well San Francisco has coped.
   Dr. Beverly Bradley, supervisor of health programs for the San
Francisco United School District, said she was in Chicago when the
quake hit and got mistaken first impressions that the entire city
crumpled.
   ``From watching TV, I got the impression the city was in
shambles. In truth, most of the city is functioning very well and
back to normal.
   ``I keep telling my relatives around the country the city is
fine except for some very specific areas that did suffer,'' she
said.
   The first phase of the Bay Bridge repair started when workers
sawed a 50-foot collapsed section in half and lowered both halves
200 feet by crane Sunday to a barge on wind-whipped San Francisco
Bay.
   Without the Bay Bridge, 65,000 rush-hour motorists were forced
to seek other ways to work. Daily, 260,000 cars use the bridge, the
most crucial of the region's earthquake-disrupted roadways. Repairs
will take at least four weeks.
   About 3 million people commute on a typical workday in the
nine-county region. Authorities warned that 2 million of them could
be disrupted in a nightmarish obstacle course.
   Besides I-880 in Oakland, other freeways were also devastated.
The Embarcadero Freeway and the I-280 extension are closed in San
Francisco. Farther south, landslide-clogged Highway 17 is open only
to buses and emergency vehicles.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
