ID: 154	RANK: 26	SCORE: 10.076533
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891024-0205 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-10-24-89 2157EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-SFQuake 4thLd-Writethru a0783 10-24 1300</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-SF Quake, 4th Ld-Writethru, a0783,1150</SECOND>
<HEAD>Only 9 Missing Now; Chance Of Another Damaging Aftershock 50-50</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: Subs 2nd graf with 2 to UPDATE with latest aftershock. INSERTS
2 grafs after 19th, `More than...'</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By RICH CARTIERE</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>SAN FRANCISCO (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Only nine people remained unaccounted for
Tuesday _ one week after Northern California's ravaging earthquake
_ and geologists predicted a 50-50 chance by Christmas of a major
aftershock capable of causing considerable damage.
   The U.S. Geological Survey on Tuesday also revised upward the
magnitude of the Oct. 17 quake, from 6.9 to 7.1 on the Richter
scale.
   Church bells tolled at 5:04 p.m., one week to the minute after
the quake. And 83 minutes later, at 6:27 p.m., the strongest
aftershock in four days, with a Richter scale reading of 4.5,
rattled the area. There were no immediate reports of damage.
   A $2.85 billion quake aid bill passed the U.S. House.
   Survivor Buck Helm's condition improved to serious with his
kidney function reported normal.
   Demolition crews were taking down sections of Interstate 880 in
Oakland for fear still-standing sections of the elevated,
double-deck structure could tumble like dominoes onto the 1\-mile
stretch that collapsed in the Oct. 17 quake.
   The death toll rose to 63 with a coroner's discovery of a 39th
victim among the remains dug out of the rubble of I-880, which was
thefirst elevated freeway built in California.
   But authorities have been able to account for all but nine of
the 280 reported missing during the last week, California Highway
Patrol Lt. Kris Wraa said.
   ``I'm not willing to speculate how many of those nine missing
people may or may not be up there,'' Wraa said, referring to the
collapsed freeway.
   Rescue crews have not been able to locate other bodies in the
rubble, where 55 cars were trapped at rush-hour _ a number
considered well below a normal Tuesday, possibly because of the
scheduled third game of the World Series between the Bay area's two
major league baseball teams.
   A traffic officer reported he was ``surprised at how light
traffic was'' five minutes before the quake, California Highway
Patrol spokesman Thomas A. Noble said.
   Four sections remain inaccessible to searchers. Digging was to
resume when the threatening sections were taken down, possibly by
Thursday. There was no hope of finding anyone alive, authorities
said.
   ``The people that are (unaccounted for), I believe are
responsible people. Many of their cars have been found on that
interchange and for whatever reason their loved ones have not had
contact with them,'' Oakland Police Sgt. Greg Hughes said.
   ``We've sent officers out to check their homes, check their
jobs, and every four hours we're talking to the families,'' he said.
   Seismologists at the geological survey said they revised the
quake's Richter reading to 7.1 after checking data from 18 seismic
stations around the world.
   ``The original magnitude of 6.9 was based on more localized
seismic readings,'' said Waverly Person, director of the USGS
National Earthquake Information Service in Golden, Colo., in a
statement.
   The USGS issued a long-range aftershock forecast predicting over
the next two months an 11 percent chance of a temblor of magnitude
6.0 or larger, and a 50 percent chance of one registering 5.0 or
larger.
   On the Richter scale of earthquake magnitude, 5.0 is considered
capable of considerable damage, and 6.0 capable of severe damage.
State emergency coordinators have said that an aftershock of 5.0
could be especially troublesome to buildings already damaged or
weakened by the initial earthquake.
   The probabilities were based on statistics for California
earthquakes, and not on actual measurements at the San Andreas
Fault, USGS geophysicist Jim Luetgert said.
   More than 3,500 aftershocks, some almost imperceptible, had been
detected by Tuesday morning, the USGS said.
   The strong aftershock Tuesday evening was centered 14 miles
northeast of Santa Cruz, the USGS said. The aftershock was the
largest since the 4.6 aftershock that occurred about 9:15 p.m.
Saturday, said Pat Jorgenson of the USGS.
   ``It felt pretty sharp and fairly long, but I guess it lasted
only seven to 10 seconds,'' said Santa Cruz police dispatcher Chuck
Minuti. ``We had a few phone calls right away but no reports of
damage.''
   Engineers reported Tuesday that the toppled 50-foot section of
the Bay Bridge was unrepairable. Officials for the transportation
department said they hope to put up a new five-lane section on the
lifeline across San Francisco Bay by Nov. 16.
   Commuters, left without the bridge and several stretches of
freeway, fared well again Tuesday, using public transit in record
numbers, transportation officials said.
   Gov. George Deukmejian, speaking to business leaders, praised
efforts to reduce traffic and warned against lapsing into regular
cummuting patterns. ``We've got some longterm concerns here,'' he
said.
   In Washington, the House voted 321-99 to send $2.85 billion in
earthquake-relief funds to Northern California. The Senate was
expected to concur Wednesday and send the legislation to President
Bush.
   In a floor speech before the vote, Rep. Nancy Pelosi, who
represents San Francisco's Marina district, pleaded for ``a chance
to rebuild.''
   She said, ``We were hit by 10 times the amount of explosive
power of World War II, including the atomic bomb.''
   San Francisco Mayor Art Agnos called on the federal government
to raise the maximum home rebuilding loan to $500,000 from
$100,000, reflecting high housing costs in the region.
   ``One-hundred thousand dollars in South Carolina can make a big
difference. It doesn't here,'' Agnos said.
   In San Francisco alone, 750 to 1,000 buildings need extensive
repair, Agnos told the city-county Board of Supervisors on Monday.
He estimated damage in the city at $2.2 billion to $3.2 billion.
   Clyde Walthall, spokesman for Pacific Gas &amp; Electric, said the
utility estimates they'll need to replace about 10 miles of gas
distribution lines in the hard-hit Marina district, at an estimated
cost of $10 million.
   He did not know how long that work would take, and said the
utility was awaiting clearance from the city before beginning the
work.
   About 5,100 customers are without gas service in the district,
and that about 1,000 customers are also without electric service,
Walthall said.
   Fire officials reported five homes were evacuated on Monday and
Tuesday when heavy rains caused landslides in the Santa Cruz
mountain communities of Zayante and Boulder Creek. No injuries were
reported.
   Since the quake, as many as 90 homeowners around Zayante made
the ``common sense decision'' to leave their uninhabitable homes
without being ordered to evacuate, said Ken Boynton, district fire
chief. Some of the houses slid and leaned against trees, while
others were reduced to rubble.
   Already, damage from the quake _ estimated at more than $7
billion _ has surpassed Hurricane Hugo as the costliest disaster in
U.S. history.
   Deukmejian said he would call a special legislative session
within two weeks to work out the state's response to the
devastation.
   Documents on file at the state transportation department in
Sacramento show that I-880, opened in July 1957 at a construction
cost of $10.2 million, was the first elevated freeway in California.
   A nearly identical roadway built soon after, the Embarcadero in
San Francisco, probably will be closed until June due to earthquake
damage. Unlike its near-twin in Oakland, this structure will be
repaired rather than replaced.
   Along the Pacific coastline near San Francisco, rocks continued
to fall of cliffs damaged by the earthquake, making the beaches
below unsafe, the USGS said.
   ``There are many cracks along the tops of coastal bluffs, and
some of these could collapse without warning,'' the agency said.
   About a half-dozen wineries in the Santa Cruz region reported a
jumble of 500-pound wine barrels that rolled off madly leaping
racks stacked to the ceiling. Some lost precious bottles from their
wine ``library,'' the collection all wineries have of every vintage
produced.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
