ID: 154	RANK: 4	SCORE: 14.434881
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891018-0094 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-10-18-89 0930EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a PM-SFQuake 3rdLd-Writethru-2Takes a0567-71-74 10-18 1262</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-SF Quake, 3rd Ld - Writethru - 2 Takes, a0567-71-74,1291</SECOND>
<HEAD>URGENT</HEAD>
<HEAD>PRECEDE San Francisco</HEAD>
<HEAD>Nation's Deadliest Earthquake Since 1906 Hits Northern California</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: LEADS with 18 grafs to UPDATE with rescue efforts today, new
fatality, injury counts, additional detail; combines pvs into 2 takes.</HEAD>
<HEAD>With LaserGraphic, LaserPhotos</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By MARY McGRATH</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>OAKLAND, Calif. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Aftershocks continued today as rescuers
struggled to free motorists from an elevated highway collapsed by
an earthquake that jarred Northern California, killing more than
270 people and injuring hundreds more.
   The quake Thursday, measuring 6.9 on the Richter scale,
collapsed buildings across the region as well as a section of the
San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge and at least two spans in the
Santa Cruz area. Severed gas lines sparked fires, including one in
San Francisco that burned a block of buildings.
   The magnitude of the catastrophe emerged slowly as officials
made contact with hard-hit areas, where many telephones were cut
off. As many as 1 million people were left without power and other
services.
   ``This is just a devastating, terrible, terrible situation
beyond everybody's imagination,'' said Marty Boyer, the Alameda
County spokesman.
   Lt. Gov. Leo McCarthy this morning put the death toll at 271.
State emergency services spokesman John Peterson said at least 272
people had died and 650 were injured. At least 253 people were
killed when a half-mile section of the upper level of Interstate
880 in Oakland collapsed onto the lower level, said Dave Wilson of
the state Office of Emergency Services.
   ``You could hear it crunching down _ but you couldn't see
anything. It was just a big white cloud,'' said Leroy FitzGerald,
who works nearby. ``You could hear people screaming for help.''
   Tractors, bulldozers and dump trucks were called out, and trucks
and vans took bodies from the site this morning.
   The quake hit at 5:04 p.m. Tuesay along a segment of the might
San Andreas Fault eight miles northeast of Santa Cruz and 75 miles
south of San Francisco. Aftershocks today included one measuring
4.5 on the Richter scale at 3:25 a.m., according to the National
Earthquake Information Center in Golden, Colo.
   McCarthy said damage would total ``the better part of a billion
dollars.''
   ``You could see dozens, huge booms of smoke going into the
air,'' said Greg Higgins, who was driving near Santa Cruz, close to
the quake's epicenter, when it struck. ``It was complete
pandemonium.''
   The quake sent thousands of terrified office workers rushing
into the streets of Oakland and San Francisco, and many remained
stranded hours later.
   ``I've never been through anything like this in my life,'' said
Mary Garcia, who works in Oakland's Clorox building. ``I was on the
17th floor and the building just rocked and rocked. I was scared
out of my mind coming down the 17 floors.''
   Authorities urged people to fill their bathtubs in case water
was cut off. San Francisco Mayor Art Agnos urged commuters to stay
home today rather than further taxing the transportation system,
crippled by the closing of the Bay Bridge. A section of its top
collapsed onto the lower roadway.
   At least two bridges in the Santa Cruz area collapsed, highways
leading out of the city were damaged, and mountain passes outside
of Santa Cruz were closed because of landslides and fissures in the
road, the Highway Patrol said.
   In San Francisco, at least eight people died, and looting and
vandalism were reported in the city's major crack dealing area
after dark. ``When the power is off, opportunists come out,''
police Dispatcher Chris Curran said.
   Agnos asked the Army to help. National Guardsmen were being
mobilized, including engineers, military police and medical workers.
   Still, Agnos said, ``The city is in reasonably good shape. We've
survived this so far.''
   Sixty-thousand baseball fans were evacuated from Candlestick
Park before the start of Game Three of the World Series. No major
injuries were reported at the stadium, which sustained structural
damage, and there was no word this morning on when the game would
be played.
   Fire engines and ambulances, sirens howling, picked their way
through a darkened San Francisco. Headlights and an occasional
office building running on emergency generators stood out. Buses
were jammed and traffic was backed up.
   Commuters were left with no major transportation routes east out
of San Francisco because of the closing of the Bay Bridge, two
other spans and the Oakland-San Francisco subway, which apparently
was unscathed by the quake.
   Tourist ferries helped fill the void, giving stranded commuters
free rides from San Francisco to the East Bay.
   People walked around San Francisco, sat outside dingy hotels or
on stoops and curbs, listening to radio reports of the disaster.
Without power, there was no television. Restaurants and bars opened
with candlelight.
   Agnos said five people died in the city after buildings
collapsed on cars, and three died in San Francisco's Marina
district in a spectacular fire that burned much of the evening
before being brought under control.
   Up to 20 people were hurt in the fire, officials said.
   Police Chief Fred Jordan said the fire appeared to have consumed
an entire block, estimated by Agnos to be 12 buildings. The fire
apparently was caused by a natural gas leak, Agnos said.
   State emergency officials said at least five people died in
Santa Cruz County, including three crushed in collapsing buildings.
   One San Jose resident suffered a heart attack during the quake
and died.
   Willis Jacobs of the earthquake center said the quake was
centered about eight miles northeast of Santa Cruz, or 75 miles
south of San Francisco, along the San Andreas Fault. That is the
major earthquake fault blamed for the 1906 disaster that destroyed
much of the city and killed hundreds _ 700, according to
traditional estimates, and more than 2,500, according to recent
studies.
   In San Francisco's Haight-Fillmore district, cracks were visible
on some stoops and buildings, some in the stucco and some
structural. Many buildings in the neighborhood are Victorian-style
homes that survived the 1906 earthquake.
   A 30-foot section of the upper deck of the bridge connecting
Oakland and San Francisco collapsed, leaving three cars dangling
between the levels.
   CBS said the California Highway Patrol reported a J.C. Penney
building in downtown Hollister collapsed, as did a bridge on a
highway near Hollister.
   Gov. George Deukmejian cut short a trade mission to Frankfurt,
West Germany, and flew home. ``The devastation is just horrible and
we're just shocked,'' Deukmejian said before returning.
   In Washington, President Bush dispatched Transportation
Secretary Samuel Skinner to California to assess the damage. Vice
President Dan Quayle landed early today at Moffett Naval Air
Station, between San Francisco and San Jose.
   The quake was felt in Reno, Nev., 225 miles to the northeast; as
far north as the Russian River area, 70 miles to the north; 180
miles southeast in Fresno and 80 miles due east in Stockton.
High-rises in Los Angeles, 350 miles south of San Francisco, also
shook.
   At least four smaller aftershocks were recorded, said Bruce
Presgrave of the National Earthquake Information Service in Golden.
More were expected, but Presgrave said he did not expect them to be
strong.
   There were no reports of damage to the Golden Gate Bridge that
connects San Francisco to Marin County, to the north. The San Mateo
bridge, which crosses 10 miles south of Candlestick Park, was
closed for inspection, as was the Dumbarton Bridge, about 30 miles
south of San Francisco.
   The Oakland Airport and the San Francisco International Airport
were both closed. The San Jose International Airport was open with
only minor damage.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>MORE</NOTE>
</DOC>
