ID: 154	RANK: 41	SCORE: 9.382733
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880723-0066 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-23-88 0841EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a PM-Wildfires     07-23 0574</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Wildfires,0590</SECOND>
<HEAD>Wildfire Burns Within Mile of Yellowstone</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Hundreds of fighters were losing ground against the sweep of a
nearly 20,000-acre wildfire in Bridger-Teton National Forest
wilderness as it edged its way to within a mile of Yellowstone
National Park.
   But in California firefighters made headway Friday against two
fires that have cost more than $6 million and charred 12,500 acres
in rugged mountains 150 miles east of San Francisco.
   And air and ground reinforcements were called in overnight as
crews continued to fight a brush fire in Colorado that had nearly
tripled in size Friday to 1,100 acres.
   The twin arson-suspected fires in Calavaras County east of San
Francisco have razed six homes, nine outbuildings, seven vehicles
and a tractor since they began Tuesday.
   Firefighters had the fires 75 percent encircled by their control
lines Friday night and expected full containment by Saturday
evening, said Marilyn Richards, a spokeswoman for the California
Department of Forestry in San Andreas.
   But the more than 800 firefighters using almost 20 miles of hose
near Yellowstone weren't so fortunate as they tried to keep fire
from crossing the forest's Yellowstone Meadows, also known as
Thoroughbred Meadows, into the park.
   Most growth in the lightning-caused Teton fire was attributed to
``spotting,'' when winds carry hot embers into areas separate from
the main fire.
   Park officials have said they expect the fire to move into a
remote backcountry section of the park within the next few days.
   Fire Information Officer Pam Gardner said Friday, however, that
the blaze was still more than 30 miles from any major park
attractions, and Yellowstone officials continued to stress they
have not closed any facilities.
   Richards said the California fires had cost a total of nearly
$6.4 million, including timber and property loss and fire
suppression efforts. Some of the firefighters were sent home
Friday, leaving about 2,800 to battle the blazes.
   The fires charred nearly 12,500 acres, leaving flames to gnaw
mostly at uninhabited timber country in Calaveras County.
   Meanwhile, some 60 miles south of San Francisco, an
out-of-control brush fire threatened homes Friday as hundreds of
firefighters attempted to gain control of the blaze in steep
terrain near Morgan Hill.
   The fire, spurred by hot temperatures and slight winds, had
burned about 140 acres by Friday night, according to the California
forestry department. There were no reports of structural damage and
no evacuation was anticipated at the fire site, about 1 mile west
of Morgan Hill.
   In Colorado, a full fire team was called in to organize the
battle on Bureau of Land Management land some five miles north of
Canon City on Cooper Mountain, BLM dispatchers said late Friday.
   ``We will have ten 20-person hand crews'' on the firelines
Saturday, supported by two slurry bombers, two helicopters and 11
truck pumpers, dispatchers said.
   The fire, dubbed the Dinosaur Fire because it is near fossil
sites, was burning through an old logging area in steep terrain and
mainly was consuming pinon, juniper and oak brush.
   A blaze broke out Friday afternoon on the Spokane Indian
Reservation northwest of Spokane and grew to about 1,500 acres
within hours, said Dan Curd, Bureau of Indian Affairs fire
management officer in Washington state. Several homes on the
reservation and campers at nearby Fort Spokane were evacuated, but
there was no report of property loss in that fire.
   Curd said the fire jumped lines with ease because of shifting
winds.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
