ID: 154	RANK: 49	SCORE: 9.137065
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891023-0107 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-10-23-89 1504EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a PM-SFQuake 10thLd-Writethru a0635 10-23 1347</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-SF Quake, 10th Ld-Writethru, a0635,1349</SECOND>
<HEAD>URGENT</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: Leads with 19 grafs to Update with two more bodies found in
San Francisco. Deletes reference to Bay Bridge pieces towed ashore. Picks
up 20th graf pvs, ``Without the ...''</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos OAS1, SNJ1</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By ROBERT DVORCHAK</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP National Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>SAN FRANCISCO (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   A flotilla of ferries and extra trains
helped keep rain-soaked traffic moving today, but only at a
bumper-to-bumper pace. Rescuers halted the search for survivors at
an earthquake-flattened freeway when the rubble became too unstable.
   And hospital officials said today survivor Buck Helm had
improved and they were considering upgrading his condition from
critical to very serious. Doctors said he was no longer in pain,
and they were hopeful the longshoreman pulled from the freeway
rubble would not have permanent kidney problems.
   ``In the next 24 to 48 hours, if he continues the way he is now,
he will be out of the woods,'' Dr. Floyd Huen said.
   The death toll rose to 61 today with the recovery of two more
bodies in San Francisco, the coronor's office said. A female body
was found in the remains of a Marina district fire, and a
68-year-old woman died of injuries suffered from the quake near
downtown. Dozens remained missing and thousands were injured and
homeless.
   At the Interstate 880 disaster in Oakland, where 38 bodies have
been recovered, officials said today crews began dismantling a
100-yard section of the double-deck freeway that was near collapse.
   ``It is a dangerous operation,'' said Kyle Nelson, a spokesman
for the California Department of Transportation.
   Congress began putting together a $3 billion-plus package of
federal disaster, but put off until later how to come up with the
money to pay for it.
   ``There is an urgent need for help for people now,'' Sen. Pete
Wilson, R-Calif., told the Senate Environment and Public Works
subcommittee on transporation and resources.
   Gale warnings were posted early today, rain was heavy in some
areas and one ferry was turned back because of rough waters on the
San Francisco Bay, authorities said. The Union Ferry Building, the
terminus of all ferries when they reach San Francisco, was closed
for an hour because of high waves and the boats were diverted to a
pier about a mile away.
   But most made it to work without major problem, despite
predictions of commuter gridlock on the first full workday since
the earthquke closed crucial freeways and broke a section of the
vital Bay Bridge linking San Francisco and Oakland.
   ``Considering everything, my commute has really gone smooth,''
said Maggie Faulkner of Oakland, who rode a ferry across the choppy
bay to San Francisco.
   Highway 101 was a sea of lights starting shortly after 5 a.m.
PDT and the Golden Gate Bridge was bumper-to-bumper but moving. Bay
Area Rapid Transit, which runs trains underneath the bay, had
carried 70,000 passengers by 8:30 a.m., more than double the normal
load.
   Damage estimates from Tuesday's earthquake topped $7 billion,
eclipsing Hurricane Hugo as the costliest natural disaster in U.S.
history, according to the Independent Insurance Agents of America.
   On Sunday, 150 residents of a housing project just 10 feet from
collapsed I-880 joined thousands of homeless because of fears that
more of the highway could fall.
   The unstable ruins forced authorities to halt rescue work late
Sunday.
   ``We know there are more victims, more cars. But we don't know
how many,'' said California Highway Patrol Capt. Mike Garver,
speaking about I-880.
   There was no estimate of when work could resume.
   ``It's kind of minute by minute,'' said Nelson.
   The first phase of the Bay Bridge repair started when workers
sawed a 50-foot collapsed section in half and lowered both halves
200 feet by crane Sunday to a barge on wind-whipped San Francisco
Bay.
   Without the Bay Bridge, 65,000 rush-hour motorists were forced
to seek other ways to work. Daily, 260,000 cars use the bridge, the
most crucial of the region's earthquake-disrupted roadways. Repairs
will take at least four weeks.
   ``You just can't squeeze all the traffic onto other bridges.
There just isn't enough room,'' said Joel Markowitz, a traffic
planner with the Metropolitan Transportation Commission. ``We're
going to have a crisis until people adapt a little.''
   Traffic planners took extraordinary precautions to avoid
rush-hour paralysis on the first full workday since the earthquake.
   Commuters were urged to take public transportation, buddy up in
carpools and come in earlier or later than normal. Fourteen ferries
were added to ease the bridge crisis, and extra police and tow
trucks were placedin choke zones in case something goes wrong.
   About 3 million people commute on a typical workday in the
nine-county region. Authorities warned that 2 million of them could
be disrupted in a nightmarish obstacle course.
   MTC Chairman Rod Diridon said any motorist driving alone would
be ``doing an anti-social act.''
   Extra subway trains and ferries can accommodate an additional
45,000 riders. Other bridges must handle the rest of the traffic
that normally crosses the 8.5-mile-long Bay Bridge.
   Other freeways also are devastated. A 1\-mile section of I-880
is flattened, and the Embarcadero Freeway and the I-280 extension
are closed. Farther south, landslide-clogged Highway 17 is open
only to buses and emergency vehicles.
   The hospital where Helm was taken was deluged with flowers,
telegrams and phone calls for a survivor who had been given up for
dead.
   Helm, 57, regained some functions in his kidneys, which were
damaged by dehydration during his 89-hour ordeal. He was also
breathing better, but he was still having trouble moving his leg
and was being fed by a tube in intensive care, said officials at
Oakland's Highland General Hospital.
   Highway engineer Steven Whipple, the hero who found Helm, said
he was checking the ruins for stability when he spotted the back of
Helm's head and a slight movement in his flashlight's beam.
   ``It stopped my heart,'' said Whipple, 29, who works for the
state transportation department.
   In six subsequent sweeps of the section, sniffing dogs and
sensitive listening devices failed to detect any more survivors.
   Rescuers were clearly buoyed at finding someone alive after four
grisly days of removing bodies and crushed cars from the crumpled
concrete. They placed giant airbags, hydraulic jacks and wooden
timbers under concrete slabs and trucked in dirt to firm the
foundation. They also installed seismic monitors on the structure.
   Meanwhile, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers on Sunday reported
major cracks in three dams within five miles of the epicenter in
the Santa Cruz Mountains, but said they posed ``no public threat at
this time'' because water is low behind them.
   A half-dozen tent cities have sprouted in Watsonville, a city of
30,000 about 80 miles south of San Francisco. Many residents were
so frightened by the quake and its aftershocks that they refuse to
go indoors, even if their homes have been declared safe.
   The Red Cross even opened a full-blown shelter of olive-green
military tents, complete with medical and feeding facilities, in
the battered community.
   Resumption of the World Series, the first ever between the two
Bay area teams, was pushed back until Friday. It had been hoped
play would resume three days earlier.
   Football was played Sunday, but not in San Francisco. The 49ers
beat the New England Patriots 37-20 in a game moved from
Candlestick Park to Stanford University, and a collection was taken
among the 75,000 fans for earthquake victims. A moment of silence
honored the dead.
   Throughout the region, Sunday was a time for mourning the dead
and giving thanks for survival.
   ``We pray to be spared from further suffering,'' Archbishop John
Quinn told 700 worshipers at St. Mary's Cathedral in San Francisco.
``I pray for the relief of suffering and anxiety. I cannot forget
to pray for the dead and the bereaved.''
   In Oakland, parishioners of the St. Francis de Sales Cathedral
held services in a Baptist church because their tower had been
cracked and leaned precariously.
   ``Sometimes in life, God shakes us and says, `Pay attention,
there is something more important than the ordinary things in our
lives,'' the Rev. Joseph Powers said.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
