ID: 154	RANK: 54	SCORE: 9.036308
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891019-0073 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-10-19-89 0951EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a PM-SFQuake 3rdLd-Writethru 2Takes 10-19 1066</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-SF Quake, 3rd Ld-Writethru, 2 Takes, a0539,1094</SECOND>
<HEAD>Three Strong Aftershocks Strike Today; Relief Efforts Gear Up</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: UPDATES throughout with power restored in Financial District,
Bush planning trip Friday, new quote from resident, moves up World Series,
inserts that rescuers cut through mother's body to rescue boy; No pickup.</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos NY6, NY9, NY10, NY11</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By ROBERT DVORCHAK</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP National Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>SAN FRANCISCO (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Three strong aftershocks rattled Northern
California today as relief poured into the earthquake-devastated
Bay area from throughout the world.
   Workers dug into a 1\-mile-long slab of collapsed freeway in
Oakland with fading hopes that anyone might be alive. Authorities
fear more than 270 people were killed, most in the highway cave-in.
   There were signs of life slowly returning to normal. Power was
restored in the city's Financial District early this morning,
setting off thousands of alarms. Airports were open, and ferries
from Southern California steamed north to bolster the overburdened
Bay area commuter fleet.
   The third game of the World Series, which was within minutes of
the opening pitch when the quake struck, was rescheduled for
Tuesday at Candlestick Park in San Francisco.
   Still, many offices remained closed. The Bay Bridge, the
lifeline that links Oakland and San Francisco, was expected to be
closed at least one or two more weeks while a collapsed section is
repaired.
   An aftershock that measured 5.0 on the Richter scale of ground
motion struck at 3:15 a.m. and was centered near Watsonville, 10
miles south of Santa Cruz, according to the state Office of
Emergency Services.
   ``It was real strong,'' said Kelly Johnston, an admitting clerk
at AMI Community Hospital in Santa Cruz. ``I ran to the doorway.
Most people were just standing there frozen.''
   ``No one is really sleeping around here,'' Watsonville resident
John Murphy said.
   Two other aftershocks measured 4.5. The aftershocks collapsed
the damaged steeple of a Watsonville church, and further damaged
buildings in Santa Cruz, near the epicenter of Tuesday's 6.9 quake,
state officials said.
   As of early today, more than 1,400 aftershocks were recorded.
The strongest, 5.2 on the Richter scale, struck within 40 minutes
of initial jolt, according the U.S. Geological Survey.
   On Wednesday, BART, the Bay Area Rapid Transit subway system,
reopened and then closed again when a train operator reported a
leak in the tube beneath the bay.
   Gov. George Deukmejian demanded an investigation into the
collapse of Interstate 880 in Oakland, saying it should have been
built to withstand the devastating force of Tuesday's earthquake.
   The collapse ``raises troubling questions for the entire state
in terms of the construction of our freeways,'' Oakland Mayor
Lionel Wilson said.
   Largely because of the collapse of I-880, known as the Nimitz
Freeway, the quake was the second-deadliest in U.S. history. It
killed an estimated 270 people _ 250 of them in the rubble of the
Nimitz _ and crippled transportation, electric power and commerce
in the nation's fourth-largest metropolitan area, a region of more
than 6 million people.
   Besides the commuters crushed in the freeway collapse, at least
21 people died in San Francisco, San Mateo, Santa Clara and Santa
Cruz counties. State officials said 1,400 people were injured
throughout the Bay area, although hospitals said they treated 2,750
people, many for chest pains.
   In Santa Cruz, closest to the quake's epicenter, police arrested
at least five people Wednesday night after distraught friends of a
woman missing in the rubble marched to protest authorities'
decision to stop searching for her. Several buildings in the city's
historic downtown district were destroyed.
   San Francisco Mayor Art Agnos said the quake caused $2 billion
worth of destruction in his city alone.
   President Bush, sharply criticized in South Carolina for his
response to Hurricane Hugo, quickly declared the San Francisco
region a disaster area and directed an initial $273 million in
relief efforts. White House officials said he would tour the area
Friday.
   More relief began to flow in from places as far afield as South
Carolina, Japan and Great Britain. Israel and France offered to
send disaster teams experienced in finding victims trapped beneath
wreckage.
   Officials in Los Alamos, N.M., dispatched a device used to
locate survivors of last year's earthquake in Soviet Armenia.
   Hope was fading, however, that anyone would be found alive
beneath the devastation in San Francisco's Marina district or under
the crushing weight of I-880.
   In the affluent Marina district, two bodies were spotted in the
rubble of a four-story apartment building. Their hands were
clutched in an embrace, said Dr. Charles Saunders of the city
Health Department.
   ``There were no signs of life,'' he said. ``It's very unlikely
anyone else will be found alive.''
   Across San Francisco Bay in Oakland, crews searched round the
clock for victims amid the tons of steel and concrete that had been
the Nimitz Freeway.
   ``We have located several individuals, none of whom are alive so
there are no survivors at this point,'' Oakland police Capt. Jim
Hahn said.
   Earlier, rescuers freed a 6-year-old from a car by cutting
through the body of his dead mother. The boy was in critical
condition.
   Seven bodies were recovered from the Nimitz and police said at
least 86 people were officially reported missing. The quake hit at
rush hour, and state officials estimated there were 250 cars caught
in the collapse, based on an optimistic assumption of one person
per car.
   A remote-control backhoe was flown in by helicopter to dig out
the rubble, but couldn't begin operation until workers shored up
the 1\-mile stretch of collapsed roadway.
   Sen. Alan Cranston, D-Calif., got an overhead view of the
crushed freeway from a helicopter and offered a horrific
description: ``It looked like a snake hacked with an ax. It was in
bits and pieces.''
   The Nimitz, built in the 1950s, was reinforced in 1977 in the
first of a three-phase program to earthquake-proof state highways.
   The second phase, begun on other roads in the last year, had
been delayed at the Nimitz pending an engineering study, according
to Bill Schaefer, the chief engineer for the California Department
of Transportation.
   Still, Schaefer said he was shocked by the collapse. ``We
thought it would withstand the maximum credible earthquake we could
have in this area,'' he said.
   Deukmejian said the cave-in appeared to be the result of
substandard construction. ``I think ... we should have a full
inquiry to determine why there were failures,'' Deukmejian said.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>MORE</NOTE>
</DOC>
