ID: 154	RANK: 8	SCORE: 12.453568
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891018-0192 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-10-18-89 1741EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a PM-SFQuake 13thLd-Writethru a0787 10-18 1293</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-SF Quake, 13th Ld-Writethru, a0787,1327</SECOND>
<HEAD>Nation's Deadliest Earthquake Since 1906 Hits Northern California</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: SUBS 2nd graf, At least ... million residents., and 22nd graf,
State emergency ... were injured., to UPDATE with 1,400 injured; SUBS 27th
graf, The quake ... Richter scale., to UPDATE aftershocks information.</HEAD>
<HEAD>With LaserGraphics, LaserPhotos</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By MARY McGRATH</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>OAKLAND, Calif. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Aftershocks to Tuesday's killer quake
shook the battered San Francisco Bay area today as work crews gave
up hope of finding anyone alive beneath a wrecked freeway and
stunned Californians struggled to put order back in their lives.
   At least 272 people were reported killed and 1,400 injured in
the catastrophic earthquake, which in 15 seconds wrecked buildings
across nearly 100 miles. A section of the Bay Bridge and at least
two spans near Santa Cruz fell, and electric power was cut for as
many as 1 million residents.
   Severed gas lines touched off fires, including one in San
Francisco that burned a block of buildings, but all the blazes were
out or under control today.
   Extensive damage was reported in parts of Santa Cruz and San
Benito counties 70 miles to the south, which were closest to the
epicenter of the earthquake.
   The quake, 6.9 on the Richter scale, was the second-deadliest in
U.S. history, surpassed only by the great San Francisco earthquake
of 1906, when 2,500 or more were killed.
   The magnitude of the disaster emerged slowly today as officials
made contact with hard-hit areas _ outlying suburbs and towns where
many telephones were cut off.
   ``The devastation is just horrible,'' said Gov. George
Deukmejian, who cut short a trade mission to West Germany. Lt. Gov.
Leo McCarthy said damage would total ``the better part of $1
billion.''
   San Francisco Mayor Art Agnos urged commuters to stay home
rather than tax the transportation system, crippled by the closing
of the Bay Bridge. But as dawn spread over the glass-strewn streets
of the region, people tried to revive a sense of normalcy, some
making their way to work by ferry, by foot or over highways not
blocked by damage. The Bay Area Rapid Transit system reopened this
morning, as did the Oakland and San Francisco airports.
   Many people stayed home, however, their workplaces shut down in
the quake's aftermath. Most schools and many other institutions
were closed as well.
   San Francisco's financial district was unusually quiet. The
Pacific Stock Exchange opened, but business was slow as traders
worked by candlelight, flashlight and light filtering through
skylights.
   Traffic was light on bridges into San Francisco and in most city
neighborhoods.
   A San Francisco city councilman, Bill Maher, said electric power
had been restored to about two-thirds of the city by morning and
should be fully restored by the end of the day.
   ``The city is in reasonably good shape,'' Agnos said. ``We've
survived this so far.''
   The mayor estimated 40 buildings in the city were unusable or
severely damaged.
   Pacific Bell said its telephone network suffered no significant
damage, but the system was being overloaded by a huge increase in
calls into and out of the region.
   In a grimly futile operation near Oakland's bayfront, crews
worked to clear concrete debris and searched for victims along a
mile-long portion of Interstate 880, the Nimitz Freeway, whose
upper level collapsed on a lower roadway crowded with rush hour
traffic.
   Dave Wilson of the state Office of Emergency Services said at
least 253 people died in the highway disaster. Authorities declined
to say how many bodies had been recovered, but said they based
their estimate on the number of cars believed crushed in the
debris. They said seven victims had been identified.
   Some people were pulled alive from the wreckage after the quake,
but Oakland Mayor Lionel Wilson said today searchers believed no
more survivors remained.
   Tractors, bulldozers and dump trucks were called out this
morning, and trucks and vans took bodies from the site.
   ``You could hear it crunching down _ but you couldn't see
anything. It was just a big white cloud,'' witness Leroy FitzGerald
said of the collapse. ``You could hear people screaming for help.''
   A 30-foot section of the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge's top
level also collapsed, dropping onto a lower roadway and leaving
three cars dangling.
   State emergency services spokesman Tom Mullins said at
midafternoon that at least 272 people had died overall and 1,400
were injured.
   The San Francisco coroner's office said today it had confirmed
10 earthquake-related deaths. Authorities reported five deaths in
Santa Clara County and one in San Mateo County, areas just to the
south of San Francisco.
   Officials in Santa Cruz County said five people were killed
around the coastal city of Santa Cruz.
   In Washington, President Bush signed a disaster-relief
declaration and said ``we will take every step and make every
effort'' to help. Vice President Dan Quayle and Transportation
Secretary Samuel Skinner flew over the area for about an hour today
to survey the damage.
   The president said he would make a personal inspection in a few
days. White House officials said Bush probably would go on Friday
or Saturday.
   The quake hit at 5:04 p.m. Tuesday along a segment of the huge
San Andreas Fault eight miles northeast of Santa Cruz and 75 miles
south of San Francisco. Dozens of aftershocks followed, including
one that measured 5.9 on the Richter scale shortly after the main
shock.
   The quake was felt in Reno, Nev., 225 miles to the northeast,
and high-rises shook in Los Angeles, 350 miles south of San
Francisco.
   Forty buildings reportedly collapsed in Santa Cruz and
Watsonville; Santa Cruz County emergency services coordinator Dina
Phillips estimated $350 million in damage. Lori Aldrete of the
California Association of Hospitals in Sacramento said the
Watsonville Community Hospital was evacuated, but no other details
were available.
   In Los Gatos, about 10 miles southwest of San Jose, Police Chief
Larry Todd said many buildings had collapsed, and there were some
reports of looting.
   At least two bridges in the Santa Cruz area collapsed, highways
leading out of the city were damaged, and mountain passes outside
Santa Cruz were closed due to landslides and fissures in the road,
the Highway Patrol said.
   The quake sent thousands of terrified office workers rushing
into the streets of Oakland and San Francisco.
   ``I've never been through anything like this in my life,'' said
Mary Garcia, who works in Oakland's Clorox building. ``I was on the
17th floor and the building just rocked and rocked. I was scared
out of my mind coming down the 17 floors.''
   Looting and vandalism were reported in San Francisco's major
crack dealing area, along Third Street. ``When the power is off,
opportunists come out,'' said police Dispatcher Chris Curran.
   Agnos asked the Army to help. National Guardsmen were being
mobilized, including engineers, military police and medical workers.
   Sixty-thousand baseball fans were evacuated from Candlestick
Park before the start of Game Three of the World Series. No major
injuries were reported at the stadium, which sustained structural
damage. Baseball Commissioner Fay Vincent said no decision had been
made on when or where to resume the Series.
   There were no reports of damage to the state's six nuclear
reactors, said Greg Cook, a Nuclear Regulatory Commission spokesman.
   The 6.9 Richter reading made this the sixth-most powerful quake
to strike California this century, and the most powerful since a
7.0 quake centered in Eureka in 1980.
   The Richter scale is a measure of ground motion as recorded on
seismographs. Every increase of one number means a tenfold increase
in magnitude. An earthquake of 6 can cause severe damage. A 7 is a
``major'' quake, capable of widespread heavy damage. The 1906
earthquake, which occurred before the scale was devised, has been
estimated at 8.3.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
