ID: 154	RANK: 87	SCORE: 8.612505
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891026-0092 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-10-26-89 1156EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a PM-SFQuake 2ndLd-Writethru a0531 10-26 0962</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-SF Quake, 2nd Ld-Writethru, a0531,0935</SECOND>
<HEAD>Signs of Return to Normal, but Health Fears in Tent Cities</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: INSERTS 2 grafs after 3rd to UPDATE with Bush comments.</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos FX1, FX2, OAS4</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By CHRISTOPHER SULLIVAN</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>SAN FRANCISCO (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Rebuilding went ahead from mountain
landslide areas to the earthquake-scrambled Port of Oakland, but
there were new signs of a return to normal as even traffic officers
resumed issuing tickets after a week's unplanned moratorium.
   Tolls on bridges went back into effect today. Children returned
to school in the hard-hit Marina district.
   Congress on Wednesday approved a $3.45 billion package of
federal aid to areas ravaged by the Oct. 17 quake, and President
Bush signed it today.
   Asked if it would be enough, Bush said, ``I've pledged to do
what we need to do ... and we got this done.''
   ``We are hopeful that this action, taken in great speed and
compassion by the Congress, will send a signal that all of us,
crossing party lines, care very much about this,'' he said.
   In the agricultural community of Watsonville, south of San
Francisco, officials fearing health and safety dangers from
unrefrigerated food and open cooking fires urged residents of tent
cities to move to shelters.
   ``Our plan is not to physically move people but to convince them
that their options are better at other places,'' Fire Chief Gary
Smith said at a news conference Wednesday in a park where about 160
people have set up camp.
   Some of those camping in parks and lots were driven from their
homes because of damage, while others said they would feel unsafe
returning to their homes even though inspectors have certified them
sound.
   Others wished they could return home. Landslides in the Santa
Cruz Mountains have claimed 100 houses and severely damaged three
times that many, officials said Wednesday.
   In Lompico Canyon on Wednesday, Kieran Reid worked to shore up
his landslide-damaged house. Though it sustained cracks and lost
its chimney, he said he felt lucky.
   Not far away, one house could be seen literally cracked in half,
its furniture spilled on the ground. Others had plastic covering
gaps in the roof.
   ``It's like a tornado. Some people have lost everything and
others haven't,'' said Wilson Scaling, head of the federal Soil
Conservation Service after a helicopter tour of the landslide area.
   ``If we have a wet winter, there's a potential for a lot of
slides,'' he said. ``I feel very sorry for these folks. They're
kind of sitting on a powder keg. The potential is there for
something else, but hopefully that won't occur.''
   Scaling said his agency is turning over $400,000 for emergency
work, including surveys to assess damage to streams, channels and
dams in a 10-county area.
   Gov. George Deukmejian praised Congress' quick action on the
relief bill. ``Not only did they approve the emergency funding, but
they also passed several significant changes in the law that ...
will assist the massive cleanup effort,'' he said.
   A survey in the San Francisco Chronicle on Wednesday did not
give federal officials such high marks. Thirty-six percent of Bay
area residents polled found the federal response the the quake fair
or poor.
   Forty-nine percent found it excellent or good, compared with 72
percent who felt that way about the local government response and a
59 percent positive rating for the state.
   Damage estimates have been set at $7.1 billion.
   Police said six people remained unaccounted for, and the death
toll remained at 63, including 39 from the collapse of
double-decked Interstate 880 in Oakland. Nearly 14,000 people were
reported homeless.
   ``I'm taking it one day at a time right now,'' said Lynn
Carrere, who was being sheltered by the Red Cross at the Marina
Middle School after her apartment was heavily damaged. ``The
aftershocks are really getting on my nerves.''
   Some students were upset to find 175 displaced people still in
their school when it reopened.
   ``It's sort of weird,'' said one girl. ``We can't get to the
gym. The yard is split in half for the Red Cross.'' A boy said some
students felt they had sacrified enough.
   Administrators said they were happy to help.
   ``These are people who need the help,'' said Assistant Principal
Norm Sui. ``Things are going fine.''
   In Oakland, crews continued to dismantle a section of I-880. The
search for more bodies was delayed because the road was too shaky.
Demolition along the entire 1\-mile crippled stretch won't be
complete until December, officials said.
   Buck Helm, the I-880 survivor, remained in serious but stable
condition. ``He's doing well,'' said Phyllis Brown, a spokeswoman
for Highland General Hospital in Oakland.
   Also improving were 6-year-old Julio Berumen and his sister,
Cathy, 8, who lost their mother in the I-880 collapse. Some 500
letters to the children and more than $25,000 in checks have
flooded a fund set up for them.
   Meanwhile, cleanup and rebuilding continued throughout the Bay
area.
   At the Port of Oakland, where an estimated $75 million in damage
included two derailed container cranes, nine of 10 marine terminals
were back in operation Wednesday.
   ``It's not pretty, but it's working,'' said Robert Middleton, a
port spokesman.
   Cracks and other damage at one end of the main runway at
Oakland's airport were also being repaired. Passenger travel has
not been affected, Middleton said, but air freight carriers have
been told to lighten loads until the full length of the 10,000-foot
runway is usable again.
   Deukmejian on Wednesday ordered the immediate release of $122
million in emergency state funds to hard-hit localities to help
prevent ``cash-flow difficulties.''
   In San Francisco, parking officers went back to giving tickets
Wednesday. Some illegally parked cars were even towed, though Nancy
Lynch of the traffic department said, ``We're using plenty of
discretion.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
