ID: 154	RANK: 92	SCORE: 8.571760
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900407-0006 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-04-07-90 0003EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-CaliforniaQuake 3rdLd-Writethru a0752 04-07 0675</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-California Quake, 3rd Ld-Writethru, a0752,0689</SECOND>
<HEAD>Moderate Quake in San Francisco Area Recalls Big World Series
Temblor</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: LEADS with 14 grafs to UPDATE with magnitude of latest quake
set at 4.5, aftershock, reaction. Pick up 11th graf pvs, `Tracy
Hein... </NOTE>
<DATELINE>CONCORD, Calif. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   A moderate earthquake jolted the San
Francisco Bay Area on Friday night, causing minor damage and
jarring nerves during a baseball game that recalled the World
Series contest stopped by last year's kller quake.
   The quake, which struck at 7:39 p.m. PDT, registered 4.5 on the
Richter scale, according to a preliminary reading from the state
Office of Emergency Services. That is considered strong enough to
cause moderate damage in the immediate area.
   One of an afternoon-long series of tremors, it was centered near
Danville, about 20 miles southeast of San Francisco and inland from
San Francisco Bay.
   At Candlestick Park, where an exhibition ballgame between the
San Francisco Giants and Oakland Athletics had just gotten
underway, players and spectators seemed to momentarily stunned.
   ``Everybody sort of sat up and said, `No, that didn't happen.
Did someone jump hard?''' said Bob Egelko, an Associated Press
reporter who was covering the game. ``It looked like the players
hesitated.''
   The tremors were an eerie reminder of the devastating
7.1-magnitude quake that struck Northern California on Oct. 17,
minutes before the start of the third game of the World Series
between the Giants and the A's at Candlestick. That quake killed 67
people and did millions of dollars in property damage.
   Though the quake was felt over a wide area, there weren't any
immediate reports of serious damage, said Chuck Young of the Office
of Emergency Services.
   ``We queried all of the affected counties and they said the only
real problem has been a slow dial tone on the phone,'' Young said.
   The 4.5-magnitude quake was followed at 7:51 p.m. with a tremor
of magnitude 3.5, Young said.
   Several temblors centered in the Danville area shook San
Francisco and its eastern suburbs through the afternoon, the
biggest of magnitude 3.9 at 3:41 p.m. and of magnitude 3.5 at 1:55
p.m. Those were preliminary measurements by the U.S. Geological
Survey in Menlo Park.
   The afternoon quakes knocked objects from market shelves in
several communities, and startled some shoppers into running from
the stores.
   ``It was like the first one, a sharp, fast jolt and I felt a
real tiny one after,'' said Sue Nicoles, administrative clerk at
Heather Farms Community Center in Walnut Creek said of the largest
temblor.
   ``I jumped right out of my chair, but it didn't last long enough
for me to get under my desk, which would have been my next move,''
she said.
   An apparently unrelated quake of magnitude 4.1 shook a sparsely
populated stretch of desert 450 miles to the southeast, near Indio
at 6:07 p.m. Friday, said scientists at the California Institute of
Technology in Pasadena. Authorities said there were no immediate
reports of damage or injuries.
   Tracy Hein of the Contra Costa County Office of Emergency
Services in Danville described the afternoon temblor as ``a little
joy ride, I'll tell you. It was more like a truck hitting the
building.''
   Customers at the Lucky supermarket in Walnut Creek ran out when
cans and boxes tumbled from the shelves, said store manager Gary
Earl. There wasn't any serious damage, he said.
   Bay Area Rapid Transit trains, which connect San Francisco with
the suburbs across the bay, were halted for about five minutes as a
precaution during the afternoon quake, said transit district
spokesman Sy Mouber.
   The Richter scale is a gauge of energy released by an
earthquake. Every increase of one number means the ground motion is
10 times greater.
   A quake of the magnitude 2 is the smallest normally felt by
humans, a quake of 3.5 can cause slight damage in the local area, 4
moderate damage, 5 considerable damage, 6 severe damage. A 7
reading is a ``major'' earthquake, capable of widespread heavy
damage; 8 is a ``great'' quake, capable of tremendous damage.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
