ID: 317	RANK: 45	SCORE: 5.554527
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920311-0009
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920311-0009.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Young Artists See
   Amusement Parks
   As Step to Big Time
   ---
   Singers, Dancers and Actors
   Toil for Very Low Pay;
   Getting Shot Repeatedly
   ----
   By Clare Ansberry
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
03/11/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
RECREATIONAL PRODUCTS &amp; SERVICES (REC)
LEISURE TIME SERVICES AND PRODUCTS (REQ)
</IN>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   At 5 feet 7 inches tall and weighing 275 pounds, Frank
Shirey never fancied himself leading-man material.
   His only formal training remotely related to show business
was clarinet lessons in the fourth grade. Though he did place
second in the Latrobe, Pa., Lions Club talent show for
singing "Just Friends," a song he wrote a few years back, he
always figured he would make his living as a carpenter.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Now, at 26, he is a star -- in a very minor galaxy.
   People stop him in stores and ask, "Aren't you Sheriff
Jackson?" Why yes, he is. He is the guy who several times a
day, six days a week, gets shot in the rear end, yelps and
then chases down the bad guy in a regular Wild West skit at
Idlewild Park in Ligonier, Pa. Between gunfights, he croons
"Rocky Top" and strums his guitar.
   "I'm hanging around Idlewild, hoping someone will discover
me," says Mr. Shirey, who has been the sheriff at Idlewild's
Hootin' Holler for eight years.
   There are a passel of talented young people, with similar
dreams, all over the country. They spend their summers in
places such as Indiana's Santa Claus Land, belting out songs
on stages no bigger than a baseball dugout, for audiences
that didn't come to see them but to ride the roller coaster.
For performers, it is theatrical experience, a foot in the
door. Many hope to end up on Broadway, in Hollywood, or at
least in Anaheim, Calif. Disneyland is a plum job.
   The competition is fierce. Representatives of amusement
parks, theme parks and the Norwegian Cruise Lines for the
past month or so have been hopping from Muncie, Ind., to
Tulsa, Okla., and even to New York City, auditioning
potential Berenstain Bears and Lusty Lils for the coming
summer. More than 500 hopefuls show up at the typical
audition. Disney tends to draw crew-neck sweaters, ponytails
and more dimples than in a mile of cellulite. Nashville's
Opryland attracts big hair. Cruise ships draw red lips.
   Most who turn out are college students majoring in theater
or dance, who arrive with portfolios of publicity stills
under their arms. Other aspirants are straight out of the
church choir or have appeared locally somewhere in "South
Pacific."
   "For some, an amusement park is the equivalent of hitting
Broadway," says Charles Stephens, chairman of the music
department at St. Clair County Community College, which
played host to auditions in tiny Port Huron, Mich., for Cedar
Point Park in Sandusky, Ohio.
   Being an amusement-park entertainer is like being vice
president; people are more interested in the main attraction
-- like being dropped 200 feet in three seconds and eating
fried dough. Patrons will stop in for a little song and dance
because the theater is air-conditioned or the pool is closed,
or because the line for the Blue Streak is too long.
   "This is not Shakespeare Theater where people sit quietly
and applaud. You need to reach out to them," says Marje
Cronenewett, manager of park attractions for Cedar Point.
Singers at Kennywood Park in Pittsburgh had to outsing the
screams from a black octopus ride named the Monongahela
Monster, which flailed above the outdoor stage. This year the
park decided to drop its "Raz Ma Taz" song show, and replace
it with the Rocket Car: A stunt man rides a little car down a
chute, flips in the air and comes down on a landing pad, or
(occasionally) in the nearby lagoon. Another fellow swallows
swords and fire four times a day. That, too, requires talent.
   But for 22-year-old Kristi Smith, the years of voice
lessons and braces on her teeth were worth it, just for a gig
at Geauga Lake Park in Aurora, Ohio. There, she got to sing
and dance in a grueling 30-minute show, repeated 36 times a
week and requiring six costume changes, made possible by
Velcro. The stuff, she adds, loses zip after 250
performances. Once her dress popped open and she had to back
off stage.
   Ms. Smith's parents had wanted her to play the oboe, but
her woodwind career got sidetracked in the eighth grade, when
she was picked to make a TV appearance with Pearl Bailey. Her
two-minute, three-line debut earned her $2,000. "I thought
`Wow, this is it.' I don't want to be sitting in an orchestra
in 20 years playing an oboe. I want to be on stage." So she
took her two grand to the orthodontist and got her teeth
straightened. "I'm glad I did it. People say I have lovely
teeth," she says. This summer, she is going to Opryland to
sing George M. Cohan songs.
   Opryland, like Disneyland and Walt Disney World, is
considered a great job. They pay twice what some smaller
parks pay -- as much as $500 a week. And the big parks have
the most lavish shows. One of them, Kings Island, in
Cincinnati, has an underwater scene with twinkling
fiber-optic lights and mermaids who dress like Cher. The big
parks, like Disney's, often lip sync voices, so the performer
who moves like a swan but sings like a duck can still be a
star.
   At smaller parks, performers have to sing, dance and mend
costumes. (Mr. Shirey's mother mends his sheriff's uniform.)
"We're small potatoes," says Annie Hughes, whose 70-year-old
husband, Carl, runs Kennywood and Idlewild and books all the
entertainment, including a bird comedy routine called Alphie
Cockatoo and the Comedy MaCaws. There aren't many Las
Vegas-type, multisequined reviews at smaller parks.
   But small parks can be stepping-stones to bigger things.
One Cedar Point performer went to Broadway with "Annie,"
another is touring with Natalie Cole. Debbie Damp, of
Latrobe, Pa., who played Royal Wife No. 7 in "The King and I"
in summer stock and spent three summers at Idlewild, was a
Disney finalist this year.
   Ms. Damp has been dreaming of working for Disney ever
since the third grade, when one of the Seven Dwarfs in the
Crickett Theater's production of Snow White got chicken pox.
Overnight, she was elevated from a lowly tree to Doc. Miss
Jones, her teacher, told the audience little Debbie had saved
the show.
   Smitten, she took tap-dancing and starred in high-school
plays. But her big break was with Idlewild in 1988. She
played Ma McCoy, and got hit in the face with cream pies. Her
parents turned out every Sunday to see the show.
   Now, she hopes, her career is taking off. Aside from being
a Disney finalist who didn't make the final cut, she landed a
TV commercial for Arthur Treacher's Fish &amp; Chips and a radio
commercial for Highway Pizza, in State College, Pa. Next: the
big screen? Ms. Damp may soon be telling Cinema World theater
audiences: "No smoking, no big hats."
   While amusement-park performers may be aiming for the
Great White Way or the Hollywood Walk of Fame, most will
never get much further than singing "Bile Them Cabbage Down"
next to a cotton candy stand. "This will be the pinnacle,"
says Joseph McGoldrick, assistant performing arts director at
Point Park College in Pittsburgh, where amusement parks do
some of their hiring.
   Mr. Shirey, alias Sheriff Jackson, now works winters as a
security guard at Idlewild, and between summer shows has
operated the Rollocoaster and Spider rides. But he lives for
the stage.
   Last summer, Mr. Shirey decided that, after eight years,
he needed to jazz up his routine. He stood in the wings until
the other performers were on stage, ran out, jumped in the
air and touched his toes, like a member of the Bolshoi.
Dazzled by his agility, the audience gave him a standing
ovation, which a friend of his captured on videotape.
   "It was my moment in the spotlight," he says.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
