ID: 317	RANK: 67	SCORE: 5.406454
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910621-0169
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910621-0169.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   The Real NCAA Scandal
   ----
   By Doug Bandow
</HL>
<DATE>
06/21/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEVADA (NV)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   The athletic program at the University of Nevada at Las
Vegas (UNLV) is again under attack. The latest charge, that
some of basketball coach Jerry Tarkanian's players consorted
with a convicted sports fixer, has forced the coach to agree
to quit after next year. Sports purists, along with the NCAA
officials who've laid siege to Mr. Tarkanian for years, must
be pleased.
   But Mr. Tarkanian's departure will do nothing to end the
scandals that periodically mar college sports. New
violations, investigations and punishment will continue
because of the very structure of the NCAA, or National
Collegiate Athletic Association, the 800-plus member body
that regulates 21 different college sports. Although
membership is formally voluntary, no school could easily
quit, since all major intercollegiate competition takes place
within the NCAA's framework. Mr. Tarkanian, in testimony
Wednesday before a House subcommittee looking into
intercollegiate athletics, called the NCAA "the biggest
problem in college sports." He couldn't be more right.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The fundamental problem is that universities, in collusion
with professional teams, have created a monopoly. Put
bluntly, colleges have conspired with one another to stifle
competition for labor by setting players' salaries at roughly
zero (a "scholarship" for many kids who would prefer not to
be in school).
   Moreover, by acting as de facto farm clubs for the pros,
universities have forced most young men, irrespective of
their mental abilities, to attend college in order to play
pro basketball and football. An inner-city kid with
significant baseball talent can sign with a club when he
leaves high school. A similar youth whose sport is basketball
or football has to get accepted by and attend a college.
   Thus, scandal is inevitable. Universities, like members of
any cartel, have an incentive to cheat; they hope to attract
top athletes and keep in school kids who have neither an
aptitude nor an interest in higher education. There's nothing
unethical involved: The kind of financial benefits offered
under the table to lure a top basketball or football player
are precisely the sort provided openly to a stand-out
baseball or hockey player. It is an unfair cartel agreement,
not morality, that is violated.
   Of course, NCAA officials cite the importance of
maintaining the purity of college sports to justify their
activities. But their concern about potential corruption is
curiously one-sided. The member schools luxuriate in the $1
billion generated annually by big college sports, offer
lucrative contracts to coaches, and allow coaches to collect
cash for dictating the shoes worn by their teams. The
players, in contrast, get essentially nothing.
   Indeed, the NCAA doesn't even bother to discriminate
between corrupt and innocent practices involving students. It
simply seeks to keep players from gaining any benefit at all
for their services, barring schools from giving away
T-shirts, for instance, or lending kids, many from poor
families, money to pay bills or visit sick relatives. The
NCAA even blocks players from earning money on their own:
UNLV's Greg Anthony was forced to drop a T-shirt business
that he had created.
   True, in the name of the players the NCAA continues to
attempt to raise academic standards. Noble as that may sound
in theory, in practice it means denying many inner-city kids
a shot at the pros. Consider one of the criticisms of Mr.
Tarkanian: that in 1986 he recruited New Yorker Lloyd
Daniels, who attended four different high schools but never
graduated. So what? Most universities with major sports
programs stretch their admissions requirements for players,
giving the lie to the notion of the student-athlete. More
important, why should a gifted basketball player be denied an
opportunity to play professionally because he isn't a good
student? And why should fans be denied the opportunity to see
him play because he can't keep up in school?
   This wretched system is supported by the pros because,
though it denies them access to some potential stars, it
provides them with a cheap farm system. Colleges locate,
train and exhibit the top players, saving pro teams much time
and money. Minor league teams are costly; better to have the
University of Nebraska and Notre Dame fulfill that function
for free.
   Yet with every scandal come proposals for stricter
enforcement and tougher punishment. The latest idea, from the
Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, is to tie the
"integrity" of a school's athletic program to its academic
accreditation. Naturally, the NCAA likes the idea. Says
Executive Director Richard Schultz: "I think it is good and
can have a salutary effect. A loss of accreditation is a
devastating blow to a university."
   The relevance of an athletic "scandal" to a school's
academic credentials is not obvious. Moreover, the SACS
proposal would reinforce the very cartel that is the problem,
a system that denies gifted athletes any compensation for
long hours of hard work, shortens their total employable
playing time, denies any shot at professional play to many
disadvantaged kids, and teaches athletes that rules exist to
be broken. We should therefore move in the opposite
direction, applying the baseball model to basketball and
football.
   Pro farm clubs would hire athletes not interested in
school; universities would recruit players who could meet
their admissions requirements. Should major sports schools
want to own a farm club -- say, the UNLV Rebels -- they could
hire the players. The other colleges could join the Ivy
League in putting academics first.
   The sentimental idea of the student-athlete is a powerful
one, but the NCAA is about money, not student athletics.
Thus, true reform will come only when colleges have to choose
between acting as semi-pro franchises and acting as schools.
   ---
   Mr. Bandow is a fellow at the Cato Institute.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
