ID: 236	RANK: 100	SCORE: 7.818716
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911122-0156
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911122-0156.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Small Business (A Special Report)
   ---
   Spreading the Word:
   When Entrepreneurs Mix Business
   And Religion, Some Customers Lose Faith
   ----
   By Barbara Marsh
</HL>
<DATE>
11/22/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE R10
</SO>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Entrepreneurs love spreading the word about their
businesses. But spreading the Good Word can land Christian
business owners in some unholy conflicts.
   Annette Sherman made that discovery when an
apartment-building manager canceled a contract with her
Hyattsville, Md., cleaning service. She says the manager was
angry that her cleaning crew had left religious tracts at the
building and had prayed there during lunchtime.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   For thousands of business owners such as the
fundamentalist Ms. Sherman, the entrepreneur's freedom of
choice largely means the freedom to run a company in
accordance with religious principles. For many owners, that
mainly involves managing the company internally in line with
strict moral and ethical principles.
   But for other owners, it also means the freedom to spread
the Word in the marketplace. And that is when orders get
canceled and commitments get tested.
Entrepreneur-missionaries find that conflicts with customers
are common. Plenty of customers out there don't welcome a
Gospel lesson with the invoice or a talk about God along with
the pitch for widgets.
   Many religious entrepreneurs (mostly, though not entirely,
Christian) are wrestling with these issues. The Fellowship of
Companies for Christ International, an Atlanta-based group,
says its mailing list has grown to about 5,000 from 3,500
during the past two years. Its 625 active members -- most of
whom are chief executives and born-again Christians -- will
reach out to a half million customers this year, says Ray
Miller, the group's president.
   This reaching-out process takes several forms. Christian
business owners often engage customers in informal religious
chats. They stick Biblical materials in their products. They
include scriptural messages and Christian symbols -- crosses
or fish -- on invoices, business cards, catalogs, stationery
and corporate signs. Perry Bigelow, a Palatine, Ill., home
builder, leaves religious pamphlets in his model homes
titled: "Does Your Life Have Real Meaning and Real Purpose Or
Are You Just a Blob of Material That Has Happened By Chance
on the Sands of Time?"
   Sometimes entrepreneurs alter the product itself. Lee
Middleton, whose Belpre, Ohio, company makes dolls, puts tiny
Bibles in the dolls' diapers. That upset a customer who
bought a Lee Middleton doll for an atheist friend, says
shopkeeper Lily Bergh of Huntington, N.Y. Her customer hadn't
realized the Bible was there, and the friend was infuriated.
   Ms. Bergh now shows customers the Bible -- and removes it
if the purchaser wishes. Overall, though, she thinks she wins
more sales than she loses because of the baby Bible.
   Some Christian entrepreneurs are choosy about whom they do
business with. Some see their willingness to turn away
certain customers as their faith's acid test. But this can
also have repercussions, as Century Marketing Inc., of
Bowling Green, Ohio, recently discovered.
   The label maker angered a group of self-proclaimed witches
because it refused to fill an order taken by a label company
it acquired last year. One of the witches, Ann Duckworth of
Philadelphia, ordered perfume-bottle labels and bags for her
Hand of Aries shop. She had specified that the bags promote
her spiritual paraphernalia, books, candles, tarot cards and
readings.
   When her order was refused, "I was hurt" says Ms.
Duckworth, who insists she's a "sweet grandmotherly" type.
"If I were a really bad witch, which I'm not, I'd blow up
their place."
   Instead, she spread the word among a national network of
witches. They sent angry letters to Century Marketing. "Watch
your business go way down," one writer wrote. (So far,
anyway, business has stayed up.)
   Albert Caperna, Century Marketing's president, says he is
praying for protection. He says he dated a witch in college
before he became a born-again Christian and knows how to wage
spiritual warfare through prayer, if necessary. The
anti-occult policy has cost the company just two other
customers, he says.
   But religious principles can be rewarded as well as
"punished." Companies known for their Christian values can
engender intense loyalty among customers. Nabil Ibrahim, a
management scholar at Augusta (Ga.) College who has studied
Christian-based companies, says customers often consider
their products or services as "superior."
   For instance, he notes, customers of Chick-fil-A Inc., a
Christian-based fast-food chain in Atlanta, indicate in
interviews that they like the quality of its sandwiches, even
though they are costlier than those of competitors.
   Still, meeting customers' expectations can cause problems
for some Christian business owners. Walter Meloon, a Baptist
and president of Correct Craft Inc., an Orlando, Fla., maker
of boats that pull water-skiers, cites the customer who
recently insisted the company replace his boat. The customer
claimed that a structural flaw had caused damage to the boat
even though a company inspection didn't uncover any evidence
of a flaw, Mr. Meloon says.
   The boater, however, accused the company of failing to
live up to its reputation as a Christian manufacturer. Mr.
Meloon decided to give the man a refurbished boat -- even
though a warranty didn't apply. Mr. Meloon reasoned that the
customer truly believed the company had a higher obligation
to him because of its Christian leanings.
   The upshot? Mr. Meloon says the customer now claims the
replacement boat also has a structural flaw. Mr. Meloon says
he isn't sure what he will do next, but is praying for
answers.
   Many proselytizers act to minimize conflicts. Ms. Sherman,
the Maryland contractor, says that after employee
proselytizing infuriated the apartment-building manager, she
did some soul-searching about mixing work and religion. She
says she began holding staff prayer sessions at her office
and instructed employees to steer clear of unwanted
discussion of religion with customers.
   Baptist Hilary ("Zig") Ziglar, who gives corporate
training seminars and sells motivational materials, generally
cites his faith in his talks. But he saves the direct
exhortation to "commit your life to Jesus Christ" for
Christian-based clients.
   For general audiences, he makes a couple of passing, less
specific references to faith and family. And he uses humor in
bringing up the topic. Example: "Of course you know a lot of
people don't go to church because they say, `There's a bunch
of hypocrites down there.' I say, `Come on down, we've got
room for one more."' Another: "If a hypocrite stands between
you and God, then the hypocrite is closer to God than you
are."
   Apparently, voicing his Christian beliefs hasn't hurt his
appeal to nonbelievers. Two years ago, when the Chief
Executive Officers Club hired him to address its chapters
around the country, he talked about his game plan for winning
in life. He says that he emphasized that to be healthy,
happy, prosperous and enjoy good family relationships, a
person needs a base of faith, love and loyalty.
   The religious message went over big in the South, but
members of the group's heavily Jewish New York chapter
complained to the group's president, Joe Mancuso.
   But Mr. Mancuso says he would like to engage Mr. Ziglar
again. The organization made more money on sales of his
materials than on those of any other speaker, he notes. In
fact, Mr. Mancuso adds, sales at the New York chapter outran
those at other chapters.
   ---
   Ms. Marsh is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's
Chicago bureau.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
