ID: 236	RANK: 18	SCORE: 18.882391
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891030-0036 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-10-30-89 0321EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a PM-HalloweenScares     10-30 0650</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Halloween Scares,0673</SECOND>
<HEAD>Halloween Ghouls and Goblins are Real for Some</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Pumpkin festivals are sprouting in some school districts, where
parents are trying to keep Halloween out of the hallways and off
school grounds because of its connection with witches and Satan.
   In Alachua County, Fla., Robert Guyer gathered the signatures of
about 200 fellow parents who think the holiday is a religious
celebration of Wicca, a modern pagan witchcraft cult.
   When teachers dress up like witches, ``what happens to these
little Christian kids like mine?'' asked Guyer, a University of
Florida law student. ``How are they going to feel when it's
dress-up day and they don't dress up?''
   Officials in Alachua County left the decision on Halloween to
school principals.
   In neighboring Levy County, the superintendent asked schools to
avoid using Halloween decorations and to cancel school celebrations.
   Halloween, which is being celebrated Tuesday night, apparently
sprang from an ancient ceremony honoring the Celtic god of death.
In medieval England, it came to be known as All Hallows' Eve,
celebrated before the feast day of All Hallows, now All Saints'
Day. As is the case with the pagan Christmas tree, few pay
attention to its religious origins.
   But Guyer cites a recent 11th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals
ruling in Atlanta that found that prayers before high school
football games violate the constitutional separation of church and
state.
   ``As Easter has been banned in favor of spring holiday, as
Christmas has been banned in favor of winter holiday, so, too,
Halloween should be banned in favor of fall holiday,'' he said.
   The Rev. Bill Ligon of Brunswick, Ga., agreed: ``Some of the
symbolism used for Halloween is used also by recognized religions.
I think the law as interpreted by the 11th Circuit should be
impartially applied to any religious activity at school.''
   Halloween's defenders say it has become a non-religious holiday.
   ``The witches and goblins of Halloween are no more believable
than Santa Claus, the Easter Bunny or the Tooth Fairy. ... Are they
going to ban those, too?''asked Charley Mack, a father of six in
Tallahassee, Fla., where several schools are inaugurating ``harvest
festivals'' in place of Halloween.
   In Texas, Harlingen Superintendent T. Carl McMillan responded to
parents' anxieties by asking principals to tone down celebrations.
   ``I asked them to review their practices and if they had
anything that depicted blood and gore to try to eliminate that,''
McMillan said.
   An elementary school in Amarillo planned to celebrate Pumpkin
Fun Day rather than Halloween.
   And in Frederick County, Md., three elementary schools have
discontinued Halloween events. At least one decided to hold a fall
celebration instead.
   ``I personally have trouble defending ghosts and goblins in our
instructional curriculum,'' said John Thompson, a county school
official.
   Parents are upset by lurid descriptions of devil worship on
television and in rock music, said Fred Eisenbraun of the Rapid
City Cops for Christ, in South Dakota.
   Eisenbraun was in Worthington, Minn., last week to conduct an
Occult Awareness Seminar for teachers, parents and teen-agers.
   ``Satanists do not isolate themselves to New York, to Denver or
to Dallas,'' Eisenbraun said. ``They like rural areas, like
Worthington, Minnesota, or Rapid City, South Dakota, where there's
an availability of abandoned buildings, animals, and wide-open
areas where there aren't enough cops to check on them.''
   The popularity of slasher movies and costumes that imitate them
worry other parents.
   Movies like ``Halloween'' and ``Friday the 13th,'' are popular
enough to make their protagonists among the hottest-selling
costumes this year, outfitters say _ along with Batman and Jim and
Tammy Bakker.
   But Freddy Krueger, the ogre of Elm Street, isn't invited to the
Halloween party at the Bethesda Elementary School in Waukesha, Wis.
Students there were forbidden from dressing as characters in any of
the graphically violent movies, said Principal Nancy Marsho.
   ``We don't appreciate Freddy here at Bethesda,'' Ms. Marsho said.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
