ID: 236	RANK: 25	SCORE: 12.560276
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911223-0081
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911223-0081.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Now Sing Along:
   O Solstice Tree,
   O Solstice Tree...
   ---
   All Sorts of People Celebrate
   This Special Winter Day;
   Even Santa Shows Up
   ----
   By Suzanne Alexander
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
12/23/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Saturday night, Jennifer Thoren hung up her stocking with
care, left out a cup of cocoa and cookies for Santa and went
to bed with visions of sugarplums dancing in her head. Yes,
Saturday.
   For 11-year-old Jennifer, Dec. 22 -- the winter solstice,
when daylight starts growing longer again -- is the day that
matters, not Dec. 25. 'Tis the season, solstice celebrants
say, for sending solstice cards, trimming solstice trees and
exchanging solstice gifts.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "Solstice predates Christmas by many centuries," says
Robert Brooks, a 54-year-old auto-plant machine repairman,
who lives in Madison Heights, Mich. Pagan solstice
celebrations date back 2,000 years before Christ was born, he
adds. "We feel the holiday was kind of taken over by modern
religion."
   Mr. Brooks happens to be an atheist, so he's prone to be
put out by all the hoopla celebrating the birth of Jesus. But
atheists are hardly the only ones who celebrated the winter
solstice yesterday. Wiccan followers, or witches, observe the
day with gift exchanges, decorated trees and candle-lit
ceremonies. Planet Drum, an ecological education group in San
Francisco, gathers hundreds of members around a bonfire for a
ceremony involving drumming and music. No one knows for
certain how many other people observe the day.
   Nacolle Parsons, of Salt Lake City, Utah, for one, feels
extremely "put upon" this time of year. "I get so tired of
{Christmas carols} being crammed at me. Everywhere, there are
Christmas sales. No one else's ideas get accepted," grumbles
Ms. Parsons, who manages a fan club for actor Mark Hamill.
   Not that solstice celebrants are a bunch of Grinches.
Children found stockings stuffed and presents under their
Christmas, uh, solstice trees yesterday morning. "You've got
to do something so your kids don't feel different or left
out," explains Ann Zindler, a housewife in Columbus, Ohio.
   Even Santa Claus is acceptable. Despite his historical
connection with St. Nicholas, solstice celebrants contend
that Santa is a secular figure in America, not a religious
one. "I'm not heartless," says Ellen Johnson, a homemaker in
Rockaway Township, N.J., who adds that her three-year-old son
"can enjoy the character just like everybody else."
   Jennifer Thoren strings popcorn for her family's solstice
tree, sings "Santa Claus is Coming to Town" and explains to
friends at her San Francisco school why she celebrates the
solstice. To make it easier, this year her mother, Pamela,
addressed children at her school about winter solstice, the
date when the Earth's axis begins to tilt toward the sun and
days start getting longer. "We think it's only fair for kids
to see the other side of the coin," says Ms. Thoren, a
health-care worker.
   Still, some things are avoided, even though there are no
set traditions for the winter solstice celebration. Patricia
Wilkinson, a homemaker in Phoenix, Ariz., shuns traditional
angel and drummer-boy ornaments for her solstice tree,
instead using homemade egg-shell ornaments adorned with
ribbons and buttons. "They represent a new beginning,"
explains Ms. Wilkinson. She and her husband, Walter, don't
exchange gifts on solstice; instead, they invite some of
their atheist friends over for a potluck dinner.
   But many solstice celebrants send solstice cards, with
greetings like, "Solstice Claus is coming to town]" and
"Merry Solstice." A few cards poke fun at religion, offending
some people. "These are anti-Christian {messages}, not
pro-pagan. They're vicious," says Rev. Donald Wildmon,
president of the American Family Association, a Christian
activist group in Tupelo, Miss. "These people see Christians
having a good time celebrating and they feel left out.
They're seeking joy but they'll never find joy by pulling
others down."
   Still, many historians say Christians appropriated the
holiday from the pagans. No one knows for certain when Jesus
was born, but "most scholars believe Jesus was born closer to
spring or summer," says Delores Carpenter, associate dean of
Howard University's School of Divinity.
   Winter solstice was being observed as a sacred celebration
of the sun god by ancient Egyptians as early as 1996 B.C. and
as late as about 274 A.D. in Rome, says Loyd Allen, associate
professor of church history at Southern Baptist Theological
Seminary in Louisville, Ky.
   In the years following the first recorded Christmas
celebration in 336 A.D., Christians copied many solstice
traditions, including gift giving, feasting, the decorating
of evergreen trees and the use of holly, mistletoe, candles
and wreaths.
   Despite all the history, some solstice celebrants have
adopted a distinctly contemporary approach. When it comes to
music, computer programmer Chris Allen of Salt Lake City
eschews traditional carols, preferring such favorites as the
Beatles' "Here Comes the Sun." Says Mr. Allen: "It fits right
with the season."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
