ID: 236	RANK: 31	SCORE: 11.240015
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910716-0115
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910716-0115.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Is That a Druid Temple in the Back Yard?
   ----
   By Catherine Fredman
</HL>
<DATE>
07/16/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   Kent, N.Y. -- Are they root cellars or Druid temples?
   That's the question currently inflaming the intelligentsia
of Putnam County, a rocky chunk of exurbia some 60 miles
north of New York City. Its 247 square miles are home to
83,971 inhabitants and some 200 mysterious stone chambers
that were built either 150 or 3,000 years ago, depending on
who you talk to.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Some of the best examples are in the woods off Whangtown
Hollow Road in this little community. And one of the
best-preserved chambers is on the property of longtime
resident John Murray.
   Partially covered by an earthen mound, the chamber is
about 5-foot-8-inches high, 6 feet wide and 15 feet long.
Whoever built it made good use of local materials: Small
rocks are stacked in the carefully balanced arch of a
corbeled vault, three enormous shingled slabs form the roof
and a couple more serve as the doorway and lintel. The
temperature in the chamber feels a good 10 degrees cooler
than outside and the stones drip with moisture. Mr. Murray
refers to the structure as "Dave Kent's root cellar,"
referring to a member of one of the town's leading families.
Members of the Kent Conservation Advisory Commission and the
Kent Historical Society, however, revere it as a Celtic
cathedral.
   Charlie Boyle, whose business card proclaims him an expert
in water dowsing and megalithic research, is in the latter
camp, one of the group that ardently supports the theory that
America was originally colonized by Celtic explorers who
sailed their coracles across the Atlantic in 1500 B.C. By
local legend, the explorers then came up the Hudson River to
mine the iron deposits in what is now Putnam County.
   Believers in the Bronze Age settlement hypothesis quote
Barry Fell, professor emeritus of biology at Harvard and the
author of "Bronze Age America" and "America B.C.: Ancient
Settlers in the New World." Mr. Fell contends that the stone
chambers, menhirs and dolmens are druidic calendrical devices
used to worship the sun. Proof of this, he claims, is that
many of the chambers face either east or southeast, line up
with the sun at the solstices, and contain stones inscribed
in Punic and Iberian scripts and Ogam, the script of the
ancient Irish.
   Mr. Boyle can read Ogam and is able to spot inscriptions
that might elude the untrained eye. At a meeting of the Kent
Historical Society held at Penny Krupman's house on Kentwood
Drive off Whangtown Hollow Road, he holds up a rock that he
stumbled across and speedily translates some scratches into
an enthusiastic, if garbled, proclamation from a sun god.
"This rock is loaded with thought forms," he says. "I call
these megalithic computer chips." "That's interesting,"
ventures Mrs. Krupman. "You bet your life it is," Mr. Boyle
responds.
   James Baker, another resident whose property boasts a
couple of stone chambers, is of two minds on the question of
their origin. He relates how a Fell disciple came to inspect
the caves on Mr. Baker's property and found some markings on
a stone wall that he deciphered as the Ogam for Baal, or Bel,
the sun god. But Mr. Baker, a retired high school history
teacher, admits that he could just as easily see the markings
as an incidental glacial scratch.
   Adding his own ingredient to the brew, Mr. Baker believes
that the stone chambers were simply colonial precursors of
silos and that Dave Kent's root cellar was, in fact, built by
one Moses Mead, a highway commissioner in the first half of
the 19th century who owned a large team of oxen and needed
someplace to store their winter feed.
   Further debunking the believers, Mr. Baker explains that
the eastern and southeastern orientation of the structures is
a function of agricultural necessity: "You do most of the
work in the early morning, so you'd want the light. And you'd
place the opening of the cellar away from the north so that
the roots wouldn't freeze. The fact that some face sunrise at
the winter solstice," Mr. Baker inexorably continues, "is
purely chance."
   But try telling that to Martin Brech. A retired professor
of philosophy, he thinks that the large chambers were used
for religious rituals and the smaller ones for meditation. In
fact, he has meditated in the chambers and he's convinced
that they're something special.
   Mr. Brech camped out in the Celtic cathedral on the night
before winter solstice and had such a powerful experience
that he wrote a two-page, single-spaced poem about it (". . .
nestled below mounded soft-bellied earth/proudly presenting
the mother goddess Womb . . .").
   At dawn the next day, Mr. Brech gathered a group of
people, including Mr. Baker, for a sunrise solstice service.
They sang the Shaker hymn "Tis the Gift to Be Simple" and the
rock anthem "We Are the World" among other songs. They also
chanted the Supreme Mantra from the Heart Sutra of Buddhism
as well as American Indian incantations. One of the
participants, a follower of Wicca, the religion of
witchcraft, brought a drum.
   "He was very helpful," Mr. Brech recalled. "He knew some
of the same chants." Everyone shared hot cider with a little
rum and then, in an informal ritual, put food in each other's
mouth -- trail mix.
   That kind of stuff just makes Ella Townsend snort. "Oh,
yes, says the 83-year-old Kent resident, "and then the drum
roll comes in." Farmers Mills Road, the main Kent
thoroughfare, was dirt when her family moved in in 1921, and
young Ella used to run errands for her father on horseback.
Often when she made her deliveries, farm wives would proudly
show her their stone root cellars stocked with turnips,
potatoes, carrots and even preserved fruits and vegetables.
"Putnam County is very rocky, so you couldn't dig foundations
for a basement," explains Mrs. Townsend. Stone structures,
carefully insulated from the cold and damp by a thick blanket
of dirt and sod, did the trick instead.
   A longtime member of the Kent Historical Society, Mrs.
Townsend was present the evening "two professors came and
gave a knowledgeable talk about these cellars being used for
religious services. Everybody swallowed it and Bobbie {her
friend, Barbara Adams} and I just sat there nudging each
other."
   Now that the weather's more enticing, the woods around
Putnam County are hopping with visitors less skeptical than
Mrs. Townsend and Mrs. Adams. Mr. Brech leads tours for the
curious, on behalf of the Kent Conservation Advisory
Commission. He claims to have attracted as many as 50 people
at a shot.
   Enrique Noguera, who lives across the Hudson River in
Kingston, is also in the guiding biz. He spends a lot of time
in Putnam County on behalf of the Early Sites Preservation
Association, of which he is executive director. Mr. Noguera
leads tours of the cellars as often as twice a month and
charges $25 per person (there's a discount for groups of six
or more). Mr. Brech refuses to accept money; he finds the
notion "subtly corrupting."
   What everyone agrees on, however, is that regardless of
their origin, the stone structures need to be preserved. The
threat is real. These days, it's a lot easier to reach Dave
Kent's root cellar (or Celtic cathedral, as the case may be),
thanks to a road bulldozed in by Ginsberg Development Corp.
"{Samuel} Ginsberg promised that he wouldn't destroy the
site," says Mr. Brech. "Yet he is going to have cluster
zoning there."
   Not if the Kent Conservation Advisory Commission, the Tree
Commission, PLAN Kent (Protecting Land and Nature in Kent)
and the Save Our Lakes political party have anything to do
with it. Rallying round the root cellars, they invoke
history, sanctity and what Mr. Baker calls "the mystery of
the woods."
   Perhaps they -- with a little help from the recession --
are having an effect. Mr. Ginsberg's development plans have
been halted for the time being. And a real estate agent
recently showing some property on nearby White Pond
emphasized its dilapidated stone chamber as a selling point.
   ---
   Ms. Fredman is an editor at Working Woman magazine.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
