ID: 236	RANK: 43	SCORE: 9.941694
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911219-0107
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911219-0107.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Counterpoint:
   Where Christmas Belongs
   ----
   By Irving R. Kaufman
</HL>
<DATE>
12/19/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A15
</SO>
<IN>
LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)
</IN>
<NS>
LAW &amp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)
</NS>
<GV>
SUPREME COURT (SUP)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   As the Christmas holiday approaches and government offices
everywhere struggle with the delicacies of extending neutral
"Season's Greetings," it is worth remembering how intrusive
the official voice of spiritual governance used to be. In the
Massachusetts Constitution of 1780, the Declaration of Rights
established it to be the "right as well as duty of all men in
Society, publicly, and at stated seasons, to worship the
Supreme Being, the great creator, and preserver of the
universe." Although every man was free to worship in his own
"season," still -- worship he must. The intent of the
legislature was clear: to promote Christian reverence and
piety among their constituents.
   Amid the proliferating trends of the 1990s, there are
signs that the crusade to reinstate the church into public
life is making a quiet, insidious comeback. Chief among the
suspect symptoms is the Supreme Court's willingness to hear a
case potentially challenging the way in which boundaries of
our secular autonomy are defined. In Lee v. Weisman, heard by
the court this fall, the nine justices were asked to
determine whether the invocation of God's name at a
public-school commencement exercise violated a student's
First Amendment right to be free of state-established
religion.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The court has not handed down its decision yet -- and may
not until as late as next summer. But some already fear that
the reasoning governing the decision will portend the
beginning of the end of religious noninterference.
   Since 1971, when the court decided Lemon v. Kurtzman,
judges have been using the same test to determine whether the
intent of the Founders of the Constitution to have Congress
"make no laws establishing religion or prohibiting the free
exercise thereof," was being respected. The Lemon test, as it
has come to be known, mandates a three-pronged investigation
to discern whether a publicly ordained practice has a
legitimate secular purpose, advances or inhibits religion as
its principal primary effect, or fosters an excessive
governmental-religious entanglement. For more than 20 years,
the Lemon test has protected school children from chanting
prayers, atheists from taking religious vows, Seventh-Day
Adventists from working on the Sabbath, Christian Scientists
from receiving unwanted medical treatment, and non-Christians
from seeing creches spring out of their town halls.
   While not asking the court to overturn any of these
landmark decisions, the Bush administration did call on
justices to abandon the Lemon test, and reintroduce a "civic
acknowledgement of religion in public life." Under this new
test, religious practices would be allowed to proceed absent
proof of direct or indirect governmental coercion of
religious non-adherents. Some minor entanglements of church
and state, such as having the word of God ("in whom we
trust,") appear on our coins, or an ordained chaplain invoke
the name of God in his opening prayer to Congress, have long
been accepted as relatively innocuous departures from the
formal proscription against establishment.
   But while such "deeply embedded practices" (as they were
described by the Supreme Court in Marsh v. Chambers in 1983)
may serve the legitimately secular purpose of "solemnizing
public occasions" (as decided in 1989, County of Allegheny v.
ACLU), having school children at publicly funded commencement
services suffer through unwanted religious benedictions
serves no such end.
   If the Supreme Court rules to adopt such a test, it alone
cannot be blamed for infusing a newly religious tone into its
rulemaking. Some citizens are intent on inducing Solomonic
decisions from the justices on the most ethically fraught,
spiritually sensitive issues of the times. The conservative
sweep among religious fundamentalists, the sectarian wrath of
pro-choice lobbyists, even the mounting appeal of such
radical politicians as David Duke, all speak in favor of one
thing: substituting the voice of spiritual guide, or God, as
it were, for that of law.
   What explains this hunger for officially sanctioned
spiritual guidance? A look to the Puritanic past of the
country reveals clues. Then, as now, there was a burgeoning
sense of religiousness in the land. Just as people today are
spread out, often too diverse in cultural backgrounds to
share a common understanding of ethos, then too the
proliferation of hostile sects prevented a holistic community
from developing. As a result, local boards in effect became
moral surrogates for the people. These boards provided not
only positive spiritual guidance but also an atmosphere of
moralizing paranoia that ultimately lent legitimacy to the
practice of witch hunts.
   At the famous trial of Anne Hutchinson, the suspected
heretic, in 1637, the threat of nonconformism raised by her
novel interpretations of the faith-works controversy even
spurred the governor of Massachusetts to interfere. Although
he acknowledged the difference between civil and church law,
the governor nonetheless insisted that his right to intercede
rested on the state's having established the religion to
which Hutchinson was now expected to conform. He aligned
himself with the reigning Puritan minister of the community,
who preached the virtues of the "Covenant of Works" as the
only sure means of salvation. The governor claimed that God
had willed him to use civil means to effect church ways, and
subsequently voted to banish and excommunicate Hutchinson
from the Massachusetts colony. Much like the abortion-seekers
of tomorrow, Hutchinson was consigned to pursue freedom
across the state lines.
   While we have certainly improved in erecting a more
impermeable divide between church and state since Colonial
times, there are signs that government's efforts to infuse a
religious tone into the reading of our Constitution's
establishment clause are becoming more open, more aggressive.
   In the midst of a newly awakened movement toward religious
governance, the public has shown itself passively
acquiescent. Perhaps, contrary to the days of Puritanism, it
is the dearth of spiritual guidance in their own homes that
explains the compliance. Soaring poverty rates, the advent of
working mothers, increased racial and ethnic polarization of
neighborhoods and the fading autonomy of the local church
have all contributed to a lack of moral influence in the
home, especially for children. Pathetically, laws
establishing religious parameters of conduct may become the
new moral surrogate for some families in the 1990s.
   Exactly what may come of this misguided substitution of
assigned roles -- jurist as spiritual mentor, legislator as
itinerant preacher -- is yet unknown. Lee v. Weisman could be
the harbinger of a phenomenon whereby citizens defer to
officials the role of religious guide and spiritual mentor.
As in the Colonial era, deciding when government crosses the
proper lineand doing something about it -- could pose the
biggest challenge to our democracy in the 21st century.
   ---
   Judge Kaufman is judge on the Second Circuit Court of
Appeals (New York, Connecticut and Vermont), where he
hasserved as chief judge.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
