ID: 236	RANK: 96	SCORE: 7.869493
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910320-0166
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910320-0166.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Tennessee Baptists
   Turn to Judaism
   For New Inspiration
   ---
   Christian Fundamentalists
   Seek Roots of Their Faith;
   There Goes the Steeple
   ----
   By R. Gustav Niebuhr
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
03/20/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<LP>
   ATHENS, Tenn. -- One sunny autumn day in 1989, the Rev. J.
David Davis and about 15 of his flock took down the steeple
of the Emmanuel Baptist Church and carted it off to the dump.
They had decided it was a pagan fertility symbol that had no
business being on a house of worship.
   Then they scraped the words "Baptist" and "Church" off the
sign out front.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Members of Emmanuel also quit celebrating Christmas and
scrapped the Wednesday evening prayer service. In its stead,
they had an Orthodox rabbi in to instruct them in Jewish
thought.
   And so, right smack in the middle of the Bible belt, a
group of Christian fundamentalists eager to explore the roots
of their faith turned for spiritual guidance to Judaism.
   This isn't a fluke but a movement. Calling itself B'nai
No'ach (Hebrew for "Children of Noah"), it has already drawn
inquiries from "nearly 500 families," says Vendyl Jones, a
former Baptist preacher and amateur archaeologist in
Arlington, Texas, who runs the Institute for Judaic-Christian
Research, a sort of clearinghouse for the Noahides. Over the
past couple of years, Mr. Jones says, informal study groups
have sprung up in Minneapolis, in Kansas City and in Houston.
Others are gathering overseas -- in Belgium, England, even in
Nigeria. "I call it Judaism for nonJews," says Mr. Jones, who
claims to see biblical prophecy (from Ezekiel) fulfilled in
gentiles' turning to the "God of Israel."
   Emmanuel's Mr. Davis, whose 80-member congregation makes
up B'nai No'ach's largest single bloc, insists that members
aren't actually converting to Judaism. They aren't keeping
kosher; they aren't getting ritual circumcisions or having
bar mitzvahs. But they say they have found in the seven Laws
of Noah (the ark-builder) the essence of religion that God
intended for the gentiles.
   Speaking in his north Georgia twang, Mr. Davis ticks them
off: injunctions against blasphemy, murder, theft, idolatry
and such sexual sins as adultery and incest, along with
commandments to uphold justice and not eat the flesh or blood
of a living animal. Mr. Davis came to this faith gradually,
after suffering doubts about the literal truth of the Bible.
A friend put him in touch with Mr. Jones in Texas. Then Mr.
Davis went looking for a rabbi. (He also lost nearly half his
congregation, which had numbered about 140, through
defections to other churches.)
   Michael Katz, the suburban Atlanta rabbi who leads
Emmanuel's members in weekly Torah study, says the relevant
passages are tucked away in the recesses of the Talmud, the
writings of Jewish civil and religious law.
   Obscure it might be, but the movement has historical
precedent, according to James D. Tabor, a professor of
religion at the University of North Carolina at Charlotte.
Ancient Hebrew writers, he says, mentioned certain gentiles
called "Godfearers," who were dedicated monotheists who hung
around the synagogues and followed many beliefs and practices
of their Jewish neighbors.
   That this movement is having a second coming in rural east
Tennessee makes for some interesting contrasts. A number of
Emmanuel's men lean to baseball caps, pickup trucks and
fishing in Watts Bar Lake. The women cook and sew; a few
teach school. Members of both sexes quote the Torah.
   Tom Slater, a burly ex-Marine, drives a half-hour from
tiny Tellico Plains to get to Emmanuel. A computer
programmer, Mr. Slater says he has spent "probably $1,000" on
Jewish religious texts, picking up a multivolume set of the
Five Books of Moses, a 2,000-page commentary on Genesis and a
stack of cassette tapes on the cabala, an occult Jewish
philosophy based on a mystical interpretation of the
Scriptures. By reading and listening, he says, he is "getting
a whole different look" at religion.
   Once upon a time, Sunday mornings at Emmanuel featured
hymns and the hellfire preaching of the stocky, bearded Mr.
Davis. Now the time is spent in discussion -- with no music,
no prayers, no sermon.
   Mr. Davis, who wears a tiny gold Star of David around his
neck, leads his flock in a conversation about Scripture, with
a little Middle Eastern archaeology thrown in to give weight
to certain Bible stories. Jesus, he says, was a traditional
rabbi (a great prophet but no divinity). Christ's followers
were a mix of Jews and B'nai No'ach gentiles, but the whole
enterprise got twisted into a new religion by various popes,
theologians and Roman emperors (who tacked on pagan holidays
such as Christmas and Easter that the Emmanuel group no
longer celebrates).
   Gary Buchanan, an operations manager for a small
supermarket chain, takes a front pew with his wife, Martina.
He says B'nai No'ach is quite a departure from the
evangelical faith he grew up with. But he sees logic in it
and feels "it has brought us closer to God."
   To most people hereabouts, however, Mr. Davis's teachings
-- especially his flat rejection of the virgin birth and the
resurrection of Jesus -- are anathema.
   Athens, a town of 14,000, just west of the Appalachians,
has 50 churches listed in the Yellow Pages. Salvation is
preached from pulpits, billboards and bumper stickers -- and
all across the radio dial. A half-hour's drive to the south
are the world-wide headquarters of three Pentecostal sects.
There's a big biblical theme park just across the North
Carolina line.
   So after the steeple came down, Mr. Davis and Emmanuel's
congregation came in for some abuse, as unbelievers and
worse. Thirteen-year-old Christopher Revis says a bunch of
boys at school called him a devil worshiper.
   Local clergymen don't seem to buy all the talk of
Satanism, but they are repulsed nonetheless. "I think it's a
cult," says the Rev. Jack Scallions, a minister and head of a
local Christian school. The Rev. Carlos Peterson, pastor of
2,100-member First Baptist Church, the biggest congregation
in Athens, says he paid a call on Mr. Davis and came away
convinced his teachings are "heresy."
   Mr. Tabor, the University of North Carolina professor,
says in its defense that the little congregation must seem
"very threatening" in a place like Athens where "the average
person has never seen a Jew in his life."
   There has been dissension within Emmanuel, too, but most
of those who disagreed with the trend of things up and left.
Mr. Davis says his congregation, which once numbered 140, has
been reduced by nearly half because of defections to other
churches.
   Some who have stayed have had to deal with the disapproval
of family and friends. When he found out that his son Gary no
longer accepted the virgin birth, Paul Buchanan threatened to
disinherit him. "I wouldn't want any of my money to support a
church that didn't believe in Christ," he says.
   Jason Folmar, a 17-year-old senior at McMinn County High
and an Emmanuel member, says he lost a girlfriend to
religious differences. The Rev. James Palmer, a minister in
Hermitage, Tenn., whose mother and brother attend Emmanuel,
declares: "I've got to get my family out of that]"
   Within the remaining congregation, some have found it hard
to part with traditions like Christmas. Charles and Peggy
McKeehan speak wistfully of the 12-foot artificial tree that
they now have packed away. They haven't thrown it out,
however. The McKeehans also still give presents to relatives,
but they do it well before Dec. 25, by which time they are in
Florida enjoying a secular vacation.
   Still, all the controversy hasn't kept away a few curious
newcomers like Mr. Slater, the former Marine. And a satellite
congregation has sprung up in tiny Cohutta, Ga.
   And the faithful are trying to reach out in other ways.
Emmanuel recently started a newsletter and mails out tapes of
its services. John Hill, a believer in Fort Worth, Texas, has
started a computer bulletin board and puts out a booklet that
tells how Noahides can celebrate Jewish holidays such as
Hanukkah.
   Mr. Katz, Emmanuel's Torah teacher, says that
institutionalizing such rituals is vital if adherents of
B'nai No'ach are to keep their children interested and
involved. But he admits he is worried about the movement's
long-term survival unless it grows quickly.
   "The marriage pool," he says, "is extremely limited."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
