ID: 216	RANK: 17	SCORE: 12.228859
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911031-0105
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911031-0105.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Film: Dustin Hoffman as a '30s Gangster
   ----
   By Julie Salamon
</HL>
<DATE>
10/31/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A20
</SO>
<LP>
   The novelist E.L. Doctorow sees history as the interplay
of fact and magic. He builds his novels mixing what he's read
about the past with what his imagination senses might have
taken place. So when he decided to write about the Jewish
American gangsters of the 1930s in "Billy Bathgate," he
created a magical kid to narrate his story.
   His Billy, writing from the point of view of a grown man
remembering his past, was infatuated by Dutch Schultz, saw
him as his ticket out of the Bronx and on to the American
dream. Told as reminiscence, Billy's story of hope and
disillusionment has a nostalgic tone. He's recalling himself
as a poor young man blessed with all kinds of gifts, a kid
with luck who eventually understands that he's spent his
cunning charm winning over an evil man who isn't glamorous at
all. Billy never lets on how he's chosen to use that life
lesson, for good or for bad.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Director Robert Benton and screenwriter Tom Stoppard have
remained faithful to the idea behind the Doctorow book and
yet somehow lost its spirit. The production design is
stately, the actors are intelligent and so is the script.
Despite the obvious care and thought that went into it -- or
maybe because there was too much of it -- the movie feels
mummified, like an expensive apartment that's been put
together by an expensive interior decorator. It's all very
beautiful and very tasteful, but no one seems to live there.
   The problem is that Billy is and isn't the main character.
In the book, he comes alive as he filters his impressions of
Dutch Schultz and his henchmen. Though it takes quick wits
and guts for him to insinuate himself into Schultz's inner
circle, he watches and learns and manages to stay out of the
line of fire.
   The problem this poses for the film makers, which they
never really solve, is that Billy frequently seems like an
unnecessary extra that the camera keeps turning to for
reaction shots. The fault doesn't lie with Loren Dean, the
winning young actor who plays Billy. He has the face and the
sensibility of the kid Billy was, or thinks he was -- the
naive bravado and earnestness. His face makes you want to
understand that Billy isn't a rebel at all. He's climbing on
board Schultz's murderous enterprise with a sense of purpose.
This is the way up and out.
   But the face isn't enough. The dark undercurrent in
Billy's behavior never really emerges. Too often we watch him
watching without the benefit of seeing what he is thinking.
The film makers rely too much on his face, just as they rely
too much on the sleek production design. Everything's too
respectable. Even Mark Isham's music lacks the composer's
characteristic jazzy feel. The score is so lushly jaunty that
Billy's story sometimes feels like a straightforward telling
of Horatio Alger in gangland.
   The movie opens with Billy jumping onto a tugboat carting
Bo Weinberg out to sea, his feet stuck in cement. Billy
watches in horror as Schultz quietly sentences his former
close friend to death and drags away his girlfriend. Bruce
Willis's Bo looks appropriately stricken, and everything is
set for a gripping start.
   But the camera turns to Billy watching Bo and the
immediacy is dispelled right from the start. Weinberg seems
to be an apparition and so does his misery. Then the picture
flashes back to Billy's first meeting with Schultz in the
Jewish Bronx of the '30s.
   It's pleasant to look at the film maker's re-creation of
the Bronx -- both the bustle of the streets as well as the
satiny interiors of Dutch's nightclubs downtown. But the
exterior perfection soon wears thin. It's a kind of
coffeetable-book film making.
   In the book, Dutch Schultz wasn't so much a person as an
idea -- Billy's idea of success (and a metaphor for
capitalism run amok). Dustin Hoffman adds flesh to the idea
-- and much blood, when Dutch erupts periodically in fits of
rage. He isn't operatic, like Robert De Niro's Al Capone in
"The Untouchables." He should be even scarier, a
mild-mannered nebbish who casually beats someone's head in
when he's displeased. It's a subtle and thoughtful
performance, maybe too subtle. Mr. Hoffman's Dutch melts into
the atmosphere.
   The movie comes to life in the middle, when Nicole Kidman
takes center stage. Ms. Kidman, the Australian actress best
known here as Tom Cruise's wife, is just wonderful as Drew
Preston, the rich married woman who amuses herself by having
affairs with gangsters. She slips easily from Bo's bed to
Dutch's, but saves her real energy for Billy.
   Ms. Kidman gets across the boredom that makes Drew ready
for anything. She's young but not girlish. She's Billy minus
the innocence. When Schultz moves his entourage to Saratoga
while he waits to fight a tax evasion charge in a friendly
court, the focus turns on Drew. In these scenes the story
takes on the mischief and menace that is missing everywhere
else, mainly because Billy is doing something rather than
watching.
   Oddly enough in this grandly conceived production, the
picture gets its basic resonance in a simple way, from a
minor character, Otto Berman the bookkeeper (Steven Hill),
who masks his evil with a veneer of niceness and honor. This
marvelous actor captures the book's play of dark and light
better than anyone or anything else.
   ---
   VIDEO TIP: Robert Benton had a far more interesting take
on gangsters when he co-wrote "Bonnie and Clyde" in 1967,
before gangster lore had been stultified into a film cliche.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
