ID: 216	RANK: 28	SCORE: 10.684276
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP901203-0006 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NY-12-03-90 0004EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-Obit-Copland 3rdLd-Writethru a0792 12-03 1050</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Obit-Copland, 3rd Ld - Writethru, a0792,1293</SECOND>
<HEAD>Aaron Copland, Distinctly American Composer, Dead at 90</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Leads with 2 grafs to UPDATE with hospital giving cause of
death. Picks up 3rd graf: `Admired by ...</NOTE>
<DATELINE>NORTH TARRYTOWN, N.Y. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Aaron Copland, the pioneering
composer who used folk songs and jazz in writing plainspoken
classics such as ``Appalachian Spring,'' ``Lincoln Portrait'' and
``Billy the Kid,'' died Sunday at age 90.
   Copland, who lived in Peekskill, died at Phelps Memorial
Hospital in Westchester from pneumonia with respiratory failure
following two recent strokes, hospital spokeswoman Ann Marie
Treanor said Sunday night.
   Admired by colleagues as the ``dean of American music,'' Copland
was a major force in gaining international recognition for the
nation's 20th century composers. His honors included a Pulitzer
Prize, a Presidential Medal of Freedom, the Guggenheim Foundation's
first music fellowship and an Oscar.
   Vivian Perlis, with whom he wrote his memoir, said Copland ``had
the unusual ability to reach a wide audience and at the same time
he composed some of the masterworks of the century that were highly
respected by other musicians.''
   She added: ``He put American music on the map. He decided that
there should be an American sound, a place for the American
composer.''
   Among his better known works were the score for ``The Red
Pony,'' the 1949 movie based on the novel by John Steinbeck, and
``Lincoln Portrait,'' music performed with narration inspired by
the writing of Carl Sandberg.
   Other noted pieces included ``Fanfare for the Common Man,''
written in 1942.
   ``He was the composer who would lead American music out of the
wilderness,'' the late Leonard Bernstein wrote in High Fidelity
magazine for the occasion of Copland's 70th birthday. ``He was The
Leader, the one to whom the young always came with their
compositions.''
   Composer William Schumann said he, Copland and Bernstein were
close friends for many years and formed a ``triumvirate'' among
American composers.
   ``I think Aaron created the American sound in symphonic music,''
Schumann said. ``He has not only been for a half-century the
pre-eminent American composer, but a remarkable force as an
influence with younger composers.''
   He added: ``Copland believed in the validity of American music,
and that we were not inferior to our European cousins.''
   Copland wrote two operas, six ballets and eight film scores,
including his Oscar-winning music for William Wyler's ``The
Heiress'' in 1948. He was a pianist, conductor, author and
educator, guiding numerous musicians including Bernstein.
   Copland won his Pulitzer and the New York Music Critics Circle
Award in 1945 for ``Appalachian Spring,'' which he wrote for Martha
Graham to accompany her choreography based on a Hart Crane poem.
Among the composition's most famous themes: a Shaker melody played
by clarinet and followed by five variations.
   His ballets ``Billy the Kid'' and ``Rodeo'' also combined cowboy
tunes and folk songs with original themes.
   Despite his success, Copland stopped composing after 1967,
spending much of his time at his home and directing recordings of
his works.
   One reason for his decision to stop composing was the rejection
by young composers of his ``Inscape,'' his first attempt at the
highly structured, atonal 12-tone system.
   Born Nov. 14, 1900, Copland was the youngest of five children.
His parents, immigrants from Eastern Europe, owned a neighborhood
department store in Brooklyn.
   Copland's maternal grandfather, Aaron Mittenthal, moved to
Dallas and opened a dry goods store there in the 1870s. According
to Copland family lore, Jesse James' brother, Frank, worked in the
store, attracting customers but stealing the profits, forcing
Mittenthal to eeturn to New York.
   Perlis, co-author of his 1984 memoir ``Copland,'' suggests that
lineage is one reason a Jewish boy from Brooklyn could write cowboy
music, though he did not travel to the West until he was 28.
   Copland provided his own explanation: ``I preferred to imagine
being on a horse without actually getting on one!''
   His first work was a song composed at about age 8 for his
mother. About three years later, he gave up after two pages of
``Music for opera, Zenatello, Act I.'' His first complete work was
a song, ``Lola,'' written at age 14.
   But Copland's parents were reluctant to pay for music lessons.
   ``My parents were of the opinion that enough money had been
invested in the musical training of the four older children, with
meager results,'' he once recalled.
   Copland's persistence prevailed. At 16, he began harmony lessons
with Rubin Goldmark, who taught another Brooklynite, George
Gershwin.
   In 1920, Copland was the first to be accepted to the French
government's summer music school for Americans at the palace of
Fontainbleau. He studied harmony in Paris with Nadia Boulanger, and
sold a composition, ``The Cat and the Mouse,'' for $32.50.
   ``To finally see my music printed means more to me than any
debut in Carnegie Hall,'' he wrote home.
   Copland was part of a talented group of Americans who studied
with Boulanger, including Virgil Thompson, Walter Piston, Roy
Harris, David Diamond and Elliott Carter, who remembered Copland on
Sunday night as being ``extremely helpful to his musical
colleagues.''
   The brightest musical light in Paris when Copland was there was
Igor Stravinsky, whose pounding, primitive ballet ``The Rite of
Spring'' caused a riot at its 1913 premiere.
   Copland was struck by Stravinsky's use of Russian folk material:
``I have no doubt that this strongly influenced me to try to find a
way to a distinctively American music.''
   In 1923, Boulanger introduced Copland to Serge Koussevitzky, who
would take over the Boston Symphony Orchestra the next year.
Copland played his ``Cortege macabre'' on the piano, and composer
Serge Prokofiev, who was also at the house, blurted out ``Too much
bassi ostinati.''
   However, Koussevitzky promised to conduct the piece in Boston,
and asked Copland to compose an organ concerto for Boulanger. A
shaken Copland later asked his teacher, ``Do you really think I can
do it?''
   ``She pointed a finger at me. `You can do it.' And when
Mademoiselle said, `You can do it,' that was the end of the
discussion,'' Copland recalled.
   Copland returned to New York in 1924 to complete the ``Symphony
for Organ and Orchestra,'' which Boulanger premiered in New York in
1925 at her U.S. debut.
   Afterward, Copland recalled, conductor Walter Damrosch addressed
the audience: ``Ladies and gentlemen. I am sure you will agree that
if a gifted young man can write a symphony like this at 23 ...
within five years he will be ready to commit murder.''
   Copland laughed along with the audience, but for years Damrosch
worried whether the composer understood he was joking.
   The same year, Copland won the first Guggenheim Fellowship in
music, worth $2,500.
   Koussevitzky commissioned Copland's ``Music for the Theatre,''
and introduced his ``Piano Concerto,'' both jazz-inspired
compositions.
   The concerto, written in 1926, used frequently changing rhythms.
``I felt I had gone to the extreme of where jazz could take me, the
audiences and critics in Boston all thought I had gone too far,''
Copland recalled.
   In 1928, during his first trip to the West, Copland heard the
piece hissed during rehearsal and again in concert at the Hollywood
Bowl.
   His 1942 ``Rodeo'' launched Agnes DeMille in her dancing career.
   Copland also helped organize Cos Cob Press, which published
music of composers rejected by established publishers. He founded
the Young Composers' Group, which helped Thompson, Bernard Herrmann
and others.
   Copland never married and left no survivors.
   An old friend, the late playwright Harold Clurman, once told
Perlis that ``the only ambition I ever heard him remark on was, `I
want to be remembered.'''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
