ID: 216	RANK: 45	SCORE: 9.221882
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910820-0092
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910820-0092.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Timeoff: Diversions and Excursions Aug. 20-Sept. 3
</HL>
<DATE>
08/20/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>

                                                                                                       

                         New York
                   "Frank Lloyd Wright:
           Preserving an Architectural Heritage"
                                                                                                       

</LP>
<TEXT>
   More than 70 items -- from furniture to art-glass windows
-- surveying the architect's career and addressing the issue
of preservation of his buildings and their furnishings. The
show includes examples of furniture in his early Prairie
style, which featured darkened oak, and his later Usonian
style, which featured light wood and geometric shapes. The
art-glass windows on view range from stylized floral motifs
designed for the Darwin D. Martin House to a more abstract
group from the Avery Coonley Playhouse. American Craft
Museum: 40 West 53rd St. Through Oct. 27. (212) 956-3535.
                                                                                                       

                       Philadelphia
                  "On Tabletop and Wall:
            The Art of the American Still Life"
                                                                                                       

   Thirty works from the early 19th century onward. Artists
include Raphaelle Peale (son of Charles Willson Peale),
America's first professional still-life painter, who painted
fruits from his father's farm; DeScott Evans and John
Frederick Peto, masters of the trompe l'oeil at the end of
the 19th century; and Stuart Davis and Arthur B. Carles Jr.,
who painted abstract still lifes in the early 20th century.
Of special interest are two rarely seen still-life
assemblages by Joseph Cornell. Pennsylvania Academy of the
Fine Arts: Broad and Cherry Streets, through April 19. (215)
972-7600.
                                                                                                       

                         New York
                  "Documents of Dissent"
                                                                                                       

   More than 100 items -- including books, periodicals,
posters, handbills and journals -- examining dissent and
censorship in the U.S., Europe, Tibet, India, China and the
Arabic world. Highlights include items from China drawn from
the library's new Tiananmen Archive; newspapers and pamphlets
chronicling the dissolution of East Germany and its
subsequent unification with West Germany; and a section
devoted to the Guerrilla Girls, a group of American women art
professionals who wage unorthodox protests against sexism and
racism in the art world. Edna Barnes Salomon Room, New York
Public Library: Fifth Avenue at 42nd Street. Through Feb. 15.
(212) 221-7676.
                                                                                                       

                           FILM
                                                                                                       

                         New York
                    "The Last Westerns"
                                                                                                       

   This film series explores the swan song of the western,
with screenings of 13 films made between 1968 and 1973.
Included are rare screenings of two films featuring Dennis
Hopper, "The Last Movie" and "Kid Blue"; Sergio Leone's "Once
Upon a Time in the West," a "spaghetti western" starring
Henry Fonda and Charles Bronson; Sam Peckinpah's "Pat Garrett
and Billy the Kid"; Andy Warhol's mock western, "Lonesome
Cowboys"; and Robert Benson's "Bad Company," starring Jeff
Bridges. American Museum of the Moving Image: 35th Avenue at
36th Street, Astoria, Queens. Through Sept. 13. (718)
784-0077.
                                                                                                       

                         FESTIVAL
                                                                                                       

                    Santa Rosa, Calif.
               "Scottish Gathering &amp; Games"
                                                                                                       

   The largest Scottish gathering in the world outside of
Scotland celebrates its 126th annual festival with plenty of
dancing, piping and folk singing. The pipes and drums of the
Scots Guards (the pipe band of the British Army) and the
MacLean Pipe Band from Annan, Scotland, will be featured.
Competitions will be held in many events, including highland
dancing, piping and drumming, fiddling, soccer and the "caber
toss," which involves turning a huge log end over end.Sonoma
County Fairgrounds: Aug. 31 and Sept. 1. (415) 897-4442.
                                                                                                       

                           MUSIC
                                                                                                       

                         New York
                   "New York City Opera"
                                                                                                       

   Leos Janacek's "Cunning Little Vixen," an oddly engaging
work inspired by newspaper articles about a half-tame fox
cavorting through a Czech village, returns to the repertoire
after eight years. In the meanwhile, the company has rebuilt
the lavish Maurice Sendak costumes consumed by a warehouse
fire several years ago, including the magnificent red fluffy
tail which Kathryn Gamberoni will flounce as the Vixen
Sharp-Ears. Cynthia Rose sings Golden-Stripe, the Fox, and
Jan Opalach is the Forester. Christopher Keene conducts.
Tonight at 8 pm; August 25 (mat), September 6, and 11.New
York State Theater, Lincoln Center: 65th and Broadway. (212)
496-0600.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
