ID: 102	RANK: 3	SCORE: 31.107172
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920309-0071
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920309-0071.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
   Big Splash at Ooey-Pooey
   ----
   By Frederick C. Klein
</HL>
<DATE>
03/09/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10
</SO>
<LP>
   Indianapolis -- Perhaps the best measure of the strength
of the U.S. Olympic swimming team that was selected by trial
of water here last week was a quip that Eddie Reese, who will
coach the men's team at Barcelona next July, made Friday
morning, after his roster was all but filled. Reese knew he
would have in his charge no fewer than six reigning world
record holders, yet he was able to say, almost
straight-facedly, that he'd "offered Mark Schubert (the
women's team coach) money if he'd switch jobs with me."
   Added Reese, eyes atwinkle: "Most of the talk here has
been about the women, and how tough they look. And, hey, I
agree. I'd have to think hard before I'd put my boys against
them head-to-head."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Most of the talk was about the women because a couple of
them did their world-record busting at the Phillips 66
National Swimming Championships on the campus of Indiana
University-Purdue University-Indianapolis (IUPUI), which
natives of the Hoosier metropolis shorten to "Ooey-Pooey."
The meet doubled as the Olympic Trials, with the top two
finishers in each event qualifying.
   Last Sunday, the event's first day, Jenny Thompson, 19, a
blue-eyed blonde from Stanford U. via Dover, N.H., churned
the 100-meter freestyle in the unprecedented :54.48. The next
day Anita Nall, a stuffed-owl-loving, 15-year-old wunderkind
from Towson, Md., took the 200-meter breaststroke, in a
record 2:25.92. Before the waves died down on Friday night,
two more American women's records fell and two others were
nudged severely.
   But this is not to say Our Boys did poorly. Charmin'
Melvin Stewart, a voluble Tennessean, on Thursday night swam
the 200-meter butterfly in 1:55.72, just .03-second above his
own world mark, and a couple hours later Jeff Rouse, a
bespectacled Stanfordian, missed his 100-meter backstroke
record by .14-second, at :54.07.
   And in the highlight of a memorable evening-indeed, maybe
of the whole meet-Matt Biondi, the giant (6-foot-7) hero of
the 1988 Olympics in Seoul (he won seven medals, five of them
gold), edged world-record-holder Tom Jager by .05-second in
the 50-meter freestyle final, with his time of :22.12 pacing
the fastest eight-man field in the history of the event.
   "Our goal in Barcelona?" Reese would echo. "To win all the
medals, of course. Although we probably won't do it."
   Chances look good, though, that U.S. swimmers will do
better at Barcelona than they did at Seoul, where their
18-medal haul was this country's lowest in 28 years. The rosy
outlook stems partly from the demise of East Germany, which
dominated the women's side of the sport in the 1976, '80 and
'88 Games.
   When the Berlin Wall came down, so did the wall of silence
that surrounded steroid use by East German athletes, and the
fact that Thompson and Nall broke records formerly held by
East Germans was cause for some breast-beating here. "It's
good to see that drug-enhanced records have been broken by
our girls, swimming clean," said Dennis Pursley, national
team director for U.S. Swimming, the sport's domestic
governing body. When pressed, Pursley admitted that drugs
still may be present in the sport. "Techniques to cheat
remain ahead of techniques to test," he allowed. But he
added, "I know our people, and know they'd never use them."
   While Pursley didn't mention it, one American woman,
sprinter Angel Myers, tested positive for steroids after
qualifying for the 1988 Olympic team, and was barred from the
Games. Myers has maintained she never used the drugs. Now 24
years old, married and last-named Martino, she's back in the
sport after serving a suspension. She qualified in the
50-meter free-style and 400-meter free-style relay, but said
that restoring her reputation was not her motive. "I don't
think about that (the 1988 incident)," she said quietly.
"Maybe I block it out."
   U.S. swimmers hope they'll have a couple of other things
going for them. One will be the extra training that team
members can glean from having the Trials in early March,
nearly five months before the Games. The '88 Trials were just
six weeks before the Seoul fest, and it turned out that some
swimmers couldn't hold their competitive peaks that long. But
it should be recalled that the '88 format seemed like a good
idea at the time.
   Probably more important will be the results of the
increased financial help available to top U.S. Olympic
hopefuls over the last quadrennium; whatever other adjectives
might apply to swimmers, "poor" no longer is one of them.
Last year, 1988 triple-gold-medal winner Janet Evans,
breaststroke world-record holder Mike Barrowman and Biondi
each collected more than $50,000 in aid, and 17 other
swimmers got $20,000 or more. The upshot is a 1992 men's team
that averages 23 years old, and a women's crew that averages
20, both about two years above '88.
   "I'm here because I love the sport . . . and can afford to
keep pursuing it," affirmed Biondi, 26, who qualified for the
50and 100-meter freestyles and the 400-meter freestyle relay.
   The 20-year-old Evans will be back, too, having won the
400- and 800-meter freestyles that she captured at Seoul, but
having failed to qualify in the 400-meter individual medley,
which she also won in '88. Along with Thompson and Nall, much
of the women's spotlight fell on Summer Sanders, a
19-year-old Californian. She qualified impressively in four
individual events and earned other accolades as well.
   "This is not only our best women's team ever, but also the
best looking," declared Stewart. "I'd be willing to grovel
for a date with Summer."
   "Melvin?" responded the dark-haired Sanders when informed
of the above. "He hardly talks to any of the girls."
   Swimmingwise, experience was a stronger theme among the
men. Qualifiers included 27-year-old Pablo Morales, whose
1984 world record in the 100-meter butterfly still stands but
who failed to qualify for the '88 team, and David Berkoff,
25, a silver medalist in the 100-meter backstroke at Seoul
who disgustedly quit the sport for a time after the
underwater technique he'd pioneered was banned.
   But they also include Joe Hudepohl, an 18-year-old
Cincinnati high schooler, who won the 200-meter free-style
and later showed there was something else to be said for
youth. Did the "pressure" make the Trials a trial, he was
asked. "Not really," he responded. "Our high school meets are
like this."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
