ID: 102	RANK: 88	SCORE: 17.763681
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900123-0226 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-01-23-90 1145EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>a a BC-PRI--Athletes Adv25-1stLd-Writethru b2060 01-23 0959</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-PRI--Athletes, Adv 25 - 1st Ld-Writethru, b2060,0987</SECOND>
<NOTE>$adv25</NOTE>
<NOTE>For release Thursday, Jan. 25, and thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>Age-Group Competition Soars Among Older Athletes</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: SUBS 2nd graf to CORRECT that Nicklaus' birthday Sunday sted
Monday</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By SHEILA NORMAN-CULP</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>NEW YORK (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Jack Nicklaus can scorch the fairways like
practically no one else, but this month he became just another
statistic in a growing trend.
   Nicklaus, who turned 50 on Sunday, is now eligible to join the
PGA Seniors tour. He's also joining _ albeit with not quite as much
fanfare _ the exploding number of older Americans who compete in
age-group sports.
   The attraction is simple: try your hardest, be your best, and in
five to 10 years be reborn into an older group. Masters swimmers,
for example, compete in five-year intervals up to 90-94. The United
States Tennis Federation sanctions matches for men 85 and older and
women 75 and older. Age-group competitions also are organized in
bicycling, track and field, marathons and triathlons.
   The system encourages older Americans to keep competing, because
at least once every few years they get to be the youngest kid on
the block.
   ``You like to come in at the bottom of your age group and blow
them away,'' said Dr. George McVey, 62, of Rochester, N.Y., who has
competed for 17 years in masters swimming and has been
internationally ranked in the breaststroke.
   ``It's amazing _ the condition of these people,'' he said of
those attending national masters swim meets.
``Seventy-five-year-olds can go up and down the pool like you
wouldn't believe.''
   ``A couple of years ago, our oldest category was 50-plus,'' said
Gary Scott of Triathlon Federation@USA. ``Now it's 70-plus.''
   These older triathletes aren't running mini-events, either. They
are in the same grueling races attempted by athletes 50 years their
junior.
   ``We had one 64-year-old woman who finished in a decent time at
the Ironman,'' Scott said. ``She beat a lot of men in their
thirties.''
   The Ironman is one of the world's most prestigious triathlons,
held in Kailua-Kona, Hawaii, each year. The woman, Joanita Reed of
San Antonio, swam a 2.4-mile ocean race, cycled 112 miles over
hills and ran a 26.2-mile marathon, all in the same day. She
finished in 14 hours, 31 minutes and 55 seconds.
   ``We have experienced a dramatic increase in masters riders in
the last five years,'' agreed Kyle Woodlief, spokesman for the
United States Cycling Federation in Colorado Springs, Colo. ``Our
oldest licensed racer is 93.''
   That rider, Fred Knoller of Lauderdale-By-The-Sea, Fla.,
competed in the U.S. Nationals from 1976 to 1985, when he was 89.
Knoller has stopped competing but is still a big fan of the move
toward smaller age-group categories.
   ``When I was in my 50's, I was still racing against
40-year-olds,'' he said. He keeps his membership to get the
newsletter and find out how friends are doing. ``Some of these boys
60, 65, are really good. Real pros.''
   Last June, the cream of American senior athletes gathered to go
for the gold in St. Louis, at the U.S. National Senior Olympics.
The 3,452 athletes, ranging from 55 to 91, earned the chance to
compete through strong performances at qualifying meets, where more
than 100,000 seniors tested their mettle.
   ``You know the saying, `If you don't use it, you lose it,'' said
Sylvia Auerbach Swartz, 77, who with her sisters Rose, 74, and
Pearl, 68, earned 12 medals at the Senior Olympics. ``It's
important not to let the joints get stiff. You've got to keep them
going.''
   Swartz, of New York, said a youthful diet of volleyball,
softball, basketball, lacrosse and speedball, along with some
middle-aged tennis and ping-pong laid the base for her success.
Medals in field events came from weekly training, pointers from
local coaches, and encouragement from her sisters.
   ``We don't compete against each other, though,'' she said.
``That's why we are still talking.''
   At the VIII World Veterans Championships last summer in Eugene,
Ore. _ billed as the largest track meet in history, former Olympic
athletes faced top-flight but unknown competitors from around the
world. Many of the 4,950 athletes produced times and distances that
were the talk of the meet.
   Paula Schneiderhan of West Germany produced a world record in
the womens' 65-69 200-meter sprint with a time of 31.65 seconds.
   Although seniors are still a rather small segment of the sports
population, one industry expert says when they do enjoy a sport,
they go at it with gusto.
   ``The mature market incidence in most sports is pretty low,''
said Harvey Lauer, president of American Sports Data Inc., a
research firm in Hartsdale.
   ``But if you look at the people who do run, for example, and are
over 55, they do it with a vengeance,'' he said. ``Tennis players
over 55 play tennis more than tennis players in general. It's a
time factor.''
   Although some age-group seniors were top athletes in their prime
_ like Rose Auerbach, national AAU javelin champ in 1937 and 1938 _
many more found the joy of competition much later in life. The
80-to-84 category, for example, is the fastest-growing age group at
U.S. Masters Swimming meets.
   Dan Gruender, the president of U.S. Masters Swimming, began
competing only after following his wife, Edie, to Masters swim
meets. At 61, Mrs. Gruender is internationally ranked in the
butterfly, freestyle and individual medley.
   ``As the greying of America takes place, people realize that
staying active is the one way to improve the quality of your life.
It's also very satisfying. And that's what it's all about,'' he
said. ``Self-improvement is the touchstone we push. We don't care
if it takes you 3 minutes to swim a lap. Next time make it 2:59.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Jan. 25</NOTE>
</DOC>
