ID: 127	RANK: 31	SCORE: 16.759842
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910528-0078
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910528-0078.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Miners, Aborigines Clash Over Site
   Rich With Tradition -- and Gold
   ----
   By S. Karene Witcher
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
05/28/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), NO PAGE CITATION
</SO>
<CO>
   A.NBH A.NRG BHP NEM P.MNN
</CO>
<MS>
BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)
</MS>
<IN>
ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)
ENVIRONMENT (ENV)
DIVERSIFIED MINING (MNG)
PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS)
</IN>
<NS>
ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)
</NS>
<RE>
AUSTRALIA (ASA)
COLORADO (CO)
MALAYSIA (MY)
SINGAPORE (SN)
GREAT BRITAIN (UK)
</RE>
<LP>
   CORONATION HILL, Australia -- Beneath the rocky hills here
sleeps Bula, a spiritual being that roamed the Earth during
the Dreamtime. Bula created people, formed the rough
landscape and determined law. The ore is his blood. To
disturb him is to court destruction, or so say the Jawoyn
aborigines.
   For Prime Minister Bob Hawke, this area and its testy
ancient inhabitant have become a 20th-century political
headache. Located inside the southern rim of Kakadu National
Park, Guratba, as Coronation Hill is called by the
aborigines, holds reserves of gold, platinum and palladium.
Bula or no Bula, the country's mining industry wants it
exploited. Conservationists, worried about the impact on the
area's fragile ecology, are up in arms. The aborigines, for
the most part, want the proposed mine abandoned and an end to
the bickering.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Claims and counterclaims have woven a tangled, bitter tale
around Coronation Hill that is embroidered with apparent
contradictions. Archeologists publicly brawl. The Jawoyn are
split into pro-mining and anti-mining factions. The Hawke
government is divided between those who say Australia's
precarious financial position dictates development of every
resource and those who argue that economics must be balanced
against costs to the environment and indigenous land rights.
   The government is set to rule as early as this week on
whether a mining consortium of U.S., Australian and Malaysian
interests can proceed here, in what is known as Sickness
Country. Australia is one of the world's biggest mineral
producers. To deny mining will send a negative signal to
potential investors at home and abroad and fan fears of
spreading native land rights. To allow it will invite
world-wide criticism of roughshod treatment of sensitive
aboriginal rights. It also promises to anger
conservationists, who are an increasingly important source of
votes for the beleaguered incumbent Labor Party.
   "It's a no-win situation" for the government, says Robin
Widdup, a mining analyst at securities firm J.B. Were &amp; Son.
   Leading the charge for the miners is Newcrest Mining Ltd.,
partly owned by Newmont Mining Corp. of the U.S. with a 14%
stake and Broken Hill Proprietary Co., Australia's largest
company. Newcrest has a 45% stake in Coronation Hill. Another
45% is owned by Plutonic Resources Ltd., whose biggest single
shareholder is Malaysian government-controlled Malaysia
Mining Corp. The rest is held by Norgold Ltd., a unit of
North Broken Hill Peko Ltd. of Australia.
   When the debate began shortly after the consortium struck
gold in Coronation Hill in the mid-1980s, it centered on
environmental concerns but later shifted to being an
aboriginal issue, says John Quinn, Newcrest's managing
director.
   The loser -- be it the mining lobby or the aborigines and
their conservationist allies -- will find the next battle
that much harder, industry analysts say. "If {the miners} can
roll the black fellas on this one, they can do it anywhere,
and it'll make a farce of sacred sites," says John Ah Kit, a
Jawoyn Association official.
   To most Jawoyn people, mining at Coronation Hill is like
saying "Jerusalem has to be razed for a spaceport," says a
former adviser to the Jawoyn. "It's like selling the Ark of
the Covenant or the Vatican. Or strip-mining the hill of
Golgotha."
   Because Bula is "men's business," women aren't allowed to
talk about it or visit certain Bula sites. Indeed, a woman
reporter is told to refer to Bula as "the thing that lives in
the mountain" and isn't allowed to ask the custodians about
the consequences of mining.
   Guratba is one of a number of sites across the top of the
continent that have been officially designated as "sacred"
because of their particular spiritual significance to
aboriginal people. In this case, though, the powerful mining
lobby argues that the evidence is tenuous, at best. Indeed,
they contend that the Bula cult is part of an elaborate
charade to strengthen the Jawoyn's hand in a current
land-rights claim over the area. The federal government owns
the land around Coronation Hill. The Jawoyn deny any such
scheme.
   As evidence, the Newcrest consortium points to the fact
that Coronation Hill was registered as a sacred site in
October 1985, a few months after the mining consortium
disclosed that it had struck gold. The consortium says the
deposit contains at least 1.2 million ounces of gold and
enough platinum and palladium to make it the biggest source
of the latter two minerals in Australia. It estimates the
mine's life at nine years and says it might last 20 years.
   A government inquiry into the proposed mine calculates the
net present value of production to the Australian economy at
about A$82 million (US$63.6 million), while the consortium
argues that if indirect benefits are taken into account, that
figure rises to A$200 million. Still, it's a relatively small
mine. So why all the fuss?
   The mining industry says that unless it defeats the
aborigines and conservationists on this issue, other mining
areas will be threatened.
   About 26% of Australia's land surface is heavily
restricted or is closed to new exploration and mining
activity, up from just 7% in 1967. Most of the restricted
areas are lands controlled by aborigines.
   After spending about A$14 million on exploration, the
consortium fears it won't get the go-ahead. Indeed, earlier
this month, Prime Minister Hawke appeared to prepare the
industry for a decision against mining by stressing that
Coronation Hill shouldn't be regarded as "a litmus test."
   For Peter Jatbula, Sandy Barraway and Nipper Brown, who
are aboriginal custodians of the Bula area, a decision to
halt mining can't come too soon. "A lot of white fellas come
and humbug all the time," fumes Mr. Barraway, using the
common aboriginal expression for aggravation. He blames the
stress of the debate for sending several older Jawoyns to
early graves.
   Outside advisers to the Jawoyn say that all the pressure
of justifying their ties to Sickness Country -- which forced
them to reveal certain secrets of their ceremonies and other
taboos to strangers -- helped confuse the old men and led to
conflicting stories. The mining concerns contend that Messrs.
Brown and Barraway previously agreed to mining at Coronation
Hill.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
