ID: 127	RANK: 50	SCORE: 15.503276
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910715-0034
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910715-0034.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Australia Is Seeing
   New Travel Niche:
   Aborigine Tours
   ---
   Descendants of the Culture
   Lead Excursion Groups
   To Rarely Visited Areas
   ----
   By S. Karene Witcher
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
07/15/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A4D
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)
</IN>
<RE>
AUSTRALIA (ASA)
FAR EAST (FE)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
</RE>
<LP>
   DARWIN, Australia -- Bill Harney used to earn a living
rounding up cattle across the Northern Territory, but he
traded in a stockman's saddle for a four-wheel drive and a
mob of tourists.
   Mr. Harney, who thinks he is about 60 years old, is one of
a small group of Australia's aborigines who are trying their
hands as tour guides to their ancient culture. In Mr.
Harney's case, the cradle of his family's culture lies about
75 miles west of the outback town of Katherine -- on a cattle
ranch owned by the Sultan of Brunei.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Aborigines share in the management of some national parks
located on their traditional lands. But various aboriginal
groups began venturing into tourism in the early 1980s when
Australia's tourist industry took off and visitors began
exploring more remote regions. For some aboriginal groups
living in the country's top end, it was their first contact
with large numbers of outsiders.
   Besides noticing that the visitors had a lot of money to
spend, the locals were struck by the misinformation that the
travelers had got hold of and the questions they asked.
   Hosting tourists is a way for aborigines to dispel myths
about their culture, says Chris Burchett, who has acted as
the government tourist authority's aboriginal liaison manager
for the past seven years. Moreover, he says, aborigines "see
it as a way of educating and restoring pride among their own
kids."
   Today, there is an array of tours ranging from a couple of
hours -- the Edible Desert Tour at Ayers Rock in Australia's
arid center for 10 Australian dollars (US$7.65) -- to
Umorrduk, a two-day A$635 sojourn into Arnhem Land in the far
north corner of the Northern Territory where non-aboriginals
need a permit to travel.
   Still, it has been a hard sell. That is partly because of
prejudice, industry officials contend, with international
wholesale tour operators concerned that the tours will be
unreliable, officials say.
   Some incidents have occurred. Darwin-based Territory Park
Tours, for instance, dropped a half-day aboriginal tour of
Kakadu National Park from its itinerary after clients
complained that the aboriginal guide was either
uncommunicative or didn't show up at all. A tourism official
says problems with that tour have been rectified.
   Tourism also can be an unhappy affair for aborigines
themselves. Mr. Burchett recalls a group of Aranda people
near Alice Springs who decided to put on an inma, or
collection of ceremonial dances, for tourists. The selection
even included a dance featuring a kadaitja, or the aboriginal
equivalent of a hired assassin. Like his forefathers before
him, the assassin wore boots made from emu feathers designed
to leave no telltale tracks.
   The recital was disrupted, however, when a disgruntled
group of American tourists stalked out and demanded their
money back. Their complaint was that the performance wasn't
genuine because it didn't include didgeridoos, traditional
musical instruments that, in fact, aren't part of the desert
people's culture. The Aranda "were upset to the point they
never danced {publicly} again. They felt ashamed," Mr.
Burchett says.
   Mr. Harney's experience with tourists has been more
rewarding, although he says he still hasn't made any money
despite charging A$195 a person for an overnight trip. He
decided to start tours of his traditional lands in May 1989.
A member of the Wardaman language group, he is a senior
custodian of the group's traditional lands, which span the
sultan's vast spread known as Willeroo station.
   With the sultan's permission, Mr. Harney picks up tourists
twice a week in Katherine and drives them to Willeroo. There
they view rock-art sites from the aboriginal creation age
known as the Dreamtime. There are perhaps 2,000 to 3,000
significant sites at Willeroo, but most are so sacred that
they are closed to outsiders. What the tourists do see is the
art of two ancestral beings, Jabiringi and Yagdjagbula,
otherwise known as the Lightning Brothers, whom Wardaman
believe bring the early storms and rains of the wet season.
   Later, visitors camp by a waterhole and dine on a bush
banquet prepared by Mr. Harney, who classifies himself as a
"good cook." Although one participant calls it "not so
comfortable camping," Mr. Harney says he hasn't had any
complaints. About 80% of the tourists are from abroad
including Japanese, French, Britons, Swedes and Americans;
the rest are Australians.
   Although business has been patchy, Mr. Harney already has
plans to expand when it picks up. He wants to start a boat
tour on Scott Creek station, the sultan's adjoining property.
The area was in the news last year when the territory's drug
squad discovered an 11-acre marijuana plantation. "We didn't
like that," Mr. Harney says. (Arrests were made, including
the station's manager; police say that neither the sultan nor
the local aboriginal community was involved.)
   For the Harneys, tourism has turned into a family affair.
Some of his four children accompany the tours, and his wife
pitches in by washing the bus and cleaning the swags, a
bushman's sleeping bag. "I like it," Mr. Harney says of
tourism. "I like to talk to fresh people." Besides he adds,
"it's a much easier job than mustering cattle."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
