ID: 127	RANK: 55	SCORE: 14.856499
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900927-0133 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NY-09-27-90 1635EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r i AM-Mohawks     09-27 0708</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Mohawks,0888</SECOND>
<HEAD>Finale of Canada's Indian Standoff Does Not Mean End to Problems</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By JEFFREY ULBRICH</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>TORONTO (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The 78-day standoff between Mohawks and
authorities in Quebec left ill feelings that may not quickly fade,
but one positive offshoot was that it focused attention on the
plight of Canada's native tribes, experts said Thursday.
   After the surrender of the last Mohawk holdouts on Wednesday,
federal and provincial governments were congratulating themselves
for avoiding major violence, and creating a new program designed to
be more sensitive to Indians.
   Meanwhile, Indians and other observers warn it won't take much
for similar situations to erupt again.
   ``The Indians are starting to say that we've come down to the
wire and we are going to hold the white man to his word,'' said
Bruce Clark, a London, Ontario, lawyer who has studied historical
documents relating to Indian relations with the government.
   ``The white man talks about the rule of law as his great gift,
let's see if we can hold him to it,'' he said.
   Georges Erasmus, grand chief of the Assembly of First Nations,
the national grouping of Canadian Indian bands, said ``there is a
tremendous onus now on the Canadian government and the Quebec
government.''
   About 50 Mohawks, including women and children, surrendered
Wednesday after being camped for nearly a month inside a drug and
alcohol treatment center in Oka, 18 miles west of Montreal. They
were taken to a nearby military base.
   The withdrawal ended a conflict that began July 11 over plans by
Oka officials to expand a golf course onto land claimed by Indians.
Dozens of people were injured and one Quebec police office was
killed in clashes.
   The golf course issue was settled early on when the federal
government bought the disputed land and said it would turn it over
to the Mohawks. But blockades set up at Oka and Kanawake, south of
Montreal, were joined by sympathy blockades by Indian bands across
the country.
   Most observers feel it was the public pressure and the
continuing negative image of Canadian officials that finally pushed
Prime Minister Brian Mulroney on Tuesday to announce his new
program for dealing with natives.
   He said the program would cover four points: ``land claims; the
economic and social conditions on reserves; the relationship
between aboriginal peoples and governments, and concerns of
Canada's aboriginal peoples in contemporary Canadian life.''
   ``Canada's aboriginal peoples deserve a special place in this
country as our first citizens, based on the aboriginal and treaty
rights recognized in the constitution,'' the prime minister said.
   But he added: ``I will be very clear on this point: native
self-government does not now and cannot ever mean sovereign
independence. Mohawk lands are a part of Canadian territory, and
Canadian law must and does apply.''
   That issue of law and jurisdiction are major issues between the
government and many of the country's native bands.
   ``The situation is, we do not have ordinary Canadians here,''
Erasmus said, referring to the Oka crisis. ``We have Mohawk people
that have been here for tens of thousands of years. They have not
ever voluntarily entered into a treaty that has extinguished their
rights.
   ``What is necessary is an understanding of how aboriginal
rights, treaty rights, mesh with the civilian code in Quebec and
with Canadian law.''
   There are about 450,000 ``status,'' or registered, Indians in
Canada and 33,000 Inuit, often called Eskimos. These native people
make up 593 bands on 2,234 reserves covering 6.4 million acres.
   For many reserve Indians, life is a continuous struggle against
poverty, alcoholism, poor health services. They also face lack of
plumbing, sewage disposal and drinking water. Death by injury or
poisoning is quadruple that for the rest of Canada; life expectancy
is nine years less than for a white Canadian.
   Natives in general have a deep well of sympathy among white
Canadians, but the Indian struggles take place mostly in obscure
camps and reserves far from the general population.
   Taking up arms ``can't help but come up again,'' said attorney
Clark.
   ``There are two solutions. One is the rule of law. The other is
self-help. We are at the point now where Indians are tired of
talking. Will violence happen again? It's almost a certainty that
it will.''
   Clark quotes from a royal proclamation of 1763 that guarantees
the right of Indians to self-government. He says that was
reaffirmed in the 1982 constitution.
   ``Canadian history from that point took a very different road
from that of the United States. From that point, the Indians in
Canada laid down their arms. There was no Indian warfare.
   ``Either Canada will honor its own constitutional law, or it
will have to change its constitutional law.''
   The natives say they have taken the government at its word, that
it will enter into serious negotiations with the Indians now that
the Mohawks at Oka have laid down their arms.
   ``The end of the standoff is just the first step,'' said Ethel
Blondin, an Indian member of the House of Commons. ``The government
must cough up what it appeared to promise.
   ``The only way that's going to work ... is to move quickly.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
