ID: 127	RANK: 96	SCORE: 11.525497
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910911-0086
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910911-0086.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Publishing:
   Books From the Bush on Old Australia
   ----
   By Helen Dudar
</HL>
<DATE>
09/11/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14
</SO>
<LP>
   New York -- There are authors who would not consider
beginning a novel without a fair notion of where it was
going. And then there are dreamers like Rodney Hall, an
Australian writer of rising distinction, who looks on the
idea of planning as if it were a fatal disease and wants
nothing more than an untamed imagination and an opening
sentence. Thus armed, he carries a chunky little notebook out
of his house in the remote woodlands of New South Wales,
settles himself on ground overlooking the Pacific, and lets
his pencil fly.
   In just this way and in 19 days, he turned out the first
draft of his latest novel, "The Second Bridegroom" (Farrar,
Straus &amp; Giroux, 214 pages, $19.95), which will be published
simultaneously this month in New York, Toronto, London and
Sydney.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Whatever the notices may be abroad, he is already prepared
for a certain chill at home in Australia. Mr. Hall, 55, lean,
weathered, bearded and buoyant, came late to a writing
career, achieved international recognition hardly a decade
ago, and draws odd solace from the knowledge that his fiction
does not spread general joy among his countrymen.
   On a recent visit here to help judge a literary
competition, Mr. Hall paused one day to talk about work and
its rewards. "I make our people uncomfortable," he said. "I
get the cold shoulder. I don't mind. It interests me. I get a
very positive thing out of it. You know that because of the
discomfort, the message must be clear."
   As anyone who has encountered his fiction is aware, a Hall
novel is told in prose that soars and sings -- after all, his
early career was spent playing baroque music on the recorder.
Moreover, the story often has mythic dimensions, and the
subtext -- the "message" -- may remind readers that Australia
was rudely taken from its original inhabitants. Americans
think as little as possible about the usurpation of the
continent from native Indians. Australians, on the other
hand, carry "a very deep-rooted guilt about the way the
aborigine people have been and are treated," he said.
   For the next three years, Mr. Hall will have less time to
bedevil his compatriots. Last spring, he took on the job of
chairman of the Australia Council, the equivalent of our
National Endowment for the Arts. The position, Mr. Hall felt,
was one he could not honorably refuse.
   Between 1973 and 1979, when he was a somewhat obscure poet
and biographer, the council gave Mr. Hall a modest annual
grant. It was enough to allow him to settle his young family
in wild, sparsely populated territory, forested landscape
that Australians call the bush. And it gave him "the great
gift of time," the five years he needed to write his 1982
breakthrough novel, "Just Relations," which was widely
praised and garlanded with Australia's major literary award.
   The idea of public stipends for the arts in Australia, he
reports, is now under fire, although the problems there
differ from the "morality" issues that have rocked our NEA.
At heart is the strong ideological opposition of the "ockers"
(pronounced "oakers"), an element Mr. Hall described as the
Australian approximation of American rednecks.
   "The ocker position is that the government has no business
spending money on the arts. The Liberal Party, our right-wing
party, would like to disband the council altogether. The
Labor Party, which is in power, has whittled away at funding.
We have almost no private foundations -- the council is the
sole source of support for all the arts."
   The appointment puts Mr. Hall in charge of a budget of
57.9 million Australian dollars ($45.7 million) and a
professional staff of 114. He planned to tend to his
bureaucratic duties by spending four days out of every
fortnight in Sydney, a shortish plane ride north of his home.
But even that schedule will curtail his literary work. While
he is spinning out a first draft, Mr. Hall must concentrate,
without interruption, on "the world of the novel."
   The immediate impact of the new government job was the
installation of a battery-operated fax machine in his home, a
dramatic addition to a household that, until just a few years
ago, still penetrated night's darkness with candles. A
generous check for publication rights from Germany, where his
books are greatly appreciated, paid for a solar-disk system.
It lights bulbs.
   Before he settled into rusticity, Mr. Hall had spent some
formative years in Brisbane, a northern city with a climate
and foliage similar to Miami's. He left school at 16, played
with a baroque-music quartet, taught the recorder and was a
radio actor. A friendship with the Australian poet John
Manifold, a highly cultivated and generous man, changed his
life. Mr. Manifold and his wife became mentors and set to
work filling the gaps in Mr. Hall's learning. "They gave me
an education, a fantastic education."
   The Manifold "college" did not include William Faulkner,
whom Mr. Hall had not yet explored when "Captivity Captive"
appeared here in 1988; still, some American critics thought
they saw Faulkner as an obvious influence on his themes and
style. Actually, Mr. Hall said, his literary roots are to be
found in the works of Lewis Carroll and Robert Louis
Stevenson, and in the clever way that the sentence structure
of the late fiction of Henry James manipulates the reader's
attention.
   "Captive" was a dark rural tale of incest and murder in
New South Wales, a family metaphor for the moral disarray of
colonial Australia in the waning years of the 19th century.
"Bridegroom" reaches further back, to 1838, and chronicles
the imagined arrival of the first Englishman in the same
province, a convicted felon -- naturally convicted of the
wrong crime -- who jumps ship off the coast and is adopted as
"king" or "mascot" by an aborigine tribe. By the time Mr.
Hall had started "The Grisly Wife," set again in NSW, in 1868
in a woman's colony, he realized he was writing a trilogy
about the colonial presence in 19th-century Australia. That
novel, which is not quite ready for publication, also raced
through his notebooks in no more than three weeks.
   Mr. Hall has no idea why the early drafts of those three
books tumbled out so swiftly. Most of his novels chew up
years. He is still working on one, "The Colony Club,"
centered on the Brisbane of his youth in the '50s, a period
when Australia experienced its equivalent of the American
McCarthy period. It has gone through 14 complete drafts. "I
really love the book," he said. "I love all the images. But
something that drives the substrata hasn't come up yet."
Typically, he refuses to worry. Whatever is buried in the
story, he figures, will eventually surface in a form that
will inevitably upset a few Australians.
   ---
   Ms. Dudar writes frequently about writers and publishing.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
