ID: 230	RANK: 93	SCORE: 7.935842
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900724-0206 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-24-90 1334EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>s a BC-NevadaWaterWar Adv29-2Takes   07-24 1218</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-Nevada Water War, Adv29-2 Takes,1246</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv29</NOTE>
<NOTE>For release Sunday, July 29, and thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>Showdown Over Water Pits Las Vegas Against Rural Counties</HEAD>
<NOTE>With LaserPhoto, Graphic</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By LISA LEVITT RYCKMAN</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP National Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>LAS VEGAS (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   It is high noon and 108 degrees in the shade at
the ritzy residential compound called Spanish Trail, a vista green
and wet almost as far as the eye can see: past the golf course, the
artificial pond, the bubbling fountains and the pristine pools _
right up to the edge of the desert.
   There is water, water everywhere in Las Vegas.
   It runs off neat lawns from sprinklers going full-blast at the
hottest time of a scorching day. It rolls down sidewalks and
gutters and streets and evaporates like a gambler's stake, never to
be seen again.
   While the West Coast suffers through the fourth year of a
drought that has people feeling guilty for taking showers and
flushing toilets from San Diego to San Francisco, Las Vegas _ a
city dry and dusty as a neon bone, save for its share of Colorado
River water _ has been busy doubling the number of golf courses and
building 4,000-room hotels.
   But now its unstoppable growth and unquenchable thirst have
thrust America's desert playground into a bitter power struggle
with the rest of Nevada, a showdown being played out in states all
over the West. Urban takes on rural in a water war some say
threatens to tear Nevada apart.
   ``If you work on the premise, `Let's not do anything about
future water supply and let's just let it run its course, and when
we run out, then we'll have to stop' _ that's economic homicide,''
said Pat Mulroy, general manager of the Las Vegas Valley Water
District, which regulates water in much of Clark County.
   The region's explosive growth caught the water district with its
hydrological pants down.
   Its allocation from the Colorado River, the seemingly endless
bounty that has kept the area afloat and awash for years, suddenly
appears to be insufficient in the wake of a two-year growth spurt
that has brought 6,000 new residents each month.
   ``Why didn't we see this sooner? It just fell on us, absolutely
fell on us,'' Mulroy said. ``The first year we thought, that's got
to be construction water because of all the massive construction
going on. So in the second year, 1989, we finally said, `Wait a
minute! Something's got to be done.'''
   What the district did was ask the state water engineer to grant
it the rights to an ocean of unappropriated groundwater in 20,000
square miles, most of it in Nye, Lincoln and White Pine counties,
three huge rural areas to the north. The plan involves constructing
1,200 miles of pipeline over the next 30 years to transport that
water out of the desert and to the people.
   The multibillion-dollar project _ its cost is placed at between
$1.5 billion and $7 billion, depending on who's estimating _ is
described as three times the size of the huge Central Arizona
Project, which carries Colorado River water over the mountains to
Phoenix and Tucson.
   And it is at least five times the size of the disastrous Owens
County water grab by Los Angeles 77 years ago, the legendary
scandal that inspired Roman Polanski's movie ``Chinatown.''
   ``You can put taxes on us. You can do anything to us,'' said Nye
County Commissioner Dick Carver, a life-long rancher. ``But you
take my water, I'm done. I can't exist.''
   In Nevada, where water is lifeblood and ultimate power, water
law is a century old. Applications for water rights must be
approved by the state water engineer, who decides whether the
applications meet three criteria: Is the water unappropriated?
Would rights affect any existing rights? And are the appropriations
in the public interest?
   So far, his meetings with the counties have ended in shouting
matches.
   ``They're more than upset; they're outraged,'' said State Water
Engineer Mike Turnipseed, who could start making decisions on the
applications as early as this fall. ``They fear more than just the
basic idea of `You're stealing my water.' They feel it's a threat
to their economic existence.''
   The counties believe their future already is in Clark County's
hands. Any business that wants to move in needs water. If the water
rights are approved, the rural counties will have to ask Clark
County for it. If the dispute ends up in court, as both sides
believe, the water might be tied up for years.
   ``Basically, you end up with somewhat of an annexation of the
counties,'' said George Benesch, an attorney for the rural areas.
``It scares the counties to death.''
   Scares them so much, in fact, that they have turned to their
sworn enemies for help. Ranchers and miners, whose battles over
water date back 100 years, have joined forces. And they've enlisted
the aid of others who they have often considered adversaries:
environmentalists and the federal government.
   ``We've had the Sierra Club come in with the wilderness issue,
and we fought wilderness,'' Carver said. ``But now we're saying,
`Won't you please come and help us? Because without water, what
good's a wilderness area?'''
   Their greatest allies, in fact, may turn out to be the inch-long
pupfish _ the last 400 or so of which live in Devil's Hole National
Monument near Death Valley _ and other endangered species on
federal land. Clark County has said it plans to temporarily remove
more groundwater than is replenished over time, a process park
officials say can upset delicate ecological balances.
   ``The water source at Devil's Hole is so sensitive, the drop of
the water table there a matter of inches could expose the rock
shelf on which the algae grows that is the pupfishes' only source
of survival,'' said Ed Rothfuss, superintendent of Death Valley.
   The federal Bureau of Land Management, which controls most of
the land in Nevada, plans to protest most if not all the
applications, as do the National Park Service and the Fish and
Wildlife Service. When Clark County asks to use federal land, the
Bureau of Land Management has the power to order an environmental
impact statement, which the counties hope could stop the project
for good.
   ``Where the battle is going to be fought, probably in court, is
the decision of what is in the public interest,'' said Steve
Bradhurst, a planning consultant hired by the rural counties to
coordinate their attack.
   More than anything else, perhaps, it is the spectre of the Owens
Valley that most frightens the rural counties. Agents for Los
Angeles secretly bought up water rights in 1913; now Los Angeles
ships almost all the valley's water 250 miles south via two giant
aqueducts.
   The valley's thriving agricultural landscape was reduced to a
noxious dustbowl by the depletion of its water. Decimated and
nearly dead, it remains one of the oldest surviving symbols of
urban greed and contempt for the rural areas in the West. Despite
the water district's assurances that it would never happen,
Nevada's counties fear they might become the newest one.
   ``Las Vegas has to be crazy if they think we're going to lay
down and watch them do this to us,'' said Carver, who raises
alfalfa and cattle on his 860 acres in Nye County.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>MORE</NOTE>
</DOC>
