ID: 203	RANK: 65	SCORE: 8.245789
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900212-0033 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-02-12-90 0220EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r i PM-Mandela-Chronology     02-12 1022</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Mandela-Chronology,1061</SECOND>
<HEAD>Dates in the Life of Nelson Mandela</HEAD>
<HEAD>With PM-South Africa, Bjt</HEAD>
<DATELINE>JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Some important dates in the
life of Nelson Mandela:
   July 18, 1918 _ Mandela is born at Qunu, a small town in the
southeastern Xhosa-speaking region of Transkei, the son of a Tembu
tribal leader.
   1938 _ Mandela enters the University of Fort Hare. Two years
later, he is expelled for participation in a student strike and
moves to Johannesburg to avoid an arranged marriage.
   1941 _ Mandela completes work for his bachelors' degree by
correspondence and studies law at the University of the
Witwatersrand in Johannesburg.
   1944 _ Mandela, Oliver Tambo and Walter Sisulu help form the
Youth League of the African National Congress.
   1948 _ Mandela becomes national secretary of the ANC Youth
League. In 1950, he becomes its president.
   1952 _ Mandela is appointed ``volunteer-in-chief'' of the ANC's
Defiance Campaign and travels around the country recruiting
volunteers prepared to break apartheid laws.
   June 26, 1952 _ The Defiance Campaign opens. Mandela and 51
others break curfew regulations as their first act of defiance.
   December 1952 _ Mandela and Tambo open a law practice in
Johannesburg, the first black law partnership in the country. In
the same month, Mandela and others are arrested and charged under
the Suppression of Communism Act. He receives a suspended prison
sentence and is prohibited from attending meetings or leaving
Johannesburg.
   September 1953 _ Mandela's restrictions are renewed, and he is
required to resign offically from the ANC. Thereafter, his
leadership role is exercised secretly.
   Dec. 6, 1956 _ Mandela is among 156 political leaders arrested
and charged with high treason.
   June 1958 _ Mandela marries Winnie Nomzamo Madikizela, a social
worker, after divorcing his first wife, Evelyn.
   March 21, 1960 _ Sixty-nine black protesters are killed by
police in Sharpeville. A state of emergency is declared and the ANC
is outlawed.
   March 29, 1961 _ Mandela and all his co-defendants in the
treason case are acquitted after a 4{ year trial. He helped conduct
the defense. For the next 17 months, he lives as a fugitive and
becomes commander of the ANC's newly formed miitary wing, Umkhonto
we Sizwe (Spear of the Nation).
   May 1961 _ Working from underground, Mandela leads an effort to
organize a national stay-at-home strike on May 29-31.
   January 11, 1962 _ After being smuggled across the border,
Mandela makes a surprise appearance at the Pan-African Freedom
Movement Conference in Ethiopia. He then travels to Algeria for
guerrilla training and to London to meet leftist politicians.
   August 5, 1962 _ A few weeks after returning to South Africa, he
is captured and charged with incitement and leaving the country
illegally.
   November 1962 _ He is convicted and sentenced to five years in
prison.
   July 11, 1963 _ While Mandela is in prison, police raid the
ANC's underground headquarters at a farmhouse in Rivonia, outside
Johannesburg, and seize documents outlining a planned guerrilla
campaign.
   Oct. 20, 1963 _ The so-called Rivonia Trial begins, with Mandela
and eight co-defendants accused of sabotage and conspiracy to
overthrow the government.
   April 20, 1964 _ As the trial nears its end, Mandela gives his
famous statement from the dock. He explains the ANC's shift to
violence after six decades as a non-violent organization and says
he is prepared to die for the ideal of a democratic South Africa.
   June 12, 1964 _ Eight of the nine accused, including Mandela,
are sentenced to life imprisonment. Mandela is flown that night to
Cape Town and taken to Robben Island Prison, where he will spend
the next 18 years.
   May 16, 1977 _ As part of the crackdown that followed the June
1976 Soweto uprising, Winnie Mandela is banished to the remote
farming town of Brandfort, where she remains for seven years.
   June 13, 1980 _ An international ``Free Mandela'' campaign
culminates with a call for his release by the U.N. Security Council.
   April 1982 _ Mandela and Sisulu are transferred from Robben
Island to Pollsmoor Prison in Cape Town.
   May 12, 1984 _ Mandela and his wife are allowed their first
contact visit and embrace for the first time in 22 years.
   Jan. 31, 1985 _ President P.W. Botha offers to free Mandela if
he renounces violence. Mandela says he will not do so until the
government takes the initiative in dismantling apartheid and
granting full political rights to blacks.
   November 1985 _ Mandela undergoes prostate surgery. His
three-week stay in the hospital prompts rumors his release is
imminent.
   July 18, 1988 _ Mandela's 70th birthday is observed by
anti-apartheid activists worldwide. Most public commemorations in
South Africa are banned.
   Aug. 12, 1988 _ Mandela is hospitalized for tuberculosis.
   Dec. 6, 1988 _ After recovery Mandela is transferred to Victor
Verster prison farm in Paarl, north of Cape Town, where he lives in
a house and is allowed unrestricted family visits. Four of his
imprisoned co-defendants visit him before Christmas.
   Feb. 16, 1989 _ Leading anti-apartheid groups repudiate Winnie
Mandela, accusing her of complicity in the abduction and assault of
a 14-year-old black activist and of allowing her bodyguards to wage
a ``reign of terror'' in Soweto. Some of the bodyguards are charged
with the boy's murder.
   May 17, 1989 _ Mandela receives his bachelor of laws degree,
which he earned through correspondence study with the University of
South Africa.
   July 5, 1989 _ President P.W. Botha invites Mandela to his
official Cape Town residence for a 45-minute talk.
   July 12, 1989 _ Mandela's comments on his conversation with
Botha are broadcast on government-run radio and television.
   Oct. 15, 1989 _ Sisulu and four other co-defendants of Mandela
are freed unconditionally by F.W. de Klerk, who replaced Botha as
president in August.
   Dec. 13, 1989 _ Mandela confers with de Klerk at the
presidential office in Cape Town.
   Feb. 2, 1990 _ De Klerk legalizes the ANC and 60 other
organizations, vows to free all political prisoners, ends
restrictions on 374 individuals and places a moratorium on hangings.
   Saturday _ De Klerk announces that Mandela will be released from
prison the following day.
   Sunday _ Mandela leaves prison.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
