ID: 203	RANK: 79	SCORE: 7.849292
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880225-0006 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-02-25-88 0550EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r i PM-SAfrica-Chronology     02-25 0719</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-SAfrica-Chronology,0746</SECOND>
<HEAD>Chronology of Previous Crackdowns</HEAD>
<DATELINE>JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The government's ban on
political activity by opposition organizations was the most
extensive crackdown in 10 years. Here is a chronology of previous
efforts to restrict political opposition:
   1955 _ A national Peoples Congress was broken up and 156 black
leaders, including Nelson Mandela of the African National Congress
, and Pan-Africanist Congress leader Zeph Mothopeng were charged
with treason. All were acquitted after lengthy trials.
   March 21, 1960 _ The ANC and PAC called for peaceful protests
against laws requiring blacks to have passes to enter white areas.
Police gunfire killed 69 blacks at a rally in the Sharpeville
township.
   March 30, 1960 _ National state of emergency was declared,
granting police wide powers to prohibit gatherings, search people
and premises, and resort to force. New powers of detention without
trial were introduced and after the emergency ended, many of the
new powers became law.
   April 1960 _ Parliament outlawed the ANC and PAC.
   1961-62 _ ANC and PAC military wings were formed and a sabotage
campaign began.
   Aug. 5, 1962 _ Nelson Mandela was arrested and, in 1964,
sentenced to life in prison for treason and sabotage.
   June 16, 1976 _ An estimated 13,000 black students demonstrated
in Soweto to protest a requirement that lessons be taught in the
Afrikaans language. Police killed several students, touching off
riots and boycotts that sweep South Africa for more than a year,
claiming 575 lives by official count.
   Sept. 12, 1977 _ Steve Biko, founder of the Black Consciousness
movement, died in police detention.
   Oct. 19, 1977 _ Government banned 18 organizations plus the two
largest black newspapers, and detained 47 black leaders.
   May 1978 _ The Azanian People Organization was formed to replace
the Black Consciousness organizations banned after Biko's death.
   Aug. 20, 1983 _ The United Democratic Front was launched to
organize opposition to a planned tri-cameral parliament including
representation for all race groups except the black majority. Over
the next four years, the UDF became the largest legal
anti-apartheid group.
   September 1983 _ Riots broke out in Sharpeville, touching off
three years of widespread violence claiming 2,500 black lives.
   Feb. 19, 1985 _ Police began arresting UDF leaders on treason
charges. More than 22 were arrested.
   July 20, 1985 _ President P.W. Botha declared a state of
emergency in 36 black cities and towns, the first such declaration
since 1960. The emergency decrees covered about half the country.
In the first week, 1,000 activists were detained.
   December 1985 _ The Congress of South African Trade Unions was
formed to consolidate labor and political activity of black unions.
   March 7, 1986 _ The government lifted the state of emergency,
saying conditions have improved.
   June 4, 1986 _ The government banned all meetings related to
10th anniversary of Soweto riots.
   June 12, 1986 _ More than 1,000 anti-apartheid activists were
detained in pre-dawn raids. Botha imposed a nationwide state of
emergency, with broad press curbs, wide powers for police and
restrictions on many forms of protests and statements. An estimated
30,000 people were detained.
   Oct. 9, 1986 _ Government banned the UDF from receiving funds
from outside the country.
   Nov. 7, 1986 _ New orders were issued restricting activities of
white opponents, prohibiting them from participating in certain
organizations, publishing statements or attending rallies.
   December 1986 _ The press was banned from reporting many
anti-government statements or being within sight of protest
activity.
   May 6, 1987 _ The headquarters of Congress of South African
Trade Unions was blown up on election day. The Conservative Party
made big gains, becoming the official parliamentary opposition on
campaign against any apartheid reform.
   August 1987 _ National Union of Mineworkers, COSATU affiliate,
staged the most costly strike in country's history.
   Aug. 27, 1987 _ New curbs were announced to suppress
anti-government press, by threatening shutdown or in-house censors.
Seven newspapers were warned about articles government considers
objectionable.
   October 1987 _ Universities were told that funds will be cut if
they don't stop campus protests. ANC leader Govan Mbeki was
released after 24 years in prison.
   December 1987 _ The government restricted Mbeki to Port
Elizabeth, banning him from talking to press or addressing rallies.
   Feb. 24, 1988 _ The government banned political activity of 18
organizations, including COSATU, UDF and AZAPO.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
