ID: 262	RANK: 37	SCORE: 15.696523
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP881028-0234 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-10-28-88 2138EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u p AM-ComicFlap 1stLd-Writethru a0704 10-28 0712</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Comic Flap, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0704,0729</SECOND>
<HEAD>Newspapers Pull `Cathy' For Panning Bush</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: SUBS 4th graf, `Other papers ..., to ADD two more newspapers
rejecting strip; picks up 5th graf: `The Oklahoma ...</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Complaining that the comic pages are for comedy, not campaigning,
editors at a number of newspapers have refused to run installments
of the cartoon strip ``Cathy'' that are critical of the Reagan-Bush
administration.
   ``We don't think that our comics page is the place for political
endorsements on behalf of one party or the other,'' said Richard
Halicks, executive editor of the Messenger-Inquirer in Owensboro, Ky.
   His paper, which has not yet made its presidential endorsement,
said it will not publish any strips that take partisan political
stands.
   Other papers that have rejected the ``Cathy'' installments are
The Denver Post, The Evansville (Ind.) Courier, The Union Leader of
Manchester, N.H., and the Helena (Mont.) Independent Record. The
Daily Oklahoman went further, dropping the strip permanently.
   The Oklahoma City paper's managing editor, Frank Boggs, said its
management decided to discontinue ``Cathy'' ``for the same reason we
don't carry `Doonesbury' and we don't carry `Bloom County.'... We
don't pay cartoonists to do editorials.''
   The newspaper has endorsed Republican Vice President George Bush
for president over Massachusetts Gov. Michael Dukakis, a Democrat.
   The Honolulu Advertiser, while not dropping ``Cathy,'' is not
running the strips on its comic page. ``At The Advertiser, we
believe in Cathy's right to free speech; we'll run sample
`endorsement' strips tomorrow'' on the page opposite the editorial
page, its management said. ``Politics is getting plenty of space in
the rest of the paper; we don't want to spread it to the comic page,
too.''
   The paper has not made a presidential endorsement.
   The cartoon strip's criticisms are made by a character named
Andrea, who lost her job after having a baby because her business
did not offer maternity leave.
   In Friday's panels, Andrea complains the Reagan-Bush
administration has done nothing on several women's issues, including
equal pay, day care or impoverished single mothers. And yet, she
says, many people ``think things are going pretty well.''
   ``The government,'' she concludes, ``is like a baby. It looks
like a little angel when it's sleeping.''
   Contacted at her home in Los Angeles, the strip's creator, Cathy
Guisewite, said she anticipated her two-week political series would
generate controversy.
   ``I knew people did not look for the strip to be political
opinion,'' she said, noting that past strips dealt with the modern
woman's more personal problems, from inattentive boyfriends to
``cellulite and the disastrous bathing suit.''
   ``But I felt it was in keeping with the strip to comment on
women's issues that are at stake in this election. I really searched
my soul over drawing this strip. I knew I would be offending some
women readers I have who believe the extreme opposite.''
   Universal Press, a newspaper features syndicate that handles
``Cathy,'' received several complaints since the political series
began Monday, said editorial director Lee Salem.
   ``But it's that many complaints out of some 500 papers,'' Salem
said. ``I think that needs to be put into perspective.''
   Ms. Guisewite said she was not really certain why newspapers
would pull her strip and not others with a political point of view,
such as ``Doonesbury.'' But she said, ``I think people are having
problems with this series because I am coming out for a specific
candidate.''
   At the Evansville paper, managing editor Paul McAuliffe said,
``We are trying to cure the problem of a cartoonist using our comics
page to espouse a political view that is heavy-handed and in favor
of one party over the other.''
   He said the Courier was running two strips in the political
series out of sequence Friday and Saturday, and will substitute old
``Cathy'' strips for six current ones.
   The Courier endorsed Bush for president.
   The Union Leader ran an advisory Thursday on the comic page that
said: ``Readers looking for the comic `Cathy' will have to wait
awhile. Several installments scheduled for this week and next take
the strip into presidential political advocacy to an extent the
editor feels oversteps the strip's entertainment purpose. ...
`Cathy' will return as soon as she gets off her soap box.''
   The Union Leader's own editorial writers endorsed Bush.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
