ID: 262	RANK: 42	SCORE: 15.472024
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911218-0158
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911218-0158.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   REVIEW &amp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):
   The Satirist and the Inker
</HL>
<DATE>
12/18/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
PUBLISHING, INFORMATION SERVICES COMPANIES (PUB)
</IN>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   According to a Universal Press Syndicate promotional
pamphlet, "Doonesbury 1970-1990: What a Long, Strange Strip
It's Been," Gary Trudeau has been called "our leading
satirist and commentator" and "new, biting, pointed." So what
happens when someone else pokes fun at the great satirist?
His people don't laugh, and they get legal.
   In a November 21 Aside here called "Garry Vanilli," we
noted a report in Entertainment Weekly that for the past 20
years someone other than Mr. Trudeau has drawn the final
version of the cartoon. A Don Carlton of Kansas City has
toiled, largely anonymously, as the "inker" of the cartoon.
In response to a letter from Mr. Carlton, who said he inks
"Garry's roughs," Entertainment Weekly said it
"overemphasized" Mr. Carlton's role as ghosting for Mr.
Trudeau.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   In calls and letters to the Journal, Mr. Trudeau's
syndication service has now demanded retractions and
apologies, though our report accurately disclosed that Mr.
Carlton is the one whose finished product appears in the
strip. Then along came the lawyers for the syndicate,
threatening that Mr. Trudeau is not a "public figure" for
purposes of libel law. We'd be happy to litigate whether Mr.
Trudeau is more or less a public figure than targets of his
cartoons, but we're also happy to say that if our "Garry
Vanilli" headline and reference to Cartoon Synching suggested
that we consider Mr. Trudeau a complete fraud, we somewhat
overstated the case. We were using what an experienced
satirist might recognize as hyperbole, caricature, lampooning
or burlesque.
   Still, Mr. Trudeau's representatives elevate an
interesting subject -- how Doonesbury is created. At Yale,
Mr. Trudeau did all the work on his cartoon. However,
according to the Kansas City-based Universal Press Syndicate,
about a year after it started distributing the column -- some
20 years ago -- the syndicator arranged for Mr. Carlton to
help. Under this arrangement, Mr. Trudeau faxes pencil
sketches of the cartoon to Mr. Carlton in Kansas City, which
Mr. Carlton then turns into the finished cartoon.
   The use of an inker for art and lettering is rare for
political cartoonists, though fairly common for newspaper
comic strips, many of which credit the collaborator. Mr.
Carlton got no credit for the strip's 1975 Pulitzer Prize for
editorial cartooning.
   In our attempt to resolve the nowcompelling question of
who contributes how much of what to Doonesbury, we asked the
syndicate for a copy of past Trudeau pencil sketches to
compare with the final cartoon. Universal Press Syndicate
chose not to provide a copy. The syndicate's Lee Salem told
us he "couldn't see the relevance." Newsweek reported last
year that "Trudeau inexplicably destroys the true pencil
originals."
   Museum curators may be interested. There is in fact quite
a difference between the plain sketches of the pre-Carlton
Doonesbury cartoons collected in "The Original Yale Cartoons"
and the polished drawing and toning in today's strip.
Artistic styles can change over time, but in any case
Doonesbury's creation remains a far cry from, say, Thomas
Nast, whose Boss Tweed cartoons some 130 years ago for
Harper's Weekly reflected Nast's study at the National
Academy of Design.
   Aside from the question of Mr. Trudeau's
inker-who-gets-no-byline, there is these days discussion of
the satire itself. Some newspapers refused to print his
recent cartoons claiming that Vice President Quayle used
drugs in 1982 and that the government is somehow covering up.
A drug dealer who made this accusation broke down while being
interviewed on the subject for "60 Minutes" last year, as a
gambit to get out of jail. Mr. Trudeau has cited another
convict, Brett Kimberlin, now in jail for perjury, marijuana
smuggling and setting off bombs. The Los Angeles Times
published an editor's note saying they'd publish the strip,
but that "Times reporters have investigated the charges twice
in the last three years and found no evidence to substantiate
them."
   This past Sunday in a Washington Post article headlined
"Investigative Cartooning," Mr. Trudeau explained his views.
He said, "Political cartoons are a kind of reality cocktail
-- part fact, part fiction, part serious and part frivolous."
Readers, we guess, are left to figure out which parts of the
reality cocktail are fact and which are fiction.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
