ID: 262	RANK: 87	SCORE: 12.773726
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900529-0207 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-05-29-90 2159EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>a e BC-APArts:DickTracyMovie Adv01-03   05-29 1242</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-AP Arts: Dick Tracy Movie, Adv 01-03,1270</SECOND>
<NOTE>$adv01</NOTE>
<NOTE>$adv02</NOTE>
<NOTE>$adv03</NOTE>
<NOTE>For Release Weekend Editions, June 1-3, and thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>`DICK TRACY': Summer's No. 1 With a Bullet?</HEAD>
<HEAD>From Clues to Cues _ Dick Tracy Goes From Funnies to Film</HEAD>
<NOTE>With LaserPhoto</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By BOB THOMAS</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>LOS ANGELES (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   ``Dick Tracy'' the movie opens in nearly
2,000 theaters June 15 amid a media megablitz that rivals last
summer's ``Batman.''
   But will Warren Beatty's film about the square-jawed flatfoot
with the yellow fedora match the $252 million domestic gross
amassed by the caped crusader?
   Fingers crossed, Walt Disney Co. is tossing a huge premiere at
Disney World in Florida with 3,000 journalists expected to attend.
Following trailers that have appeared in 2,000 theaters since
Christmas, TV commercials will be unleashed on the nation's
networks. Merchandise, including Tracy's wrist-watch radio, will
flood the market.
   But skeptics point to some negatives.
   The comic strip Dick Tracy, once featured in 500 newspapers, now
appears in 150 and is little known by today's young, moviegoing
audience. And what's worse, the young crowd hardly knows Beatty,
53, who has made only two films in nine years, the last being the
quintessential bomb ``Ishtar.'' His other was the critically
acclaimed ``Reds,'' in 1981. He co-starred with Diane Keaton and
received an Academy Award for best director.
   Another problem is that although ``Dick Tracy'' co-star Madonna
may be a megastar in pop music, her last few movies were
megadisasters: ``Shanghai Surprise'' and ``Who's That Girl.''
   However, Barrie Osborne, executive producer of ``Dick Tracy,''
takes an upbeat view.
   ``The picture should attract a wide audience, because it can be
appreciated on different levels,'' he said in an interview. ``The
younger audience can enjoy the prosthetic characters (Pruneface,
Flattop, etc.), lots of action and beautiful color. And they
certainly know Madonna.
   ``The older audience can appreciate the wit and the appearance
of the film; much of it was derived from post-expressionist
paintings _ a `Three Penny Opera'-Bertolt Brecht look. ... And
Warren can bring that (older) audience as well.''
   Disney plans to issue graphic novelizations _ spruced-up comic
books _ of ``Dick Tracy'' to bring some sort of awareness to the
movie and character.
   ``Dick Tracy'' was the creation of Chester Gould, who drew
cartoons for Chicago papers. He began submitting comic strip ideas
to Joseph Patterson, publisher of the New York Daily News. Gould
finally clicked with ``Plainclothes Tracy,'' a hawk-nosed,
straight-arrow detective who Patterson renamed Dick. The strip made
its debut in the Detroit Mirror on Oct. 4, 1931, and the Daily News
eight days later.
   The comic strip featured blood, bullets and a menacing menagerie
of villains with memorable names. Flattop, Flyface, Measles,
Mumbles and more have threatened the intrepid two-fisted Tracy for
nearly 60 years.
   Tracy, his sweetheart Tess Trueheart and his grotesque enemies
became American icons in the 1930s and '40s. Low-budget movies and
serials and a short-run TV series helped fill the country's
fascination with Gould's denizens of the underworld.
   ``Dick Tracy,'' according to Beatty, had its beginnings in 1977
when producers Art Linson and Floyd Mutrux bought film rights from
the Tribune Syndicate. They made a deal with Paramount Pictures,
which enlisted Universal Pictures to co-produce. Various packages
were proposed, including projects with directors Steven Spielberg,
John Landis, Richard Benjamin and Walter Hill, and stars Harrison
Ford, Clint Eastwood, Richard Gere, Tom Selleck and Mel Gibson.
   Beatty became involved in 1983, but Paramount reportedly balked
at his pay demands. Five years later, Michael Eisner and Jeff
Katzenberg had moved from Paramount to Disney, and they revived
``Tracy'' with Beatty, adding certain fiscal restraints (``Ishtar''
cost $40 million).
   No one at Disney is saying how much ``Dick Tracy'' cost. Reports
range from $23 million to $30 million, considerably less than other
summer epics such as ``Total Recall,'' a reported $50 million;
``Die Hard 2,'' $60 million plus; and ``Days of Thunder,'' $55
million plus.
   ``It was a modestly budgeted film,'' insists executive producer
Osborne, a veteran of such bloated budgets as ``Apocalypse Now''
and ``The Cotton Club,'' both made by Francis Coppola.
   ``It was all filmed on the back lot and on sets that were
constructed. The film was made on budget _ within the contingency.''
   The contingency, according to reports, was that Beatty would
have to sacrifice part of his take for exceeding the budget.
   Osborne, 46, who began in films as a Directors Guild trainee,
joined ``Dick Tracy'' in September 1988. He had not worked
previously with Beatty, but he soon learned how the
producer-director-star operated.
   ``Warren acts as a conductor,'' said Osborne. ``He is very
collaborative, likes to get people together and listen to their
ideas. Then he selects what he wants.
   ``The look of the film was his idea. He wanted to achieve the
same quality of the Sunday comic strip. When there was a red, it
was the same red throughout, the same green, etc. It took some
convincing when (cinematographer) Vittorio Storaro and (production
designer) Richard Sylbert came on board.
   ``The limited-color pallette was hard on (costume designer)
Milena Canonero; she came in with cloth samples in 10 shades of
blue, 10 shades of green. Warren told her he wanted one shade only.
It was a tough challenge, but it helps the film. The production
design of most films is anchored in reality. Because of the
grotesque characters in `Dick Tracy,' we needed devices to tell the
audience that it was not reality.''
   A major attraction of ``Dick Tracy'' is the appearance of
well-known stars in wild makeups, Osborne believes. They go
unbilled, but their identities are an open secret: Al Pacino as mob
boss Big Boy Caprice, Dustin Hoffman as Mumbles, James Caan as Ribs.
   Among those who are billed: Glenne Headly, Tess Trueheart; Mandy
Patinkin, 88 Keys; Charles Durning, Police Chief Brandon; William
Forsythe, Flattop; Dick Van Dyke, the district attorney; Paul
Sorvino, Lips Manlis; Estelle Parsons, Mrs. Trueheart.
   Beatty considered several actresses for the role of the
seductive moll, Breathless Mahoney, before deciding on his close
friend Madonna, who argued that the role was similar to her own
onstage persona. Beatty agreed, eschewing the usual readings and
tests.
   Madonna's biggest challenge, she says in publicity material, was
singing the five Stephen Sondheim songs: ``It was a great learning
experience for me because when I first heard the music I panicked.
`I can't sing these songs; they're too difficult,' I said.
   ``But Stephen was very helpful and generous and gave me a lot of
encouragement. They are great songs. I wish I could write songs
like that.''
   Beatty's challenge, says Osborne, was directing the actor Warren
Beatty: ``It is actually not impossible to direct yourself. Warren
was able to watch a video playback after each scene, but mostly he
relied on the reaction of people around the camera, like Richard
(Sylbert) and Vittorio (Storaro).''
   ``Dick Tracy'' was tested before audiences away from major film
centers in large cities, and the reaction was ``great,'' said
Osborne. Only a few cuts were made to tighten the film to its
100-minute running time.
   Then the labs started turning out the 200 70mm, six-sound-track
prints that will play major theaters, and hundreds of 35mm,
two-track versions that will appear in the rest of film houses in
the United States and Canada.
   All that remains to be seen is whether or not Dick Tracy will go
from funnies flatfoot to big screen scream.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Weekend Editions, June 1-3</NOTE>
</DOC>
