ID: 262	RANK: 99	SCORE: 12.409006
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910328-0126
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910328-0126.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   There's No Truth to the Rumors
   Of an Expanded `Pepper...and Salt'
   ----
   By Marcus W. Brauchli
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
03/28/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   J.FCG
</CO>
<IN>
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
</IN>
<LP>
   TOKYO -- The Simpsons may soon have to anchor the news in
Japan to compete with the animated way one Japanese newspaper
has found of presenting the news.
   Drawing on the adage that a picture is worth a thousand
words, Fujisankei Group, one of the nation's biggest media
groups, put the funny page on the front page, and every other
page, to launch Comic Sankei, an all-comics newspaper.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Its reporters and artists produce full-color cartoon
strips on current events. If USA Today is the newspaper for a
TV age, Comic Sankei is the paper for the Saturday-morning
television generation.
   For now, the paper appears every two weeks as an
eight-page insert into 760,000 Tokyo-area copies of the
mass-circulation Sankei Shimbun. But Comic Sankei, which was
launched in February and is drawing a large following,
eventually hopes to attract a broader audience, especially
teenagers and young professionals.
   "We want those young people who don't regularly read
papers to find an interest," a Comic Sankei editor explains.
"That's why we prepared something that still has the flavor
of a newspaper even though it's comics."
   Comic books, manga in Japanese, already are enormously
popular. Although Japan has a 99% literacy rate, people like
to read manga: More than 1.5 billion comic books are sold
annually, featuring everything from recipes and romance to
business and pornography. Some firms put out employee
handbooks in comic-book form.
   There even have been current-events manga before. On the
day the Persian Gulf war broke out, a comic book titled "Iraq
vs. U.S.-Led Multinational Forces" hit the stands. The book,
which predicted gas attacks on some nations and thousands of
civilian casualties, sold out.
   In its first issue, Comic Sankei features a story about
the "Red Mafia," black marketeers in the Soviet Union who get
involved in a bloody shootout on Moscow's snowbound streets.
A legal-advice column warns readers to avoid extramarital
affairs: A tearful and embarrassed bank clerk discovers when
she visits her square-jawed lawyer that she has no recourse
against a married man who cheated her out of her savings
after proposing to her.
   Another strip, on the lives of people in sports, describes
the off hours of a sumo-wrestling referee.
   And, in a comic twist, the paper runs brief, illustrated
synopses of popular TV programs -- including children's
cartoons.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
