ID: 319	RANK: 20	SCORE: 28.194267
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910503-0175
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910503-0175.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
   Queens Trainer Atop the Sport of Kings
   ----
   By Frederick C. Klein
</HL>
<DATE>
05/03/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A9
</SO>
<LP>
   Louisville, Ky. -- Kentucky Derby entrants have been
dropping like Indian ponies in a John Wayne movie, something
you'd think would gladden the heart of Nick Zito. He's the
trainer of Strike The Gold, a Derby contender who (knock
wood) is approaching tomorrow's big race in good health, and
it might stand to reason that fewer competitors -- especially
those of the caliber of such scratches as Cahill Road, the
Wood Memorial winner, and Santa Anita Derby victor Dinard --
would improve his steed's chances.
   That, however, is not his view. "I'd like to see the
biggest, fastest field possible. Put 20 horses on the track
and let 'em battle," Zito declares. "My horse'll go around
them all at the end. If one stops in front of him, he'll jump
over him and keep running."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Zito bases his claim partly on Strike The Gold's
late-running style: The longer the race, and the more
competitive the pack, the better the chestnut colt with the
white forehead diamond has shown he likes it. His first win
was at a mile, and his next -- and best -- came April 13 in
the 1 1/8-mile Blue Grass Stakes at Keeneland, where he flew
by Fly So Free, last year's two-year-old champ and putative
Derby favorite, in the home stretch to prevail by three
lengths.
   But it also has to do with the trainer's general outlook.
He's a New Yorker, born and raised, and New Yorkers must
scrap for everything, down to space to walk on the sidewalks.
And if you're a New York horse trainer whose name ends in a
vowel, the competition only stiffens.
   "This is a wonderful country, where even an Italian kid
from Ozone Park {that's in Queens} can get horses to train.
As long as he works about twice as hard as anyone else," Zito
chuckles.
   In fact, Zito is just the latest in a long line of
Gothamites who have proven that one needn't grow up with
manure on his boots to thrive in the Sport of Kings. Hirsch
Jacobs was the leading trainer of the 1930s and '40s, and a
top owner and breeder for almost 30 years thereafter. Buddy
Jacobson, Johnny Campo and H. Allen Jerkens all saddled
winners of classic races. "Sunny Jim" Fitzsimmons, who
trained three Kentucky Derby winners, among others, was born
on the grounds of the old Sheepshead Bay race track in
Brooklyn, for heaven's sake.
   Zito, a sturdy, prematurely gray man of 43, wasn't born at
Aqueduct, a big Queens track, but he attended John Adams High
School just a few blocks away. His father, Tom, had been an
exercise rider who'd aspired to jockeyhood before bodily
growth and family responsibilities intervened. He introduced
young Nick to the races, and they quickly "took."
   Says the trainer: "I think the bug bit me about 15 minutes
after I first walked through Gate 15 at the Big A."
   At age 15, Zito went to work at Aqueduct for Jacobson as a
"hotwalker," leading horses that had just worked out in
endless circles around their barn. His apprenticeship later
included lengthy stints as a groom and assistant trainer with
Campo and LeRoy Jolley.
   He says the rotund Campo -- plus the 16-hours-a-day,
seven-days-a-week work schedule he put in then and now --
taught him most of what he knows about training horses, while
Jolley, a two-time Derby winner, provided valuable tips on
training horse owners. "Whatever you think a horse should do,
make it seem like it was the owner's idea," sums up Zito of
the latter's lessons.
   Zito struck out on his own in 1973 with a horse named Big
Red Devil, which he purchased from Jolley for $18,000. The
horse went on to win nearly $100,000. His fortunes grew as
more and better horses came his way; among his aces have been
the champion filly Ride Sally and Warfie, a top handicap
horse. Last year, he brought Thirty Six Red to the Derby
after a victory in the Wood.
   Zito's New York-based stable now numbers 27 racing
animals. His clientele has come to include horses owned by
Calumet Farm, the bluest blood of the bluegrass country.
That's how he first made the acquaintance of Strike The Gold,
a son of the famous Alydar.
   The colt was purchased last year by a group that included
Wall Streeter B. Giles Brophy, Thirty Six Red's owner. Brophy
et al. bought Strike The Gold from Calumet in a package with
six well-bred yearling fillies, and put them all in Zito's
hands. The trainer notes that while the sale price wasn't
announced, "it was enough to buy a nice place on Park Avenue
. . . and one in Southampton . . . and one in Palm Beach."
   Strike The Gold didn't race until October of his
two-year-old year, and in his debut, in a 3/4-mile sprint at
Belmont Park, near Queens in Nassau County, finished ninth,
21 lengths in arrears. But the next time out, at a mile, he
took a much-closer fifth place, and the next time won by 8
1/2 lengths.
   He has a third, two seconds and a first on his record this
year, along with earnings of $361,000, and he has improved
every time out. In March's Florida Derby at Gulfstream Park,
he finished a length behind Fly So Free. He made up 13
lengths in the stretch to beat that colt handily in the Blue
Grass.
   Zito thinks Strike The Gold will take well to the Kentucky
Derby's 1 1/4 miles, a longer distance than any horse in the
race will have run. He also thinks the colt will benefit from
his own mistakes, which contributed to Thirty Six Red's
ninth-place Derby finish last year.
   "We shouldn't have run Red in the Wood even if we did win
it. It was too tough a race for him just two weeks before the
Derby," he says. The three-week break between the Derby and
Strike The Gold's Blue Grass effort should be better, he
hopes.
   Zito brought a half-dozen horses besides Strike The Gold
to Kentucky this spring, campaigning at Keeneland in nearby
Lexington as well as at the Churchill Downs Derby site, and
his reasons were partly political. Kentucky is American horse
racing's spiritual home, and he says it's important for a
trainer, especially one from New York, to "show his face"
here from time to time.
   "You know what's funny?" he muses. "You can win all the
races and money in New York, but for respect you gotta come
here. You know what's funnier? A lot of New York people
believe that, too."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
