ID: 97	RANK: 40	SCORE: 4.403884
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910827-0078
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910827-0078.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Cabrillo Festival: New Music in Garlic Land
   ----
   By Mark Swed
</HL>
<DATE>
08/27/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10
</SO>
<LP>
   Santa Cruz, Calif. -- The most dramatic way to approach
Santa Cruz is by driving west, entering the coastal region
through Gilroy, the garlic capital of the world. The aroma of
a dozen Little Italys penetrates a car's closed windows. The
radio suddenly seems overrun by new-age music stations and
earnest '60s-style Berkeley radicals. When the ocean appears,
its spectacular beauty takes your breath away.
   It's a particularly appropriate route to take if you
happen to be headed for the Cabrillo Music Festival, where
pre-concert pastries include such local specialties as
garlic-bread pudding, where a Saturday-night concert can pair
a fine performance of a Benjamin Britten song cycle with the
work of a tedious new-age Turk, and where a pervasive '60s
informality can be both endearing and infuriating.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The Cabrillo festival was begun 29 years ago by the dean
of California composers, the wonderfully lyric and
unpredictably multicultural Lou Harrison, as a quirky
chamber-music series in a coffee-house hangout for Cabrillo
College students in nearby Aptos. It grew quickly, moving to
the college itself and later to a convivial circus tent on a
thrilling site at the Santa Cruz campus of the University of
California, overlooking the sparkling bay.
   In 1974, it hired an up-and-coming young conductor, Dennis
Russell Davies, then music director of the St. Paul Chamber
Orchestra. Mr. Davies put together a first-rate small
orchestra, invited world-class composers each year,
commissioned and premiered important work and created
arresting programs. One year, for instance, he featured works
in every concert by Ravel, the American eclecticist William
Bolcom and the eccentric Estonian minimalist Arvo Part.
   Meanwhile, however, the festival has fallen on leaner
times. For the first time in 17 years, Mr. Davies -- who is
now music director of the city of Bonn, as well as of the
Brooklyn Philharmonic and the American Composers Orchestra --
took a sabbatical, leaving his future involvement with the
festival uncertain.
   The festival itself has the same economic troubles every
small-scale arts organization has these days, and it has
hired new management to address the situation. No longer able
to afford its sensational site, it has moved to the unwieldy
and acoustically unflattering Civic Auditorium in depressing
downtown Santa Cruz.
   But the festival's spirit survives, and it continues to
offer two of the most thoughtful and original summer musical
weekends anywhere in America.
   Actually, this year's festival looked, on paper,
considerably more conventional than it generally does when
Mr. Davies programs it. But, thanks to a brilliant stroke, it
wasn't. By inviting the composer John Adams as guest
director, Cabrillo ensured that however common the
repertoire, it would be filtered through the sensibility of a
controversial composer who is also proving to be an
interesting conductor. He is best known for his operas "Nixon
in China" and the new "The Death of Klinghoffer," which
reaches the U.S. next month at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
Often cast as a minimalist, Mr. Adams employs minimalist
repetition as only one facet of his multistylistic approach,
which can include everything from American swing to
Schoenbergian dissonance. At Cabrillo, he showed himself to
be simply uncategorizable.
   He began the festival's second and more elaborate weekend,
the one I attended, with the American premiere of his "Eros
Piano," a moving short elegiac score for piano and chamber
orchestra that sounds a little bit like the '50s jazz of Bill
Evans meeting the mystical sweetness of Olivier Messiaen. He
followed that with the ravishing second act of Britten's
seldom-played ballet, "The Prince of the Pagodas," with its
glamorous orchestral imitation of Balinese gamelan. He wound
up the program with a performance of Stravinsky's
"Petroushka" that emphasized the music's rhythmic bite and
brash orchestral colors, unlike most glossy modern orchestral
accounts.
   It was a canny Cabrillo evening. Mr. Adams bowed toward
the multicultural impulses that have always characterized the
festival -- much of Mr. Harrison's music is inspired by the
gamelan. He offered a fresh look at Britten, a composer who,
like Mr. Adams, spent his career coming to his own individual
terms with modernism. And he presented some insight into his
own striking musical personality, which vacillates from the
gloomy to the glitzy in fascinating ways.
   Occasionally Mr. Adams's instincts went awry, however, as
they did in a big way on his weirdly devised Saturday-night
program. The first half consisted of a terrific performance
of Britten's stern, seldom-heard "Songs and Proverbs of
William Blake," sung with a riveting sensitivity to every
word by the baritone Sanford Sylvan and accompanied with
wondrous fluidity by the pianist Richard Goode. But it was
followed by nearly an hour's worth of needless noodling from
the Turkish-born Nazim Ozel, who plucks away on all 400
strings he has strung on a branch of a California live oak he
calls the "Semi-Civilized Tree."
   Earlier that day there was a delightfully noncondescending
family concert featuring the witty Tandy Beal &amp; Co., the
local choreographer collaborating with Mr. Adams for a
mysterious and mildly risque version of Milhaud's "La
Creation du Monde." The next evening was mixed: Mr. Adams led
a driving, properly disturbing account of Britten's "Sinfonia
da Requiem"; Mr. Sylvan and Mr. Adams became emotionally
overwrought in Mahler's "Kindertotenlieder"; Mr. Goode
offered one of his typically nuanced renditions of Mozart's
Piano Concerto No. 25, with Mr. Adams accompanying solidly.
   Missing, for the first time in memory, was anything by Mr.
Harrison, who still reigns as the informal paterfamilias of
the festival. But a CD of Mr. Harrison's gorgeous Third
Symphony, performed by Mr. Davies and the Cabrillo Music
Festival Orchestra, was just released on Music Masters. No
one else today writes orchestral music as rapturous as this,
or combines musical cultures as effectively. And no place is
better for producing such music as Cabrillo.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
