ID: 112	RANK: 81	SCORE: 14.268894
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890504-0232 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-05-04-89 2247EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>b a AM-SpaceShuttle 4thLd-Writethru a0870 05-04 1199</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Space Shuttle, 4th Ld - Writethru, a0870,1100</SECOND>
<HEAD>Magellan on Way to Venus</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: Combines pvs, new quotes about successful firing of rockets,
and rough separation of shuttle from external tank during launch</HEAD>
<HEAD>With LaserPhotos</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By HOWARD BENEDICT</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP Aerospace Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Atlantis' astronauts, safely in
orbit after a cliff-hanger weather delay, sent the Magellan
spacecraft streaking across the solar system Thursday night on a
$550 million mapmaking mission to Venus.
   The robot spacecraft, reviving an American planetary-science
program dormant for a decade, slipped from the shuttle's cargo bay
at 9:01 p.m. EDT and drifted into space.
   ``Magellan is deployed,'' reported shuttle commander David
Walker.
   An hour later, after Atlantis moved a safe distance away, both
stages of a spacecraft motor fired to start Magellan on a 456-day
journey to Venus, 158 million miles away. It will travel 806
million miles, looping 1{ times around the sun, before reaching and
orbiting its target in August 1990.
   ``While it's too early to tell about the major portion of
Magellan's mission, we're pleased it's gone so well so far,''
Walker replied when told both stages had fired.
   Minutes later Mission Control reported:
   ``Magellan is coming to life and is on a proper path toward
Venus, falling toward the sun.''
   Mission specialists Mark Lee and Mary Cleave, operating remote
controls inside the shuttle cabin, checked the health of the space
probe before sending a signal that spring-ejected it into its own
orbit while Atlantis soared over the Pacific Ocean 600 miles
southwest of Los Angeles.
   Magellan, the first planetary craft ever launched from a
shuttle, is to map up to 90 percent of Venus' cloud-shrouded
surface. Its high-resolution radar system is expected to produce
images of objects as small as a football field _ 10 times the
clarity of any previous pictures of the mysterious planet.
   The release of Magellan, the main task of the four-day flight,
came a little more than six hours after Atlantis thundered into
orbit 184 miles high.
   The launch was delayed 59 minutes by shifting clouds and winds
that had threatened the second postponement in six days. When
Atlantis finally left its pad, just five minutes remained in the
launch ``window'' dictated by the need to have the shuttle in the
proper position to dispatch Magellan to Venus.
   The launch team had advanced the countdown to the 5-minute mark
and held there, waiting for a break in the clouds that obscured a
runway near the launch pad where Atlantis would land in an
emergency.
   Chief astronaut Dan Brandenstein, flying a weather scout plane,
found a break, signaled the go-ahead, and the count was started and
carried down to the blazing liftoff.
   ``It was another cliff-hanger. I'm glad you stuck with it,''
acting NASA administrator Dale D. Myers said as he congratulated
the launch team.
   It was the 60th U.S. man-in-space flight, the 29th for the
shuttle and the fourth since the Challenger explosion more than
three years ago.
   ``Four of us are very happy to be back in space, and the fifth
one is very happy to be here,'' radioed Walker.
   Walker, pilot Ron Grabe and mission specialists Cleave and
Norman Thagard flew on previous shuttle flights. Lee is a rookie.
   ``Did somebody win the pool up there?'' mission control
commentator John Creighton asked the crew. ``We had only five
minutes left in the window.''
   ``We wouldn't want to push it any closer,'' replied Walker.
   The commander also reported Atlantis' separation from its
external fuel tank as it entered orbit was rougher than he
remembered on his first shuttle flight.
   ``It was more violent _ although I hate to use that word,'' he
said. ``It wasn't the soft separation I remembered from the
previous flight.''
   A launch attempt last Friday was halted with just 31 seconds to
go because of a short circuit in an engine fuel pump. Technicians
worked around the clock over the weekend to replace the pump and a
fuel line. NASA had to launch Magellan by May 28 or ground it for
two years until Earth and Venus were again in the proper alignment.
   Among tens of thousands who watched the rare afternoon liftoff
were some of the country's most renowned planetary scientists. They
have been waiting to resume solar system exploration since 1978,
when Pioneer-Venus was launched on the last U.S. planetary
expedition.
   Success for Magellan would signal the start of a science-rich
three-year period during which five major probes will be rocketed
into space.
   ``The overture, the symphony, begins with Magellan,'' said NASA
science chief Lennard Fisk. ``It's going to be a long symphony.
It's going to have a lot of crescendos ... Nobody is going to
question our leadership in planetary science again.''
   Fisk hailed Magellan's flight as the start of a ``second golden
age'' of space science. The first was the period from the mid-1960s
to the late-1970s when unmanned spacecraft for the first time were
launched to make closeup examinations of Venus, Mars, Mercury,
Jupiter, Saturn and Uranus.
   Looking ahead, Fisk said that in August the Voyager 2 spacecraft
launched in 1977 will take the first close look at Neptune after a
planetary odyssey that earlier took it near Jupiter, Saturn and
Uranus.
   In October, another Atlantis crew is to start the Galileo probe
on its way to Jupiter, the Hubble Space Telescope is scheduled for
launch from a shuttle early next year, Ulysses is to orbit the sun
in October 1990 and the Mars Observer spacecraft will be dispatched
in 1992 on an unmanned rocket.
   The planetary program had languished for 11 years because of a
combination of NASA budget cuts and the Challenger explosion that
delayed most of these missions more than three years.
   When Magellan reaches Venus in August 1990, it is to fire into
orbit and start its 243-day mapping assignment.
   ``The goal is to obtain radar images of at least 70 percent of
the planet,'' said Stephen Saunders, Magellan project scientist.
   The radar is designed to pierce Venus sulfuric acid clouds and
produce images showing features as small as 100 yards across, the
size of a football field. In comparison, two 1983 Soviet spacecraft
captured features about 1,200 yards across and the 1978
Pioneer-Venus could not distinguish anything smaller than 60 miles
across.
   ``Everything we have learned about planetary science says that
Venus is the planet most like Earth,'' Saunders said. ``A major
question is why Earth and Venus evolved so differently even though
at the beginning of the solar system they were almost identical.''
   The surface temperature of Earth's sultry twin is 900 degrees
Fahrenheit, hot enough to melt lead, and the atmospheric pressure
is 90 times greater than that on Earth.
   The atmosphere of Venus is composed mostly of carbon dioxide,
and the upper clouds, which hide the planet from view, are made up
of sulfuric acid droplets. Earlier exploration by unmanned
spacecraft have revealed continent-sized plateaus, deep canyons and
one of the highest mountains in the solar system.
   Saunders said the Magellan pictures might answer questions about
the extent of volcanic activity and settle disputes over whether
Venus once had oceans of water and whether it has shifting crustal
plates similar to those on Earth.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
