ID: 143	RANK: 8	SCORE: 19.373251
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP901231-0178 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NY-12-31-90 1329EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>a e BC-WKD--FilmReview Adv00   12-31 0875</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-WKD--Film Review, Adv00,1112</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv00</NOTE>
<NOTE>For Release Anytime</NOTE>
<HEAD>AP WEEKEND ENTERTAINMENT AND ARTS</HEAD>
<HEAD>At the Movies: `The Long Walk Home'; `Green Card'</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Films are currently in limited release nationwide, and will
open in more theaters.</NOTE>
<TEXT>
   ``The Long Walk Home'' (New Visions Pictures)
   
   Like ``Mississippi Burning'' in 1988, ``The Long Walk Home'' has
been assailed by some black leaders as being a distortion of the
struggle for civil rights in the South. Both films are told from
the white point of view, though ``The Long Walk Home'' appears to
offer more balance between the races.
   Taken on its artistic merits alone, ``The Long Walk Home'' is an
earnest, often affecting, curiously anticlimactic film. Its major
assets are two fully realized performances by accomplished
actresses, Sissy Spacek and Whoopi Goldberg.
   The setting of John Cork's script is Montgomery, Ala., in 1955,
when municipal buses were segregated and blacks were forced to sit
in the back. A seamstress named Rosa Parks decided one day that she
was too tired and took a seat at the front of the bus. She was
arrested, and Montgomery blacks staged a one-day boycott that grew
into a movement led by Martin Luther King Jr. Buses were integrated
a year later following a federal court order.
   In ``The Long Walk Home,'' nothing has changed in the social
structure of Montgomery since the institution of Jim Crow laws
following the Civil War and Reconstruction.
   The back-of-the-bus mentality prevails among the city's white
leaders, and the blacks are expected to know their place. The
decades of degradation well up, and blacks call a strike on the
municipal bus system, a prime source of revenue.
   Enter two reluctant heroines.
   Miriam Thompson (Spacek) is a well-to-do matron who accedes to
the wishes of her good ol' boy husband (Dwight Schultz). Odessa
Cotter (Goldberg) is her dutiful domestic, a woman who has never
challenged the social system.
   But Odessa believes the bus strike is the right thing to do. She
is willing to walk the nine long miles to and from work. Mrs.
Thompson sympathizes with Odessa and is increasingly appalled by
how her husband is influenced by his racist brother (Dylan Baker).
   The strike escalates into violence, and King's house is bombed.
Miriam Thompson decides to drive Odessa to work. Her act brings a
climax in her marriage and in the community.
   Inexpensively but caringly produced by Howard W. Koch Jr. and
Dave Bell, ``The Long Walk Home'' carries an emotional impact.
Spacek deftly portrays the ethical dilemma of Southern wife and
mother. In her most restrained performance, Goldberg again
impresses as one of the best actresses around. The other
performances are first-rate, especially Schultz as the husband who
is incensed to find his values questioned.
   Richard Pearce directs with a firm touch on the personal scenes,
which could have been overwrought. Only in the climax does he
stumble, reducing the issues to a simplistic level and mishandling
crowd scenes.
   The Miramax Films release of a New Visions Picture is rated PG
for language and intensity. Running time: 97 minutes.
   By Bob Thomas, Associated Press Writer.
   ---
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   ``Green Card'' (Touchstone)
   
   ``Green Card'' is a wisp of a movie, a harmless puff of smoke
that's pleasing to watch and quickly forgotten.
   Gerard Depardieu stars as Georges, an illegal alien from France
who marries a stranger, Bronte (Andie MacDowell), so he can receive
a green card and live in Manhattan. Bronte has her own reasons for
marrying. A horticulturist, she wants to purchase an apartment with
a greenhouse and reasons that having another name on the lease will
persuade the co-op board to let her in.
   It works, at first, but when immigration officials become
suspicious, Georges and Bronte are forced to live together so they
can learn as much as possible about each other and present
themselves as a true couple.
   Georges, with shaggy hair and black, baggy pants, is earthy and
loveable. He smokes, he eats fatty food, he loses his temper, he
hates instant coffee. He's charming, but also cynical: he ran away
from home as a child and spent a brief time in jail (Depardieu had
the same experiences in his own life).
   Bronte, who favors green, baggy pants, is well-to-do and
idealistic. She is passionate about the environment, and especially
about her garden. She's very clean and a little repressed, not
unlike her character in ``sex, lies and videotape.'' ``I am like a
gutter, and you are like a plant!'' Georges shouts at her at one
point.
   This is the comedy of the mismatch, a reworking of ``It Happened
One Night,'' ``Woman of the Year,'' ``The Goodbye Girl'' and many
others, when opposites are thrown together and eventually attract.
   Director Peter Weir takes a low-key approach, applying the same
thoughtful style of last year's ``Dead Poets Society,'' offering
quiet shots of MacDowell watching the rain and presenting a
Manhattan so golden you'd think the lens was dipped in corn oil.
Weir also wrote and produced the film.
   ``Green Card'' is a time-killer for Depardieu, who likes to make
three or four movies a year and can currently be seen in the far
more demanding ``Cyrano de Bergerac.''
   But the French actor, in his first predominantly
English-speaking role, does get the most out of a slim part,
showing wonderful timing and giving the film a sweet, offbeat
quality. The scenes in which Georges and Bronte concoct love
letters and put together an album of phony wedding and honeymoon
pictures are especially funny, such as when Georges pretends he's
writing from Africa and complains the elephants are keeping him
awake.
   The film wants to be liked - and succeeds - but the touch is so
light it leaves no mark. Even as Georges faces deportation, there
is no real tension in ``Green Card,'' no demands made of the
audience, nothing to think about when it's over, a sweet dream that
fades away after the lights go on.
   The Touchstone Pictures Release is rated PG-13. Running Time:
108 minutes.
   By Hillel Italie, Associated Press Writer.
   ---
   Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
   G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
   PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be
suitable for children.
   PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for
children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young
children.
   R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult
guardian.
   NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Release Anytime</NOTE>
<TEXT>
</TEXT>
</DOC>
