ID: 293	RANK: 90	SCORE: 11.835905
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910408-0022
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910408-0022.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   What's News --
   World-Wide
</HL>
<DATE>
04/08/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<LP>
   BAGHDAD ACCEPTED a U.N. truce resolution and more U.S.
troops withdrew.
   In a letter to the Security Council, Iraq said Saturday it
intends to comply with the resolution, though it complained
about the terms. Yesterday, thousands more American soldiers
left southern Iraq and the Gulf, and another U.S. aircraft
carrier headed home. In northern Iraq, U.S. military planes
air-dropped supplies to Kurdish refugees, while Iraqi troops
were said to have launched a new offensive against the Kurds.
Turkey said it had allowed up to 200,000 Kurds to cross over
from Iraq. Meanwhile, Baker began a round of Arab-Israeli
diplomacy.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The emir of Kuwait pledged to restore parliamentary
democracy and to hold elections by the end of 1992. He also
said he would consider the possibility of giving political
rights to women.
   ---
   Soviet Georgia's president warned Gorbachev of a general
strike in the republic if Moscow doesn't withdraw troops from
the South Ossetia region. Gamsakhurdia contended that
Georgian villages close to the disputed area were being
attacked by Ossetian extremists who had the backing of Soviet
Interior Ministry forces.
                                                                                                       

   A new Moscow police chief was named by Yeltsin's Russian
Federation government, but he was barred from taking office
by Soviet central authorities, who appointed an Interior
Ministry general to the post. It was the latest confrontation
between the Kremlin and Yeltsin, a Gorbachev rival.
   ---
   Thousands of Zulus marched in Johannesburg at what were
meant to be peace rallies, but South African police said nine
people died in the wake of the gatherings. The Inkatha
Freedom Party supporters waved spears and other tribal arms
in defiance of the rival African National Congress, which has
sought to outlaw such weapons.
   ---
   A balky observatory antenna was fixed during an emergency
space walk by two NASA astronauts who ventured outside the
earth-orbiting shuttle Atlantis, launched Friday. The space
walk was the first by Americans since 1985. The repair job
made it possible to release the $617 million Gamma Ray
Observatory into space a few hours later.
   ---
   Roman Catholic cardinals pledged to step up the fight
against abortion and euthanasia and urged Pope John Paul II
to issue a new document spelling out the threats to human
life. In a closing statement of a three-day meeting in
Vatican City, the 112 cardinals decried society's
increasingly "permissive mentality" toward abortion.
   ---
   Former Sen. John Tower died Friday in a commuter plane
crash near Brunswick, Ga., that also killed his daughter and
21 other people. Tower, 65, a four-term Republican from
Texas, had served as chairman of the Senate Armed Services
Committee. Two years ago, his colleagues rejected his
nomination as Bush's defense secretary.
   ---
   Bush and Mexico's Salinas reaffirmed their commitment to a
free-trade pact. However, Bush acknowledged after brief talks
with the Mexican president in Houston that the White House
has "a big selling job to do" to persuade congressional
skeptics concerned about losing jobs to Mexico's labor
market.
   ---
   The Los Angeles City Council voted Friday to overrule the
city's Police Commission and to take steps that could allow
Police Chief Daryl Gates to return to work. The commission
had suspended Gates with pay during an investigation of the
March 3 beating of a black motorist by white officers.
   ---
   South Korea announced it will formally seek to join the
U.N. this summer and urged North Korea to request separate
membership, saying this shouldn't hinder eventual
reunification. Pyongyang has opposed separate U.N. membership
of the two Koreas, saying that it would perpetuate the
division of the Korean peninsula.
   ---
   Thornburgh said Bush might consider dropping his
opposition to the Brady Bill gun-control legislation in
exchange for congressional approval of the administration's
crime bill, which includes a federal death penalty. The U.S.
attorney general told CNN there could be possible
"bargaining" in Congress regarding the two bills.
   ---
   Cuban transport engineers worked to reopen the country's
main railway line following a derailment Saturday that killed
55 people and injured about 200. The crash was described as
Cuba's worst train accident.
   ---
   Germany's Kohl received a mixed reception during his first
visit to former East Germany since just after German
unification. Some protesters in Erfurt threw eggs at the
chancellor and his wife, accusing him of not keeping his
promise to quickly bring economic prosperity to the east. But
Kohl otherwise met no open hostility.
   ---
   The U.S. infant mortality rate showed its biggest drop
since 1981 last year, according to figures due for release
today. The rate of deaths among babies less than a year old
fell to 9.1 for every 1,000 live births, a 6% decline from
1989, according to the National Center for Health Statistics.
   ---
   Albanians voted in runoff elections that either will grant
the communists unchecked power in Parliament or give the
opposition a major role in governing the country. There was
little evidence of the unrest that marked the March 31
initial round of Albania's first multiparty vote since the
1920s.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
