ID: 246	RANK: 27	SCORE: 8.447012
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900325-0049 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-03-25-90 1650EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a AM-Telescope-Squirrels     03-25 0874</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Telescope-Squirrels,0902</SECOND>
<HEAD>Like Snail Darter, Red Squirrel Caught in Environmental Limelight</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By ARTHUR H. ROTSTEIN</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>TUCSON, Ariz. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   They're few in number, and their sky-island
habitat has long lain undisturbed. But 180 tiny Mount Graham red
squirrels could prove a big obstacle to construction of the world's
most powerful optical telescope.
   The University of Arizona wants nothing more than to coexist
with the mountaintop rodents, an endangered subspecies. But the
builder of a $200 million observatory atop 10,709-foot Mount Graham
is having to tread carefully.
   The 8-ounce squirrel, or Tamiasciurus hudsonicus grahamensis,
has touched off a two-year ecological controversy that has split
the scientific community, pitted one federal agency against
another, and drawn environmentalists into a battle against
telescope proponents from as far away as the Vatican.
   U.S. District Judge Alfredo C. Marquez will hear closing
arguments Monday afternoon on whether a third federal biological
study is needed before construction begins this year on two smaller
telescopes.
   If all goes smoothly, the Columbus Project, a 600-inch-diameter
device expected to be six times more powerful than any telescope in
use, will be built in the mid-1990s on the 8.6-acre tract in the
Pinaleno Mountains 110 miles northeast of Tucson.
   Just 180 of the squirrels, which have been traced back 10,000
years or more, are believed to remain, and Mount Graham is their
only known habitat.
   Opposition groups say perching the telescopes on Emerald Peak,
one of Mount Graham's three peaks, can only assure that the
squirrels become a biological footnote.
   ``It's biologically indefensible to develop on that mountain,''
said Dr. Robin Silver, spokesman for the Maricopa Audubon Society.
``We will win this case. The question is will we win it before the
university wreaks too much destruction on the mountain?''
   The university, argued its vice president for research, Michael
Cusanovich, ``is the most likely participant to provide the basis
for the Mount Graham red squirrel's recovery.'' It spent more than
$200,000 last year on research and monitoring and will put aside
more than $100,000 annually for several years, he said.
   A two-mile access road for the Mount Graham International
Observatory has already been built. But opponents have so far held
up construction of the observatory buildings.
   The squirrels apparently have some militant supporters. One
mailed an anonymous death threat to telescope proponent Conrad
Istock, head of the University of Arizona's ecology and
evolutionary biology department.
   Eleven of the department's 28 faculty members and 41 of 58
graduate students have voiced opposition to the observatory. But
students at the 38,000-student university later voted down by 57
percent to 43 percent a nonbinding initiative opposing the
observatory. Fewer than 5,000 students voted.
   In July 1988, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service concluded in a
biological report for the U.S. Forest Service, the site's landlord,
that the telescopes could coexist with the squirrel.
   Arizona's congressional delegation then pushed through
legislation ordering the Forest Service to grant the university a
special-use permit allowing construction.
   But an environmental coalition intervened with a lawsuit.
Naturalists have staged demonstrations outside the Vatican Embassy
and the Smithsonian Institution in Washington.
   The university says it will advertise soon for construction bids
for the two smaller telescopes, one of which is partly financed by
the Vatican Observatory. Pope John Paul II is among the Vatican's
astronomy buffs.
   Two biologists who took part in the Fish and Wildlife Service
study alleged in depositions that officials at the agency ordered
researchers to argue in favor of construction.
   The agency's regional director, Mike Spear, upheld the study as
``biologically sound.'' But, last month, after the construction
site was designated as a critical habitat, Spear called for a
review study.
   However, the Forest Service says the congressional act
authorizes the first three telescopes and exempts them from further
review.
   Spear said the Endangered Species Act makes clear there should
be reconsultation before change in the habitat, while Forest
Service regional chief Dave Jolly said Congress intentionally
skirted the Act.
   University officials contend that poor cone crops in recent
years have hurt the squirrel population, that hunting, logging, use
of off-road vehicles and Christmas tree-cutting have been stopped
because of the planned observatory, and that 60 to 80 acres will be
reforested.
   Silver, who is a wildlife photographer, likened the squirrel's
predicament to that of the snail darter, a 3-inch fish that delayed
the Tennessee River dam project for six years during the 1970s
before it was transplanted to the Hiwassee River.
   ``They're very similar in that the developmental groups managed
to ignore ecosystem destruction and focused the issue on one
creature that was easily demeaned in their project,'' Silver said.
   The dam was completed with Congress first amending the
Endangered Species Act in 1978 to allow an exemption from the law,
then exempting the dam from any law that would hinder its
construction, he said.
   Dan Campbell, director of the Nature Conservancy in Arizona,
says Mount Graham has Arizona's greatest density of black bears,
and is the farthest south that elk can be found in the United
States.
   ``It's the general habitat which we really need to protect and
conserve in order to protect the species,'' he said. ``It's like a
lifeboat. If you keep the lifeboat from sinking, then the species
stay there.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
