ID: 246	RANK: 46	SCORE: 8.156558
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910516-0165
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910516-0165.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Water Enough for Farmer and Fish
   ----
   By Terry L. Anderson
</HL>
<DATE>
05/16/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14
</SO>
<IN>
ENVIRONMENT (ENV)
</IN>
<NS>
ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)
</NS>
<LP>
   If you thought the northern spotted owl caused conflict in
the Pacific Northwest, watch the fate of the Snake River
sockeye. This salmon, one of five salmon species in the
Columbia River system, wasn't seen last fall in the upper
reaches of the Snake River, where it normally goes to spawn.
The National Marine Fisheries Service has recommended that it
be listed as an endangered species; if the interior secretary
does so, a battle over allocation of water in the Columbia
basin will begin.
   Sockeye salmon are in trouble because of the eight major
dams on the Columbia River system. Fish ladders help adult
salmon returning from the sea get around the dams, but young
salmon trying to migrate to the sea in the spring are sucked
into the turbines. Many salmon are killed by predators,
disease and warm water when they are trapped in slack water
behind the dams. All told, nearly 90% of the young salmon are
lost, mainly because water flows are insufficient to push the
juveniles to the Pacific.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   If the sockeye is listed as an endangered species, dam
operators will be required to let more water flow downstream.
That means the water would not be stored in the spring to
meet peak summer demand. As a result, electricity prices
could rise as much as 33%, and ranchers and farmers could
lose several million acre-feet of water that now irrigate
orchards, vineyards, forage and crops.
   There is not enough water for both salmon and man because,
throughout the Columbia system, vast federal subsidies have
led to overbuilding of dams and overuse of water. Irrigators
pay only a tiny fraction of the construction costs of these
dams; and on even that payment they have a grace period of 10
years during which they are exempt from repaying federal
loans. And when they finally do repay, it is without
interest. Such concessions add up to a more than 90% subsidy
of agricultural water users. Electricity consumers are not so
lavishly supported by the taxpayer, but Columbia system rates
are still as much as 40% less than elsewhere in the country.
With payments so low, the incentive has been irresistible to
expand irrigation and energy production far beyond the level
people would demand if they were paying the true cost.
   In the past, environmentalists and sports and commercial
fishermen -- people who had an interest in preserving salmon
-- were largely outside the political process that made
decisions about water supply and allocation. Now that they
have won political power through the Endangered Species Act
and popular opinion, they are preparing to use that power in
the same way that farm interests once did -- to seize control
of the Columbia's water for their own interest.
   But rather than more political allocation of water, the
sockeye salmon needs a healthy dose of free market
environmentalism. By establishing clear, transferable rights
to water, which do not exist now, a market can evolve. Rather
than lose their water, some irrigators might give it up
willingly for an attractive price, tailoring their uses more
carefully and perhaps wasting less. Some electric utilities
might buy peak power elsewhere. The adjustments would be made
voluntarily and judiciously, without the rancor caused by
forced transfers.
   Consider the Gunnison River in Colorado. Because rights to
its water were clearly owned, the Nature Conservancy has
succeeded in protecting an endangered fish, the humpback
chub. Pittsburgh and Midway Coal Co. had held rights to
Gunnison water, which it had planned to divert for oil-shale
development. The Nature Conservancy persuaded the coal
company to transfer to it 20,000 acre-feet of water, which it
then left in the stream. Similarly, the Nature Conservancy
has purchased water from irrigators to increase the amount of
water that flows through the parched marshland of the
Stillwater National Refuge in Nevada.
   Unfortunately, rights to Columbia River water cannot be
traded among interested parties. If it were legal for
organizations interested in the preservation of salmon to
purchase water rights, they could bid for low-valued water
and leave it in the stream. But today in the Pacific
Northwest, environmentalists have only one option -- to use
their political power to wrest water from other uses.
   That power, however, might not prevail for long. In 1992
the Endangered Species Act will be up for renewal by
Congress. Given the tremendous conflict the act has
generated, it will be under severe challenge. Rep. William
Dannemeyer (R., Calif.) is considering introducing
legislation that would enable water marketing on federal
projects. Such progressive legislation offers a much better
way of preserving stream and wetland habitat.
Environmentalists have embraced water marketing elsewhere
because it reduces waste. It is time for them to put their
money where the endangered species are.
   ---
   Mr. Anderson, an associate of the Political Economy
Research Center in Bozeman, Montana, is the co-author of
"Free Market Environmentalism" (Pacific Research Institute,
1991.)
</TEXT>
</DOC>
