ID: 94	RANK: 25	SCORE: 5.927781
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880818-0151 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-08-18-88 1535EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u p PM-CVN--Quayle-Guard 6thLd-Writethru a0674 08-18 1104</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-CVN--Quayle-Guard, 6th Ld-Writethru, a0674,1100</SECOND>
<NOTE>Eds: Insert Dornan quote in 10th graf; corrects Vietnam war dead
in 26th graf.</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By JOAN MOWER</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>NEW ORLEANS (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   A retired executive of the Pulliam family
newspaper company said today that he made phone calls to ease the
way of Republican vice presidential candidate Dan Quayle into the
Indiana National Guard during the Vietnam War.
   Senior aides to George Bush were ``continuing to explore'' the
controversy even as Quayle's nomination approached. Campaign
spokeswoman Alixe Glenn said, ``Not a single thought is being
given'' to dropping Quayle from the ticket.
   In 1969, Quayle was 22, no longer deferred from the draft and
vulnerable to being conscripted and sent to Vietnam. National Guard
units were rarely activated for Vietnam duty, and many men joined
the guard as a way to avoid the draft and likely Vietnam duty.
   Quayle is a member of the Pulliam family which controls a number
of newspapers including the Indianapolis News. The question of how
Quayle joined the guard arose as every aspect of Quayle's life came
under intense scrutiny on the day he is to be nominated as Bush's
running mate at the Republican National Convention.
   Retired Maj. Gen. Wendell C. Phillippi _ who was managing editor
of The News and worked for Quayle's grandfather, Eugene C. Pulliam
_ said he contacted guard acquaintances on behalf of Quayle.
   Phillippi, according to The News, said he called on his
``multitude'' of friends within the guard when Quayle applied in
1969.
   ``I was asked about Dan Quayle's abilities and capabilities, and
I recommended him very highly ... as I did with many other men,''
Phillippi told the News in a telephone interview from his home in
Brown County, Ind.
   Marilyn Quayle said her husband ``wasn't a draft dodger.''
   Quayle, a hardliner on defense matters, has said he sought guard
duty so he could attend law school. A Bush aide said the matter was
discussed with Quayle during the process that led to his selection
for the Bush ticket, and Quayle had denied that he used influence
to gain admittance to the Guard.
   Rep. Bob Dornan, co-chairman of Bush's campaign in California
said, ``it requires a Checkers-like speech (of contrition), and he
must do it _ must do it _ quickly, before this gets out of hand.''
   Well after midnight today, the Bush inner circle met to discuss
Sen. Quayle's performance on the first day of his vice presidential
candidacy _ a day dominated by questions about the Indianan's
qualifications to be a heartbeat from the presidency, and about his
military record.
   Quayle's press aide, Jeff Nesbit sought this morning to describe
the sequence of events in 1969.
   On the issue of whether telephone calls were made to try and get
Quayle in the Guard, Nesbit said the ``collective recollection'' of
Quayle and his father ``was that phone calls may have been made on
his behalf.'' He did not elaborate.
   Nesbit said the reason that Quayle stumbled at questions about
his military record was that ``his recollection of what happened
back then is a little fuzzy.''
   Robert Teeter, who oversaw the vice presidential selection
process which resulted in Quayle's selection on Tuesday, had said
Wednesday that his military service had been raised during the
interview process.
   ``The question was, I believe, was there any pull or some
influence in some way for him to get into the National Guard. My
impression is the answer is absolutely not,'' said Teeter. ``He, at
some point said, `I simply applied, like anyone else.''' said
Teeter.
   If there were calls made on Quayle's behalf, it may not have
been necessary. John Owens, adjutant general of the Indiana
National Guard from January 1969 until August 1972, said the
Indiana ``had vacancies galore'' in its guard units during his
years.
   However, John S. Anderson, adjutant general immediately before
Owens, told the Indianapolis News there was a waiting list for
Guard service.
   Quayle told NBC that in 1969 he had ``let a number of people
know I wanted to get into the National Guard,'' and added, ``If
phone calls were made, I can't answer, I don't know the specifics
of that.....''
   ``No one should be ashamed of guard service,'' Phillippi said.
``And he (Quayle) should not be called a draft dodger because he is
subject to call at any time of the day or night during his entire
enlistment.''
   Bush's campaign chairman, James Baker III, appeared on ABC-TV
today and said Quayle had ``basically said, `Look, I really wanted
to serve in the guard. I was anxious to do that. ... I wanted to go
to law school, I was anxious to do that, and if some people helped
me, they helped me.''
   Added Baker: ``I think, frankly, he's talking about help from
his family, which really wasn't particularly unusual, given the
circumstances of the time, given the attitude, if you will, of many
baby boomers at the time.''
   Baker promised there would be ``full disclosure'' of the issue.
``We are continuing to explore it with him,'' he said. Baker led
the meeting of key Bush strategists who critiqued Quayle's
Wednesday performance and discussed _ among other things _ how to
defuse the National Guard controversy.
   George W. Bush, Bush's eldest son, told reporters today that
``the thing that's important is he didn't go to Canada. ...
Remember, in 1968, Canada was an option. He didn't go. Let's keep
it in generational perspective.''
   The Indiana senator was not a nationally known figure at the
time Bush tapped him.
   On Wednesday, Quayle called the questioning of his decision to
join the guard ``a cheap shot. I have a deep affection for those
men and women who sacrificed their lives in Vietnam.'' More than
58,000 Americans were killed in the war.
   And he told CNN: ``I was willing and ready to serve my country.
I chose to serve my country in the National Guard like millions of
other people.''
   Former Gov. Edgar Whitcomb, a Republican, denied a report that
he had intervened for Quayle.
   ``No, I never heard of it,'' he said of Quayle's interest in
joining the guard. He said Quayle _ who later was a junior aide in
his office _ was not known to him at the time he was seeking a
Guard appointment.
   ``I would say for sure no one contacted me about it and I had no
letter from someone trying to get him into the National Guard,'' he
said.
   Whitcomb said the guard was ``certainly no refuge for draft
dodgers; we had units called and they served active duty in
Vietnam.'' Quayle's was not among them.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
