ID: 94	RANK: 29	SCORE: 5.688684
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880215-0220 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-02-15-88 1342EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>s a BC-APN--SpeechWriters Adv28-1stAdd   02-15 0957</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-APN--Speech Writers, Adv 28-1st Add,0977</SECOND>
<NOTE>$adv28</NOTE>
<HEAD>AGENCIES AND RADIO OUT</HEAD>
<NOTE>For Release Sunday, Feb. 28</NOTE>
<HEAD>WASHINGTON: farm foreclosures.</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   ``We're paid for our anonymity,'' said Landon Parvis, one of the
busiest ghostwriters around. ``It's almost like a doctor-patient
relationship.''
   Never was that confidentiality more strictly obeyed than in the
presidential demise of Sen. Joseph Biden of Delaware. His writers
said nothing. Asking them was like asking a team of surgeons which
one killed the patient.
   ``I made some mistakes,'' Biden said without further explanation
of the mysterious osmosis by which the same words, images and
family memories traveled incognito from Neil Kinnock, who wanted to
be prime minister of Great Britain, to Joe Biden, who wanted to be
president of the United States.
   Safire, now a New York Times columnist and reigning scholar on
speechmanship, thinks Biden may have suffered self-hynosis in the
wearying blur of the campaign and began to believe that Kinnock's
thoughts were his thoughts.
   Safire points out that he and other presidential writers over
the years have borrowed speech patterns and rhythms from each other
without attribution. He does concede that Biden's loan was a case
of ``heavy lifting.''
   Sen. William Proxmire of Wisconsin asked what difference does it
make, anyway? Most candidates and many politicians use speech
writers. Is it more moral to buy a speech and claim it as your own
than to steal it?
   In the flurry of charge and counter-charge, only Al Haig
appeared safely immune among the candidates. Who would think to
accuse him of literary theft, this square-jawed warrior who fires
his crossbow at the State Department for ``Cheshire-catting,'' who
rises fearlessly against ``bureaucratic amoking'' and is ready to
``caveat that'' or ``context this''?
   Abe Lincoln, the president who delivered the greatest speeches,
wrote his own. Of the two best orators of their time, Franklin
Roosevelt used a phalanx of ghosts and envied Winston Churchill for
being able to write his own.
   George Washington's three helpers went on to become presidents
themselves. No presidential writer since has done quite as well,
although Judson Welliver now enjoys something of a revival more
than 60 years after his time. There is now a Judson Welliver
Society of former White House writers.
   Who, you may well ask, was Judson Welliver? He's the fellow who
went to work for Warren Harding as a ``literary clerk'' and became
the first full-time presidential ghost in history. He also wrote
for Calvin Coolidge. To no avail. Alice Longworth still thought of
Coolidge as someone ``weaned on a pickle.''
   Speech writers are torn by a conflict of code and ego. They
readily tell you that as a result of getting to know their man, his
ideas, tastes and speech patterns, the text they finally give him
is basically ``his.''
   This is their answer to Lippman. The words may be theirs; the
thinking is the client's. Also, says Robert Shrum, who writes for
Rep. Richard Gephardt, the American people would scarcely approve
of their busy president consuming three days to write a speech.
   But the hired hands also yearn for a statute of limitations on
the law of silence so that students of history will know who wrote
what. A writer and his words are not soon parted. At Nixon's first
inaugural, Safire found himself wandering around the edge of the
crowd silently mouthing his lines as the president spoke them.
Embarrassed, he moved on and there was Buchanan mouthing his lines.
   All agree it would be difficult to write for someone they
disliked. In this respect, the busiest is the most ecumenical;
Landon Parvin writes for Ronald Reagan, Nancy Reagan, corporate
heads, other Republicans AND some Democrats who suit his ideology
but wouldn't care to have that public.
   Last year, Parvin's work for Reagan ran the gamut from the
solemnity of major speeches on Iran-Contra and AIDS to scores of
one-liners on the order of: ``It's true hard work never killed
anybody, but I figure why take the chance.''
   Washington is a city that consumes humor almost as fast as
taxes. Candidates, officeholders, lobbyists and rising bureaucrats
hunger for it. The Kennedys have been known to call a comic off the
floor of a Las Vegas nightclub for a quick fix for the Gridiron and
other local festivals.
   Mark Shields, columnist and occasional supplier, notes changes
in the humor market:
   ``We're not nearly as ethnic. There are no Pedro, Pat or Manny
stories being told. The one group you can make fun of is the WASPS.
You can do `Quiche is their idea of soul food' or `They tailgated
during the war of 1812.' There is no Episcopalian Anti-Defamation
League.''
   There is a legend among speech writers which they doubt is true
but they tell it with a relish that suggests their own Walter Mitty
dreams.
   It concerns an intense president who could be sweetly benign or
thunderously abusive. After two years of that, one writer snapped.
And so:
   The president was rushing out to the Rose Garden for a routine
appearance. He scooped up the speech cards handed him by the writer
and without reading them first the Leader of the Western World
sallied forth:
   ``There are those who say we can't fulfill the Great Society
program and fight the war in Vietnam at the same time. They're
wrong and I'm going to tell you why. There are those who say we
can't feed the hungry at home and also lift living standards around
the world. They are wrong and I'm going to tell you why.''
   Two more such refrains and Lyndon Baines Johnson was now ready
to tell them why. Then, he turned to the last card and found only
this: ``Now you're on your own.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Sunday, Feb. 28</NOTE>
</DOC>
