ID: 94	RANK: 35	SCORE: 5.395117
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911219-0030
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911219-0030.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Drucker on Management:
   It Profits Us to Strengthen Nonprofits
   ----
   By Peter F. Drucker
</HL>
<DATE>
12/19/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14
</SO>
<CO>
   TAXES
</CO>
<NS>
MANAGEMENT ISSUES (MNT)
TAXES (TAX)
</NS>
<GV>
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   America needs a new social priority: to triple the
productivity of the nonprofits and to double the share of
gross personal income -- now just below 3% -- they collect as
donations. Otherwise the country faces, only a few years out,
social polarization.
   Federal, state and local governments will have to retrench
sharply, no matter who is in office. Moreover, government has
proved incompetent at solving social problems. Virtually
every success we have scored has been achieved by nonprofits.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The great advances in health and longevity have been
sponsored, directed and in large part financed by such
nonprofits as the American Heart Association and the American
Mental Health Association. Whatever results there are in the
rehabilitation of addicts we owe to such nonprofits as
Alcoholics Anonymous, the Salvation Army and the Samaritans.
The schools in which inner-city minority children learn the
most are parochial schools and those sponsored by some Urban
League chapters. The first group to provide food and shelter
to the Kurds fleeing from Saddam last spring was an American
nonprofit, the International Rescue Committee.
   Many of the most heartening successes are being scored by
small, local organizations. One example: The tiny Judson
Center in Royal Oak, Mich. -- an industrial suburb of Detroit
-- gets black women and their families off welfare while
simultaneously getting severely handicapped children out of
institutions and back into society.
   Judson trains carefully picked welfare mothers to raise in
their homes, for a modest salary, two or three crippled or
emotionally disturbed kids. The rehabilitation rate for the
welfare mothers is close to 100%, with many of them in five
years or so moving into employment as rehabilitation workers.
The rehabilitation rate for the children, who otherwise would
be condemned to lifetime institutional confinement, is about
50%; and every one of these kids had been given up as
hopeless.
   The nonprofits spend far less for results than governments
spend for failures. The cost per pupil in the New York
Archdiocese's parochial schools -- 70% of whose students stay
in school, stay off the streets and graduate with high
literacy and salable skills -- is about half that in New York
City's failing public schools.
   Two-thirds of the first-offenders paroled in Florida into
the custody of the Salvation Army are "permanently"
rehabilitated -- they are not indicted for another crime for
at least six years. Were they to go to prison, two-thirds
would become habitual criminals. Yet a prisoner costs at
least twice as much per year as a parollee in the custody of
the Salvation Army.
   The Judson Center saves the state of Michigan $100,000 a
year for each welfare mother and her charges -- one-third in
welfare costs and two-thirds in the costs of keeping the
children in institutions.
   Though the majority of the students in private colleges
and universities get some sort of financial aid, their
parents still pay more than do the parents of students in
state universities and colleges. But the state-university
student's education actually costs a good deal more than (in
some states twice as much as) that of the student in a
private nonprofit institution -- with the difference paid by
the taxpayer.
   The nonprofits have the potential to become America's
social sector -- equal in importance to the public sector of
government and the private sector of business. The delivery
system is already in place: There are now some 900,000
nonprofits, the great majority close to the problems of their
communities. And about 30,000 of them came into being in 1990
(the latest year for which figures are available) --
practically all dedicated to local action on one problem:
tutoring minority children; furnishing ombudsmen for patients
in the local hospital; helping immigrants through government
red tape.
   Where 20 years ago the American middle class thought it
had done its social duty by writing a check, it increasingly
commits itself to active doing as well. According to the best
available statistics, there are now some 90 million Americans
-- one out of every two adults -- working as "volunteers" in
nonprofits for three hours a week on average; the nonprofits
have become America's largest "employer."
   Increasingly these volunteers do not look upon their work
as charity; they see it as a parallel career to their paid
jobs and insist on being trained, on being held accountable
for results and performance, and on career opportunities for
advancement to professional and managerial -- though still
unpaid -- positions in the nonprofit. Above all, they see in
volunteer work access to achievement, to effectiveness, to
self-fulfillment, indeed to meaningful citizenship. And for
this reason there is more demand for well-structured
volunteer jobs than there are positions to fill.
   Some observers (such as Brian O'Connell, head of
Independent Sector, the national association of the large
nonprofits) believe that, within 10 years, two-thirds of
American adults -- 120 million -- will want to work as
nonprofit volunteers for five hours a week each, which would
mean a doubling of the man- and woman-power available for
nonprofit work.
   And the nonprofits are becoming highly innovative. When
some friends and I founded the Peter F. Drucker Foundation
for Non Profit Management a year ago, we planned as our first
public event a $25,000 award for the best innovation that
would "create a significant new dimension of non profit
performance." We hoped to receive 40 applications. We
received 809 -- and most were deserving of a prize.
   The actual award went to the Judson Center, but the big
nonprofits are as innovative as the small fry in many cases.
With several billion dollars in revenue, Family Service
America -- headquartered in Milwaukee -- has become bigger
than a good many Fortune 500 companies; it now is probably
the biggest American nonprofit next to the Red Cross. It has
achieved its phenomenal growth in part through contracting
with large employers such as General Motors to help employee
families with such problems as addiction or the emotional
disorders of adolescent children.
   For the nonprofits' potential to become reality, three
things are needed. First, the average nonprofit must manage
itself as well as the best-managed ones do. The majority
still believe that good intentions and a pure heart are all
that are needed. They do not yet see themselves as
accountable for performance and results. And far too many
splinter their efforts or waste them on non-problems and on
activities that would be done better -- and more cheaply --
by a business.
   Second, nonprofits have to learn how to raise money. The
American public has not become less generous -- there is
little evidence of the "compassion fatigue" nonprofit people
talk about. In fact, giving has been going up quite sharply
these past few years -- from 2.5% of personal income to 2.9%.
Unfortunately, a great many nonprofits still believe that the
way to get money is to hawk needs. But the American public
gives for results. It no longer gives to "charity"; it "buys
in." Of the charitable appeals most of us get in the mail
every week, usually just one talks of results -- the one that
gets our check.
   The nonprofits will have to get the additional money they
need primarily from individuals -- as they always have. Even
if there is government money -- mainly via vouchers, I expect
-- and money from companies, they can supply only a fraction
of what is needed.
   Finally, we need a change in the attitude of government
and government bureaucracies. President Bush has spoken
glowingly of the importance of the nonprofits as the
"thousand points of light." If he really believes this, he
should propose allowing taxpayers to deduct $1.10 for each
dollar they give to nonprofits as a cash donation. This would
solve the nonprofits' money problems at once. It also could
cut government deficits in the not-so-very-long run -- for a
well-managed nonprofit gets at least twice the bang out of
each buck that a government agency does. Some of the voucher
programs already enacted cut public school budgets, since
some of the district's per-pupil spending moves with the
child into the private sector.
   Instead of such a policy, however, we have the IRS making
one move after the other to penalize and to curtail donations
to nonprofits -- and the tax collectors of the big states are
all doing the same. Each of these moves is presented as
"closing a tax loophole"; in fact, none has yielded a penny
of additional revenue and none is likely to do so.
   The real motivation for such actions is the bureaucracy's
hostility to the nonprofits -- not too different from the
bureaucracy's hostility to markets and private enterprise in
the former Communist countries. The success of the nonprofits
undermines the bureaucracy's power and denies its ideology.
Worse, the bureaucracy cannot admit that the nonprofits
succeed where governments fail. What is needed, therefore, is
a public policy that establishes the nonprofits as the
country's first line of attack on its social problems.
   In my 1969 book "The Age of Discontinuity" I first
proposed "privatization," only to have every reviewer tell me
that it would never happen. Now, of course, privatization is
widely seen as the cure for modern economies mismanaged by
socialist bureaucracies. We now need to learn that
"nonprofitization" may for modern societies be the way out of
mismanagement by welfare bureaucracies.
   ---
   Mr. Drucker is a professor of social sciences at the
Claremont Graduate School in California.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
