ID: 94	RANK: 42	SCORE: 5.035674
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910829-0031
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910829-0031.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Entertainment:
   Disney Wishes
   On a New Star
   At Theme Parks
   ----
   By Richard Turner
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
08/29/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   DIS U.DIS WNEWS
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)
</IN>
<NS>
PERSONNEL ANNOUNCEMENTS, PROMOTIONS, APPOINTMENTS (PER)
</NS>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
EUROPE (EU)
FLORIDA (FL)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
GREAT BRITAIN (UK)
UNITED STATES (US)
WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)
</RE>
<LP>
   BURBANK, Calif. -- Walt Disney Co., in a major executive
change, brought in its top financial manager to run the
company's all-important theme park division, which lately has
been hurt by recession and declines in attendance.
   Disney reached into corporate ranks and put its
39-year-old chief financial officer, Judson C. Green, in
charge of day-to-day operations at Walt Disney Attractions.
He succeeds Richard A. Nunis, 59, who was named to the new
position of chairman of the unit. Mr. Green, who has headed a
division much-praised on Wall Street for its innovative
financing strategies, takes the title of president.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Disney didn't announce Mr. Green's successor as chief
financial officer, but individuals familiar with the
situation say the job will go to Richard Nanula, Disney's
31-year-old treasurer.
   Mr. Nunis is a legendary figure at Disney. He joined the
company in 1955 -- a few months before Disneyland first
opened -- and has led the theme park division for 20 years,
the past 11 as president. When the management team of Michael
Eisner and Frank Wells joined the company in late 1984,
Disney's entertainment division was overhauled, but the
executive ranks of the theme parks unit -- which produces 60%
to 65% of the company's operating income -- was relatively
untouched.
   Mr. Nunis was largely in charge of the building of the
Walt Disney World resort in Florida. In some ways, company
management viewed Mr. Nunis as the custodian of the sacred
tablets handed down by company founder Walt Disney.
   "He's the general," says one executive, referring to the
near-military precision and discipline of Disney's theme park
operations. "He makes the monorails run on time," adds a
former executive.
   The company said Mr. Nunis will "assume an expanded,
strategic-oriented role" in the division, and Mr. Eisner,
chairman and chief executive officer, praised his
"immeasurable" contributions to Disney's theme parks. Mr.
Nunis continues to serve on the board of directors and the
five-member executive committee.
   Mr. Green joined Disney in 1981 and became chief financial
officer in 1989. He has had several posts connected with the
theme parks, including vice president of finance and planning
for Walt Disney World and chief financial officer of Euro
Disneyland SCA, Disney's multibillion dollar resort outside
Paris that opens in April.
   The fact that Mr. Green is leaving the financial ranks to
gain operational responsibility led some Disney watchers to
speculate that he is being groomed to move up to higher
management, perhaps eventually replacing Mr. Wells, 59,
president and chief operating officer, who has four years
remaining on a five-year contract.
   "This sounds like a natural progression, given the age and
experience of the parties involved," said Harold Vogel, chief
entertainment industry analyst for Merrill Lynch. "This is a
good way to broaden Judson's base of experience."
   But executives cautioned that this view might be
premature. Mr. Wells shows no immediate signs of
restlessness, they say. "Also, Jeffrey {Katzenberg} might
have something to say about that scenario," one Disney
executive said. Mr. Katzenberg, the 40-year-old chairman of
Walt Disney Studios, might also be a logical candidate to
become company president.
   Mr. Green will continue to work in Burbank, though he'll
spend half his time in Europe and Florida, while Mr. Nunis
remains in Florida. The theme park unit will gain a major new
operational division when Euro Disney opens. And Mr. Green's
close relationship with the company's entertainment unit is
expected to make it easier for film and TV executives to
contribute to the parks.
   The past year has been difficult for Disney as the
recession, higher air fares and a stronger dollar have all
conspired to lower tourism and hurt attendance at the parks
-- just as thousands of new hotel rooms have opened at Disney
World.
   Moreover, while Disney has promised a decade of expansion
at all its parks, it has had precious few new attractions in
the past two years. The arrival last year of MCA Inc.'s
Universal Studios Florida put Disney World in the position of
having to compete, with all the attendant marketing and
promotional expenses. Some individuals familiar with the
situation say Mr. Eisner has been dissatisfied with the
performance of the attractions division, which employs 43,000
people and had revenue in fiscal 1990 of more than $3
billion.
   Some Disney watchers observed that theme park executives
more conventionally are drawn from the ranks of operations or
marketing. "When I see a financial guy go into the parks,
that tells me they're worrying about costs," said Raymond
Katz, an analyst with Shearson Lehman Hutton.
   But in an interview, Mr. Green pointed to the operational
experience in his background. "Though the economic downturn
is lasting longer than anyone expected -- and it's going to
take awhile to pull out of it -- we take the long-term view,"
Mr. Green said. "There's huge growth potential in this area
for us."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
