ID: 94	RANK: 52	SCORE: 4.690133
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900114-0053 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-01-14-90 2109EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-KingHoliday 3rdLd-Writethru a0720 01-14 1205</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-King Holiday, 3rd Ld-Writethru, a0720,1236</SECOND>
<HEAD>Coretta Scott King Calls on Bush to Help Unify America</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: LEADS with 11 grafs to UPDATE with new quote from Coretta
Scott King, quote from Kemp; PICK UP 8th graf, `Let's be ...';
DELETES redundant 26th graf.</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos NY4, AX7</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By DEBRA ELLIOTT</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Martin Luther King Jr. was remembered in church services
nationwide Sunday on the eve of what would have been his 61st
birthday, and the slain civil rights leader's widow called on
President Bush to help unify America.
   Coretta Scott King delivered her annual ``state of the dream''
address at Ebenezer Baptist Church, where her husband was pastor,
before about 1,000 people, including such civil rights leaders as
the Revs. Jesse Jackson and Joseph Lowery.
   Mrs. King reflected on the dramatic social changes of 1989 in
other parts of the world and her husband's philosophy of civil
disobedience.
   ``The cataclysmic changes we have seen in Eastern Europe, in
China and in South Africa since last year have deep roots in this
very pulpit,'' she said.
   Mrs. King, noting that Bush is to deliver his State of the Union
address in a few days, recalled a State of the Union speech in the
1960s by then-President Johnson.
   Johnson ``captured the imagination of the American people just
by saying three little words, `We shall overcome,''' Mrs. King said.
   ``A quarter of a century later, President Bush has the same
opportunity,'' she said. ``He can help unify America if he will
break with the past by ending the arms race and working for
programs to provide jobs and educational opportunities for all
Americans.
   ``If he will avoid the kind of military entanglements that
destroyed (Johnson's) war on poverty, he can unify America and lead
the world to a higher destiny,'' Mrs. King said.
   Jack Kemp, U.S. secretary of housing and urban development,
presented Mrs. King with a large photograph of a Chinese student
standing in Beijing's Tiananmen Square holding a sign reading, ``We
Shall Overcome.''
   ``The dream lives on not only here, but throughout the world,''
Kemp said.
   Mrs. King called on King supporters to carry on her husband's
dream.
   ``Let's be clear that the future depends on us and our
determination to do God's will,'' she said. ``If you take nothing
else away from here today, let it be a conviction that you can make
a difference.''
   Earlier, Jackson, a former Democratic presidential contender and
former King aide, spoke to textile workers in Louisville in central
Georgia from the steps of the Jefferson County Courthouse within
sight of an old slave auction block.
   He urged all workers to stand up against their bosses for a
living wage and decent working conditions.
   ``As long as the plug is pulled and the lights are out, we're
all the same in the dark,'' Jackson said. ``Regardless of color,
hunger hurts.''
   In New York City, Mayor David Dinkins, the first black to hold
that office, told about 400 people at Judson Memorial Church about
King's struggle for equality and the need to continue.
   ``Dr. King took us to the dawn of a new era,'' Dinkins said.
``It is up to us to push on into the bright light of day.
   ``Dr. King dreamed of an inclusive society, where people would
be judged by their good will and their good deeds,'' he said.
``That is my dream for our city.''
   In Cleveland, Roman Catholic Bishop Anthony M. Pilla presided at
an afternoon prayer service at St. John's Cathedral.
   The Rev. Howard Moody, senior minister at Judson Memorial,
expressed concern at Sunday's service that King's dream had not
been fulfilled.
   Racial strife shows that the ``dream has been deferred and we
haven't lived up to the promise,'' said Moody, who is white.
   ``Racism and prejudice is still alive and well in this country
despite everything he did,'' Moody said. ``I don't think white
people have lived up to what he hoped we would. He was betting
everything on us. He bet his life, finally, that we would change.''
   King, the son of an Atlanta Baptist minister, led non-violent
marches in the South in the 1950s and 1960s in a quest to end
discrimination against blacks and other minorities. He was
assassinated on April 4, 1968, in Memphis, Tenn.
   King's teachings were honored Sunday in Miami as about 100 to
150 Haitian exiles staged a peaceful demonstration for democracy in
their Caribbean island nation. Demonstrators called for a halt in
U.S. aid to Gen. Prosper Avril's government and that Avril, on a
trade mission to Taiwan, be kept from returning home.
   For the first time, the holiday falls this year on King's actual
birthday, Jan. 15. There were plans in all 50 states and 144 other
countries for bells to ring and for a moment of silence in honor of
King at 12:30 p.m. EST. The New York Stock Exchange also planned to
pause, and the Liberty Bell was to ring in Philadelphia.
   In Los Angeles on Saturday, hundreds of volunteers, including
Mayor Tom Bradley, planted nearly 400 Canary Island Pine trees
along a seven-mile stretch of Martin Luther King Boulevard.
   At a banquet in King's honor at the University of Kansas in
Lawrence on Saturday, Martin Luther King III said his father's
dream is a long way from reality.
   ``The reality is that time has not arrived,'' King said. ``We
still have a long way to go ... to try to achieve his unfinished
work, to create a world where freedom, justice and equality becomes
reality to all mankind.''
   King said black enrollment in colleges has been declining, and
that black people are still denied advancement in business.
   King's birthday became the 10th national holiday in 1986.
   Forty-six states and the federal government mark the holiday.
The four states that do not recognize the federal holiday are
Arizona, Montana, Idaho and New Hampshire. Wyoming is observing the
holiday this year only.
   Arizona's holiday is on hold, and the state faces more months of
debate before voters settle the controversy in November. It began
when former Democratic Gov. Bruce Babbitt declared a King holiday
by executive order in 1986 only to have it rescinded by his
successor, Republican Evan Mecham.
   According to a poll published by the Arizona Republic newspaper
Sunday, 71 percent of those surveyed would vote to repeal a law
passed by the Legislature that would set a holiday for King and do
away with Columbus Day.
   But when Columbus Day was eliminated as an issue, 49 percent of
the 808 respondents said they supported a King holiday in
principle, 40 percent opposed it and 11 percent said they did not
know.
   In Phoenix on Sunday, a supporter of the King holiday there said
efforts to stop the referendum went against what King stood for.
   ``You have to remember Dr. King's part of his movement was to
get people the right to vote so now that the `people' have said
`put it on the ballot' to circumvent them from voting would almost
go against some of the principles,'' said the Rev. Warren Stewart
Sr. ``So what we have to do is the more difficult task, and educate
people on why Martin King ought to have a holiday in Arizona.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
