ID: 94	RANK: 75	SCORE: 4.205378
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880822-0063 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-08-22-88 0956EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r p PM-Quayle-LawSchool 2ndLd-Writethru a0520 08-22 0787</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Quayle-Law School, 2nd Ld-Writethru, a0520,780</SECOND>
<NOTE>Eds: Subs 19th graf pvs, The Plain, to CORRECT spelling of Sendak</NOTE>
<HEAD>Quayle: No Strings Pulled in Law School Admission</HEAD>
<DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Sen. Dan Quayle, R-Ind., said today that even
though he was a mediocre, ``proverbial C+ student'' in college, his
influential family didn't pull strings to get him admitted to law
school.
   ``There's been nothing that has been substantiated that any
rules were violated, that we did anything that was unfair,'' Quayle
said, responding to questions on ABC-TV's ``Good Morning America''
about how he entered Indiana University Law School in 1970 and the
National Guard in 1969.
   Quayle, the 41-year-old Republican vice presidential nominee,
made his comments the day after The Plain Dealer in Cleveland
reported that Quayle had not met the admissions requirements for
the law school, but gained entrance after meeting with the
admissions dean, a Republican judge in a city where Quayle's family
owned the local newspaper.
   The Plain Dealer said the meeting came after Quayle had been
rejected by the law school.
   Quayle acknowledged today that he was not a stellar student at
DePauw University from which he graduated in 1969. But he said he
always wanted to attend law school.
   ``My grades in college were not good,'' he said. ``I was your
proverbial C+ student. I wish I had been more serious in college, I
have to confess that.''
   In the same interview, Quayle rejected the notion that he tried
to avoid the Vietnam War by joining the National Guard.
   ``The point is that I was willing to serve. I served in the
National Guard, had my unit been called to Vietnam, like other
units in Indiana were called to Vietnam, I would have served and
served with distinction, I hope.''
   The issue of Quayle's service in the guard was raised Sunday by
Sen. Bob Dole, R-Kan., who had been in the running to serve as
George Bush's No. 2 until Bush picked Quayle.
   Dole, who lost the use of an arm as a result of a injury
suffered in World War II, said that in his generation ``You knew
who was in the guard and who was in uniform fighting for their
country.'' Dole said that many people in his home state are ``very
sensitive about it. They didn't have anybody they could call. They
couldn't influence anyone.''
   On the issue of Quayle's entrance into night law school in the
fall of 1970, The Plain Dealer said it confirmed in an interview
with Quayle's father, James C. Quayle, that the school admitted
Quayle despite an academic record at DePauw that fell below the law
school's entrance requirements.
   ``They weren't going to accept him. He didn't fit their
criterion,'' said the elder Quayle, publisher of the Huntington
(Ind.) Herald-Press. ``So Danny went down there and talked to the
dean. He talked his way in. Danny, he's a pretty good salesman.''
   In 1972, the admissions dean, G. Kent Frandsen, conducted
Quayle's marriage ceremony to Marilyn Tucker, also a law student,
at her parents' home.
   Frandsen was a Republican city judge in Lebanon, Ind., where the
Quayle-Pulliam family owns the local newspaper. Frandsen also
became Quayle's campaign manager in Boone County in his 1986 Senate
race.
   The school's admissions committee reviewed at least 1,200
applications in 1970 and offered admission to 450 students to fill
275 openings, Frandsen said.
   Cleon H. Foust, now retired dean of the law school, called entry
requirements strict. Undergraduate grades were about twice as
important as scores on the national law school admissions test
(LSAT), he said.
   Foust recalls no pressure to admit Quayle. Letters of
recommendation written on Quayle's behalf are in school files,
which are not made public.
   The law school required a minimum grade point average of 2.6 (on
a 4.0 scale) at the time Quayle entered, The Washington Post
reported.
   The Plain Dealer and the Post also reported over the weekend
that an executive who worked for Quayle's late grandfather, Eugene
C. Pulliam, owner of Indiana's largest newspapers, arranged an
interview for Quayle with Theodore L. Sendak, then attorney general
of the state.
   Quayle, then 22, attending night classes at law school and
serving in the National Guard on weekends, was thinking about
taking a city government job in Indianapolis. But the senator's
father asked Medford S. Evans, editor and political columnist of
Pulliam's Indianapolis News, to find the young man ``something
better,'' The Plain Dealer reported.
   ``He said he got him a interview with Ted Sendack, the attorney
general. I said, OK, fine, and I told Danny to go down there,''
recalled James Quayle.
   Quayle became chief investigator in the attorney general's
consumer office and later administrative assistant to Edgar
Whitcomb, then Indiana's Republican governor.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
