ID: 94	RANK: 76	SCORE: 4.197134
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910320-0076
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910320-0076.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Sports:
   Game? What Game? Arenas Emphasize
   Ambiance and Amenities to Entice Fans
   ----
   By John Helyar
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
03/20/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   PCI
</CO>
<IN>
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)
REAL ESTATE INVESTMENTS (REA)
</IN>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- There was a time when athletic arenas were
spartan caverns, where the menu consisted of hot dogs, the
seats grew harder by the quarter and the scoreboard just gave
the score.
   Then there is . . . the new Madison Square Garden. When
completed in September, it will have 88 luxury suites, where
the caterers wheel in caviar; 2,100 club seats, from which
patrons summon waiters; one TV-filled sports bar, for refuge
when the live action flags; one video-splashed scoreboard,
and 19,900 rebuilt seats.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "Arenas are coming into the 20th century," says Judson
Perkins, the Madison Square Garden executive overseeing the
project. "You have to understand you're in the entertainment
business now, and you have to offer a full package of
amenities."
   At $200 million, the Garden overhaul is merely the most
costly of a national wave of construction and reconstruction
that is redefining the arena. Phoenix's new one will have a
health club. Tampa's will have a secretarial pool.
Philadelphia's will have boutiques.
   And all have, first and foremost, luxury suites:
living-room settings that are rivaling fairways and fancy
restaurants as today's prime place to do business. "Anybody
can take a client to lunch," says Ed Goldman, head of sales
for Group W Television, which has a Madison Square Garden
suite. "But not everybody can spend a quality evening where
they're relaxed and not looking at their watch."
   Essentially, savvy sports-business operators figured out
that arenas, properly run, could be formidable sources of
profit rather than merely functional settings for games. "The
future lies in development of revenues outside the game
itself," says Jerry Colangelo, president of the Phoenix Suns.
"The most logical for us was a new facility."
   The suite is the engine driving the building and operation
of the new arenas. Suites' leases secure construction
financing. Their tenants create a clientele for restaurants
and other arena amenities. Their cash generation can be
prodigious. Phoenix's arena, under construction, has
pre-leased all 88 suites for $60,000 to $70,000 per year, or
nearly $6 million. Milwaukee's Bradley Center has 68 suites,
at $35,000 to $55,000 per year, which bring in $3 million.
The Palace, the Auburn Hills, Mich., home arena of the
Detroit Pistons, has 180 suites, leasing for $30,000 to
$120,000 a year and reaping $11 million a year.
   Yet the new arenas are geared not just to putting fat cats
in suites but getting people other than hardcore fans into
the regular seats. They are designed to be not just athletic
meccas but user-friendly entertainment centers. "The teams
want more families, a wider variety of demographic groups,"
says Ron Turner, a senior vice president of Ellerbe Becket
Inc., an arena architectural firm. "They want it to be a fun
place, where people will come back, win or lose."
   It is no coincidence that alumni of Walt Disney Co., that
ultimate entertainment master, are leading the Madison Square
Garden overhaul. Judson Perkins, the renovation chief, used
to head the services division of Disney World. Richard Evans
was once a general manager in Disney's resort-hotel business
and later ran Radio City Music Hall before becoming president
and chief executive officer of the Garden. "We felt we had to
expand our customer base," says Mr. Evans. "We had to try
attracting people that perceived {the Garden} as old and
tired."
   Madison Square Garden illustrates just how outmoded an
old-style arena could be (after only about 20 years'
operation) and what goes into the making of a modern one. Its
concession stands weren't equipped to serve anything but hot
dogs. Its "skyboxes" were to The Palace as Motel Six is to
the Ritz. Its calendar was full, with more than 500 events a
year, but its profit contribution to parent Paramount
Communications Inc. was virtually nil.
   By contrast, the new Garden should yield a "high
double-digit return" on investment, says Mr. Evans, and the
new luxury-suite economics help explain why. The old skyboxes
generated just $2 million a year from leases. The new suites,
when fully leased, should reap nearly $15 million. There are
three times as many of them -- up from 29 to 88 -- at much
higher lease rates. The skyboxes went for $90,000; the suites
are $140,000 to $190,000.
   Part of the difference is in the accouterments: one wet
bar, three TVs, one buffet table, three mahogany-paneled
walls and two tiers of six comfy seats facing the arena. One
TV carries up-to-date statistics on the game below. The
buffet table can be heaped with fancy catered food.
   "You're paying a lot more money {than for the old boxes},
but you're getting a lot more value," says Joel Fisher, a
vice president of Professional Sports Publications, a
publishing and marketing firm that leases a suite. "It gives
the people you entertain . . . a sense of a special evening."
   The accolades notwithstanding, 26 of the 88 suites remain
unleased. They do have the disadvantage of being near the top
of the house, a liability to some. (New arenas put a lot of
their suites closer to the court, but the Garden had to stick
with where the skyboxes had been.) The most desirable suites
are also the nation's most expensive, and the recession has
induced price resistance. Still, Mr. Evans insists, "We fully
expect to {lease} the balance" of the suites.
   Some other arenas have felt recession's sting, too. Suite
leases at the new Target Center in Minneapolis are stuck at
61 in the 67-suite facility. The proposed new Boston Garden,
which was to be part of a mixed-use complex, has been stalled
by that city's profound real-estate slump. But most other new
arenas are moving forward and most arenas' suite leasing is
holding up well. The Palace's waiting list numbers over 100.
   At Madison Square Garden, suite leases are only one
possible source of additional income. Four new food courts
have increased the capacity of concessions by 70%. The new
scoreboard has 50% more ad capacity. There are also new
operating efficiencies, like soft-drink systems that cut
pouring time by 73%.
   The Garden thinks changes in ambiance will help increase
attendance. The outside is being lighted more brightly for
nighttime safety. The entryways have been revamped to improve
crowd flow. The women's restrooms have been expanded by 70%,
the men's by 40%.
   Not everyone is cheering the improvements. Plenty of
rank-and-file fans fear the high-cost renovation and the
introduction of club seats will only accelerate the
ticket-price spiral for Knicks and Rangers games. "I'm right
now at the edge of where I can afford this," says Bruce
Bernstein, a Knicks season-ticket holder, who has seen a
ticket's cost about double to $30 a game the past five years.
"The fancy scoreboard isn't worth it; they should improve the
team instead."
   Mr. Evans dismisses speculation that the top ticket prices
are going to $70 from $45 next season, saying no decisions
have yet been made. But Richard Kessel, executive director of
the New York State Consumer Protection Board, shares the
fans' fears. He has met once with Mr. Evans to lobby against
a big price increase and will seek another meeting. "A night
at the Knicks or Rangers is already $200-plus for a family,"
he says. "We're beginning to price the average fan out of the
arena."
   ---
                   Living the Suite Life
                                                                                                       

                                              POTENTIAL
                  NO. of     ANNUAL LEASE     ANNUAL REVENUE
   ARENAS         SUITES                      (In millions)
                                                                                                       

 Madison Square     88    $140,000-$190,000      $15.0
 Garden (N.Y.C.)
                                                                                                       

 The Palace        180    $ 30,000-$120,000       11.0
 (Detroit)
                                                                                                       

 America West       88    $ 60,000-$ 70,000        6.0
 Arena (Phoenix,

 construction)
                                                                                                       

 Target Center      67    $ 60,000-$ 85,000        4.0
 (Minneapolis)
                                                                                                       

 Salt Lake City     56    $ 40,000-$ 95,000        3.5
 Arena (Salt Lake
 City) (under
 construction)
                                                                                                       

 Bradley Center     68    $ 35,000-$ 55,000        3.0
 (Milwaukee)
                                                                                                       

 ARCO Arena         30    $ 80,000-$105,000        2.7
 (Sacramento,
 Calif.)
                                                                                                       

 Miami Arena        18    $ 75,000-$100,000        1.4
 (Miami)
                                                                                                       

 Orlando Arena      26    $ 50,000                 1.4
 (Orlando, Fla.)
                                                                                                       

 Charlotte          12    $ 50,000-$ 90,000        0.9
 Coliseum
 (Charlotte, N.C.)
                                                                                                       

   Source: Ellerbe Becket Inc.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
