ID: 94	RANK: 79	SCORE: 4.150548
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910819-0129
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910819-0129.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Television: Tex-Mex Love
   ----
   By Robert Goldberg
</HL>
<DATE>
08/19/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A7
</SO>
<LP>
   Along the borderlands, where Texas and Mexico have been
rubbing up against each other for the past 150 years, lies a
region of tumbleweeds and tornados -- a country full of
prickly plants, prickly people and prickly heat. In this dry,
dusty land, a new comic romance, "Crazy From the Heart" (TNT,
tonight, 8 PM EDT; also August 24, 10 PM EDT) tries to bloom.
   "Crazy" is a high-concept film, a picture that starts from
a one-line premise: What if a repressed Southern school
principal became infatuated with the Mexican janitor? It's a
love story, Rio Grande style.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   As Charlotte Bain, principal of the Tidewater, Texas high
school, Christine Lahti is a woman who, in the words of one
of her subordinates, is "tighter than a cow's {rear} in a
swarm of flies." For six years, she's been "engaged to be
engaged" to the school's coach, Dewey Whitcomb (William
Russ). It's a comfortable if uninspiring relationship of
Thursday dinners and evenings in front of the TV set. But
when Charlotte learns that her best friend is about to become
a grandmother, her biological clock goes off like a police
siren.
   Marching right into the middle of Dewey's wrestling class,
she applies a headlock of her own: Marry me, she tells him,
or we're through. Dewey tries to brush her off, saying it
must be "that piss and moan thing -- PMS." But Charlotte
won't budge: "I don't have any more time to waste." When
Dewey dithers some more, Charlotte walks.
   Through an improbable set of events, the newly unattached
Charlotte finds herself going out on a date with Ernesto
Ontiveros (Ruben Blades), school custodian and
none-too-successful gentleman farmer. "Frankly," Ernesto
tells her, "I find you attractive. I'm honest. It scares
people, but you're nervous anyway, so it doesn't matter."
   The uptight Charlotte and the candid Ernesto point his
beat-up old pickup truck in the direction of Mexico, and off
they go. And darned if after a few beers and a couple of
shots of tequila, she isn't whooping and hollering and
dancing on the tables. She passes out shouting "Mas tequila]
Mas musica]," so you can tell it's going to be one of those
weekends.
   Over the next 48 hours, they share a montage-full of
sing-a-longs and moonlit meals, walks on the beach and hokey
lines like "I could stay here forever" and "Have I known you
all my life?" By the end of the weekend, they're married.
   But when they return to Tidewater, Charlotte feels the
full disapproving weight of the close-knit Anglo community.
"Everybody knows about you and that greaser janitor," they
sneer at her. On his side, Ernesto finds his daughter
attacking "Miss Wonder Bread." The relationship starts to
crumble. Can it survive?
   That's the premise of "Crazy From the Heart": Can a gringa
and a greaser find happiness despite the prejudices of a
small Southern town? Thematically, it plays like a kinder,
gentler "Jungle Fever" -- "Jungle Fever" with just a slight
temperature.
   At the center of the film, Christine Lahti and Ruben
Blades make a sweet couple; they are almost solely
responsible for the film's charm. Ms. Lahti, as always, gives
a subtle, nuanced performance; she works both ends of the
spectrum, from tense to rollicking. And Ruben Bladeswell,
there's something wonderful about having a portly Chicano as
a romantic lead. Mr. Blades's Ernesto radiates a quiet
sincerity and self-confidence, a kind of Latino zen.
   Personally, Mr. Blades is one of my heroes, a guy with
more on the ball than ten movie stars. Here's someone with a
great salsa songwriting career, who transforms himself into a
solid actor, gets not one but two law degrees, and plans to
return to his native Panama as an activist and political
candidate.
   Mr. Blades is also the perfect model for the Ted Turner
message. Over the past few years the former Captain
Outrageous has been consistently and aggressively trying to
build a a better world through TV (both documentary and
fictional programming). "Crazy From the Heart" fits right
into his plan. It's a statement against discrimination; it
champions understanding, tolerance, better relations between
the races, more acceptance of others.
   But while its heart is certainly in the right place, one
wishes its head were there too. As a parable for creating a
happier world, "Crazy From the Heart" is fine, but as drama,
this sweet little film turns out to be unfortunately slight.
The characters are given little depth beyond their immediate
situation, and the issue of racism is only glancingly touched
on.
   At 90 minutes in length, as written by Linda Vorhees and
directed by Thomas Schlamme (Ms. Lahti's husband), "Crazy"
aspires to be feature film material, to open into a fully
fleshed-out story of a Texas twosome. But instead of
grappling with the messy, intriguing realities of race --
which could have added so much depth -- there are too many
high school pranks and Mexican fiestas. Lacking the bitter
irony that would have given both the comedy and the romance
more bite, this is just another TV movie, a well intentioned
piece of fluff.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
