ID: 94	RANK: 8	SCORE: 7.556837
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910523-0169
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910523-0169.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   They Could Be Like the French
   And Close the State for August
   ----
   By Carrie Dolan
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
05/23/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
</RE>
<LP>
   PALO ALTO, Calif. -- Attorney Richard Such says he could
have "spent my whole life wishing vaguely to have more
vacation." But instead, he decided to work on changing
things.
   Mr. Such is launching a drive to amend the California
Constitution to grant workers six weeks off every year.
Noting that "there has been little progress in American
vacation policy since the Depression," he says the amendment
would bring "California vacation policy up to the European
standard."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   If the proposal became law, families would be able to
spend time "more meaningfully than in the classic American
frantic effort to squeeze a visit to grandma, a glimpse of
the Grand Canyon and a stop at Disneyland into two or three
weeks," Mr. Such says. More leisure time would also cure
worker burnout, he claims, as employees "return rested,
invigorated . . . with new perspectives and new ideas, ready
to do better work."
   In order to make the plan palatable to employers, workers
would have to meet certain conditions to qualify for six
weeks off, including having a high-school education, not
smoking on the job and not having convictions for drug or
alcohol abuse. Employees could skip one of the conditions by
taking public transport, car pooling or cycling to work.
   "If this gets on the ballot, it will pass overwhelmingly,"
predicts Mr. Such.
   But Fred Main, vice president of the California Chamber of
Commerce, says it would have a "horrible economic impact." He
calls the initiative a "silly proposal with little, if any,
chance of qualifying" because it has no organized support.
   Under California law, any registered voter who pays $200
can submit an initiative. To qualify for the June 1992
ballot, a sponsor must gather 615,957 signatures.
   In the past two years, citizens have submitted 69
initiatives, including ones that would allow prayer in
school, legalize marijuana, prohibit aliens from owning land
and let juries decide whether certain laws should be on the
books. (Of those, 18 qualified for the ballot and six became
law.)
   "All {proposals} are treated equally, and given the same
scrutiny, even if some people think they're wacko," says Mary
Whitcomb of the state Department of Justice's government-law
section, which is required to review proposals. Whatever
happens, Ms. Whitcomb won't get extra time off. The six-week
vacation initiative doesn't include any government workers.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
