ID: 94	RANK: 9	SCORE: 7.506561
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910729-0026
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910729-0026.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Some Author May Write This Up
   As the American `Les Miserables'
   ----
   By Laurie M. Grossman
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
07/29/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<RE>
GEORGIA (GA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   The crime report in Cobb County, Ga., looks a bit strange
these days. To the list of assaults, break-ins and armed
robberies, add: picking flowers and not returning movie
rentals.
   In a pair of cases that have local attorneys shaking their
heads, police appear to be cracking down on some fairly mild
misdeeds. Rebecca Anding, 29 years old, spent six hours in
jail on Easter Sunday after she was caught picking tulips
from an office park in Marietta, Ga. And Linda Judson, 28,
spent four hours in jail after she was arrested at her home
in late May. The charge: She hadn't returned two rentals to
her local video store after having them for a couple of
months.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "I feel like I'm negligent, irresponsible and stupid, but
I don't feel like I stole," says Ms. Judson. "If I wanted a
stupid movie, I'd buy it."
   County officials defend the arrests, saying even minor
crimes can't be ignored. But lawyers are astounded the county
is wasting its time. "It probably fits within the four
corners of the statute, but that doesn't mean it's right,"
says Don Samuel, an Atlanta criminal-defense attorney. "Let's
really deter people from these heinous crimes," he adds. "Why
not just use the death penalty?"
   Ms. Anding says she was cutting flowers for her
grandmother's grave when she was handcuffed and booked for
misdemeanor theft. "I was shook up," she says. But Patrick
Head, county solicitor, raises the specter of a barren
landscape: "Think what the complex would look like if
everybody could pick flowers."
   Ms. Judson contends that she put the two movies in her car
and completely forgot about them when she left the state on a
series of business trips. She says she received no written or
telephone reminder to return the films. And they weren't
charged to her credit card, the usual policy for long-overdue
videos, she says.
   Mark Michael, manager of West Coast Video of Smyrna, says
he doesn't have a credit-card number for Ms. Judson and adds
that he did call her. "We perceive it as theft," he says.
   Both women are going to court in August rather than plead
no contest, pay hefty fines and get a criminal record. The
maximum penalties, which Mr. Head says are absolutely out of
the question, are a year in jail and a $1,000 fine.
   Ms. Anding says the incident has made her cautious about
flowers, even when buying them. "I save the receipts."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
