ID: 94	RANK: 99	SCORE: 4.007516
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880821-0058 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-08-21-88 2221EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u p AM-PoliticalRdp 4thLd-Writethru a0716 08-21 0950</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Political Rdp, 4th Ld-Writethru, a0716,950</SECOND>
<NOTE>EDS: Adds 5 grafs with interview with Quayle's father.
^Bush Says He'll Take the Heat Over Quayle Controversy</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By STEVEN KOMAROW</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Vice President George Bush said Sunday he'll ``take the heat''
over the controversy surrounding running mate Dan Quayle's military
service, a flap that one senior Republican predicted will linger
for a while.
   Democrats claimed it all showed their ticket has more stature.
   Bush told a pool of reporters as he flew to Chicago on Air Force
Two that Quayle has ``been thrown into a hornet's nest, but, you
know, I've been there. I've got to take the heat. I made the
decision. The buck stops right here.''
   The vice president said he had ``no hesitancy'' about keeping
Quayle on the ticket despite the controversy over the Indiana
senator using his wealthy family's influence to join the National
Guard during the Vietnam War.
   After arriving at the Springfield, Ill. airport Sunday afternoon
Bush hopped out of his limousine and greeted men and women members
of an Air National Guard unit.
   He said theirs was ``a very honorable service'' and that others
``ought not try to be making something wrong out of serving in that
way.''
   A little later, Bush leaped off a tram on the grounds of the
Illinois State Fair and walked over to an Air National Guard
exhibit, peering down the barrel of an unloaded antitank missile
launcher before playfully turning the weapon on reporters.
   Craig Fuller, Bush's chief of staff, said he and other campaign
officials are ``convinced that Dan Quayle did absolutely nothing
improper'' by seeking membership in the National Guard during the
Vietnam War.
   A day earlier, Bush himself had called the issue a ``tempest in
a teapot.''
   Fuller, appearing on the CBS television show ``Face The
Nation,'' said a review of Quayle's background after questions were
raised disclosed nothing new.
   He said taking Quayle off the ticket ``was never considered.''
   Bush and Quayle appeared together in Ohio early Sunday before
the vice president went off to the Illinois State Fair and Quayle
returned to Washington for a couple of days of private time to
chart the course of a campaign born less than a week ago at the
Republican National Convention in New Orleans.
   Democratic presidential nominee Michael Dukakis taking Sunday
off at home in Boston and his running mate, Sen. Lloyd Bentsen of
Texas was relaxing at his Virginia farm.
   Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole of Kansas, one of those Bush
passed over in his vice presidential selection process, said Sunday
he spoke with Bush campaign director James Baker about the National
Guard flap Saturday evening and ``he believes it's pretty much
behind them.''
   What does Dole think?
   ``I think it's going to last awhile,'' replied Dole to the
question put by an interviewer on NBC's ``Meet The Press.''
   Questioned about how Quayle could be picked over more
experienced and well-known senators, Dole said he thought ``Bush
decided to go for the generational thing.''
   The National Guard issue might not play well, he said. ``Right
now I would guess there are number of Reagan Democrats who are
going to remain undecided or maybe go the other way,'' he said.
   However, he said he believed the Bush-Quayle campaign would
allay those concerns as time goes on. Quayle can ``still be very
effective'' because of his expertise on certain issues, especially
defense, Dole said.
   House Democratic Whip Tony Coelho of California, also appearing
on the NBC program, said the question was not Quayle's service in
the National Guard, but rather Bush's judgment in choosing Quayle
as running mate over what he said were better qualified Republicans.
   ``Out of the 46 Republicans in the Senate, I think most people
would agree that Dan Quayle, at best, is 30th, or something like
that,'' said Coelho. ``Why did George Bush pick Dan Quayle? That's
got to be the question.''
   ``Is Dan Quaylequalified to be president of the United States?''
Coelho asked. ``I don't think he has the maturity. I don't think he
has had the experience. And for sure the one thing that we all look
at, I don't think he has shown the leadership over the years to do
the job.''
   Although Bush made a good speech at the convention, ``The
question really is whether or not George Bush is capable to make
the decisions when called upon,'' Coelho said. ``His first
presidential decision was Dan Quayle. Michael Dukakis' first
presidential decision was Lloyd Bentsen.''
   Dukakis campaign manager Susan Estrich, on ``Face The Nation,``
echoed Coelho's sentiments.
   ``Is this the man who is best qualified to be vice president of
the United States?'' she asked. If not, she said, ``At that point
the real issue is not Dan Quayle, it's George Bush and his
judgment, his decision to pass over some Republicans of real
national stature to choose Dan Quayle.''
   Meanwhile, Quayle's father told the Cleveland Plain Dealer that
his son didn't meet the academic requirements for Indiana
University Law School, but he met the dean and ``talked his way
in.''
   Newspaper publisher James C. Quayle also said that the
candidate's family ties helped him get a job as an investigator for
Indiana's attorney general.
   The law school admissions dean, G. Kent Frandsen, was a
Republican city judge in Lebanon, Ind., where the Quayle-Pulliam
family owns the local newspaper.
   James Quayle told the newspaper that an executive who worked for
Quayle's late grandfather, Eugene C. Pulliam, owner of Indiana's
largest newspapers, arranged an interview for Quayle with Theodore
L. Sendack, then attorney general of the state.
   Quayle became chief investigator in the attorney general's
consumer office and later administrative assistant to Edgar
Whitcomb, then Indiana's Republican governor.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
