ID: 311	RANK: 19	SCORE: 17.922226
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910118-0006
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910118-0006.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Potomac Watch:
   The Men
   Who've Learned
   From Vietnam
   ----
   By Paul A. Gigot
</HL>
<DATE>
01/18/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8
</SO>
<CO>
   MDEST
</CO>
<IN>
AEROSPACE (ARO)
</IN>
<GV>
DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
</GV>
<LP>
   For 20 years those who oppose the use of American military
force have chanted, "No more Vietnams." They never imagined
that Colin Powell and his fellow generals would agree with
them.
   The assault on Iraq is a long way from over, but its
initial, ongoing ferocity shows that no one has learned the
lessons of Vietnam better than the U.S. military. Virtually
without exception, America's Desert Storm generals, and each
of its 13 leading field commanders, fought in Vietnam. Some
were wounded in battle (army Gen. Barry McCaffrey lost an
arm); all were educated by it. They have taken that
experience and molded it into a battle plan of overwhelming
force, overwhelmingly delivered.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   This is a war necessary to remove Saddam Hussein as a
Middle East threat. But the tragedy is that 30 years ago war
might not have been necessary to remove a Saddam. If an
American president had put 400,000 troops in the Middle East
in the 1950s, an aggressor would have backed down. Vietnam
made the world doubt. Saddam has resisted for six months
because he thinks he can outlast us, as others did in Vietnam
and Lebanon. He has misjudged both George Bush and America's
generals.
   Caspar Weinberger, the former defense secretary, recalls
talking with his then-military aide, Colin Powell, during the
1983 Marine deployment and bombing in Lebanon. "We had many
conversations about it, and he agreed with me that the
Marines had no clear purpose there," says Cap.
   William Taylor, a retired colonel and now a military
analyst at the Center for Strategic and International
Studies, taught Gen. Powell at the National War College in
the 1970s. "Most of the students with him thought that they
were sent to Vietnam to do a job without clear goals and with
political restrictions," says Mr. Taylor. "This time, they're
saying, Let's get it right."
   No one is in a better position to get it right than Gen.
Powell, who served two army tours in Vietnam. A soothing
personality, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs has made
himself part of President Bush's small inner circle of
advisers. He's also skillfully exploited an obscure 1986
defense reorganization, Goldwater-Nichols, to make himself
perhaps the most politically dominant general since George
Marshall in the 1940s.
   The joint staff that used to report to other generals now
reports to him. The military chain of command is also more
streamlined, reporting directly from Norman Schwarzkopf in
Saudi Arabia to him. So Gen. Powell has the authority, if he
chooses to use it, to avoid the sort of interservice rivalry
that proved so damaging in Grenada.
   In Vietnam, then Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara
micromanaged "every bomb drop," as one former general puts
it. In designing this still-unfolding battle plan, President
Bush and Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney left it up to the
generals. Once they had designed it, Mr. Cheney spent a day
and a half in Riyadh in December asking tough questions. But
after he (and Mr. Bush) approved the plan, implementation was
left to the generals.
   That plan has the clear objective lacking in Vietnam:
Destroy Saddam's military capacity and clear him from Kuwait.
It also has domestic support, represented by the vote from
Congress.
   And from the first week of the military buildup in August,
Gen. Powell has advised that if force is to be used it should
be applied quickly and massively. Mr. Bush's Nov. 8 decision
to double the deployment was based on advice from both Gens.
Schwarzkopf and Powell about "what they needed to win," as
one military source puts it. Now they're being given the
authority to execute that plan to the hilt -- no "pauses" for
misguided diplomacy, no political meddling that would only
raise casualties.
   It's always possible, of course, that today's generals
have learned some lessons too well. Some critics worry about
the generals' Vietnam-inspired belief in the public's
impatience; this might induce them to accept a quick but
murderous ground attack on Iraqi troops in Kuwait.
   But as former Air Force chief of staff Michael Dugan says,
"I remember the exact moment the U.S. public turned against
Vietnam: The week Life magazine published the photographs of
all of the previous week's casualties." Desert Storm's
generals understand the political cost of casualties.
   Civilian leadership is also needed to overcome the
military's bureaucratic instincts. The Tomahawk cruise
missiles that silently struck Iraqi targets were once opposed
by the Navy brass. Cruise missiles also nearly died in the
SALT "arms control process" of the 1970s.
   But in actually fighting a war, the Bush administration
has learned the lesson of Vietnam, too. As one source
describes Secretary Cheney's view, "his doctrine of war is,
don't screw around." For 20 years, says another
administration official, two "lessons" of Vietnam have
competed for dominance in the public mind. One -- still
prominent among Democrats -- is that U.S. military
intervention carries the seeds of its own failure.
   The competing lesson is that military force can well serve
U.S. purposes if political leaders provide clear goals and
don't obstruct the mission. What a splendid irony it will be
if Colin Powell buries not only Saddam Hussein, but also once
and for all the false lessons of Vietnam.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
