ID: 311	RANK: 41	SCORE: 15.532252
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900917-0080 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NY-09-17-90 1322EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r w PM-GeneralDismissed 4thLd-Writethru a0603 09-17 0781</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-General Dismissed, 4th Ld-Writethru, a0603-a0607-a0611,950</SECOND>
<HEAD>Air Force Chief of Staff Dismissed</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Combines pvs; Will be led with 2:30 p.m. EDT Cheney news
conference</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By SUSANNE M. SCHAFER</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP Military Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Gen. Mike Dugan was fired as Air Force chief
of staff today following the four-star general's blunt comments
about U.S. contingency plans for massive air strikes against
Baghdad.
   Defense Secretary Dick Cheney relieved Dugan of his duties after
consulting with President Bush, and then delivered a harsh critique
of the 53-year-old decorated flier.
   ``There are certain things we never talk about. We never discuss
operational matters, such as the selection of specific targets for
potential air strikes,'' Cheney told reporters.
   ``We never talk about the targeting of specific individuals, who
are officials in other governments. That is an violation of the
executive order,'' the secretary said.
   ``We never underestimate the strength of opposing forces or
reveal previously classified information about the size or
disposition of U.S. forces. Nor do we ever demean the contributions
of the other services,'' he said.
   ``Gen. Dugan's statements as reported in the press and as
confirmed by him to me - failed all of those tests,'' Cheney said.
   The Pentagon's rare disciplinary action of a top officer came
one day after published reports quoted Dugan as saying U.S.
military authorities had concluded that massive air strikes are the
only effective way of forcing Iraq out of Kuwait if war erupted.
Dugan was on a tour of U.S. military installations in Saudi Arabia
when he made his comments in an interview with the Los Angeles
Times and The Washington Post.
   Atop the Dugan interview in the Los Angeles Times, the paper
quoted unnamed ``senior U.S. military planners'' as saying that
such an air campaign would be designed in part to ``decapitate''
the Iraqi leadership by targeting Saddam Hussein, his family, his
senior commanders and his palace guard.
   The paper quoted Dugan as saying that ``a better list'' of
high-value Iraqi targets had been drawn up by military planners.
The paper said, ``the list stressed the importance of attacking
Hussein and his inner circle, but beyond that Dugan would not
detail'' any target points.
   Dugan still retains his four-star rank, but he is expected to
retire.
   ``Protocol demands that he retire,'' a Pentagon source said.
``There's no job in the Air Force he could really hold now.''
   Dugan flew combat missions during the Vietnam War, and later
taught cadet military training courses at the Air Force Academy.
   He was named assistant deputy chief of staff at Air Force
headquarters in January 1987, and six months later he became Air
Force deputy chief of staff for programs and resources.
   Dugan was promoted to the joint position of commander of U.S.
Air Forces in Europe and commander of Allied Air Forces Central
Europe, headquartered at Ramstein Air Base, West Germany, in April
1989.
   His military decorations include the Distinguished Service
Medal, the Silver Star, the Legion of Merit, the Distinguished
Flying Cross and the Purple Heart.
   Pending the choice of Gen. Dugan's successor, the vice chief of
staff, Gen. John Michael Loh, will act as the top commander of the
Air Force.
   Cheney told reporters, ``Mike Dugan is a fine officer with an
outstanding record of service in the United States Air Force and to
the nation. Relieving him is not a pleasant task but I felt it was
a necessary one.''
   Cheney said there are 150,000 U.S. combat troops in the Persian
Gulf.
   ``They may be engaged in hostilities in the very near future. A
very fragile, very important international coalition has been put
together to halt Saddam Hussein's aggression,'' Cheney said.
   ``Under those circumstances,'' he added, ``the conduct of U.S.
national security policy is an extremely delicate task.'' He said
Dugan's statement ``did not, in my mind, reveal an understanding of
the situation or of what is expected of him as a member of the
joint chiefs.''
   Dugan's office said he was not at work today and was unavailable
for comment.
   Dugan's attempts at openness - a major change for top Air Force
generals - appeared to contribute to his undoing.
   Shortly after taking over from Gen. Larry Welch in July, Dugan
began an aggressive campaign to meet with reporters and deal openly
with some of the service's sore points on Capitol Hill.
   The service had been battered by congressional budget battles
over the B-2 Stealth aircraft and problems with the performance of
the F-117A Stealth bomber during the Panama invasion.
   Dugan raised a few eyebrows inside the Pentagon last week when
he traveled to Saudi Arabia before the chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff - Gen. Colin Powell - had a chance to visit with the
troops.
   Commanders on the ground in Saudi Arabia have been critical of
Dugan for several weeks because of his open assessment of U.S.
military capabilities.
   Powell's aides said last week Dugan was one of several people
who have been talking too much.
   ``Saddam already has you guys giving away the store, we don't
need to help him any more,'' one Powell aide said privately.
   Pentagon officials said Dugan appeared to be the second member
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to be relieved of his duties.
   In 1949, President Truman relieved the Chief of Naval
Operations, Adm. Louis E. Denfeld.
   Truman took the action upon the recommendation of the Secretary
of the Navy, who'd asserted that the admiral had lost control of
his command.
   Denfeld's dismissal, according to a New York Times account
printed the day after the president's action, came two weeks after
the admiral had complained to Congress that the Navy was being
``starved'' in order to support the Air Force's bombing mission.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
