ID: 311	RANK: 61	SCORE: 14.494476
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP901219-0124 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NY-12-19-90 1630EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r i AM-Gulf-Cheney-Powell 2ndLd-Writethru a0646 12-19 0793</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Gulf-Cheney-Powell, 2nd Ld-Writethru, a0646,990</SECOND>
<HEAD>Senior Officer Says US Won't Be Ready To Fight By UN Deadline</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Adds objections to Waller's comments, inserting 2 grafs after
8th graf pvs, In Saudi</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By JOHN KING</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>RIYADH, Saudi Arabia (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   American troops will not be ready to
attack Iraq until weeks after the Jan. 15 U.N. deadline for Saddam
Hussein to withdraw from Kuwait, the deputy commander of U.S.
forces in the Persian Gulf said Wednesday.
   Some crucial heavy ground forces likely will not even have
arrived in Saudi Arabia by the deadline, and commanders are urging
President Bush to delay any offensive action until the deployment
is completed, Army Lt. Gen. Calvin A.H. Waller said.
   If Saddam ignores the deadline and Bush wants to order an attack
in the days immediately following Jan. 15, ``I'd tell him, `No. I'm
not ready to do the job,'' the general said.
   Waller said he believed Bush was aware of the readiness
timetable but said it would be stressed again in three days of
meetings that began Wednesday between field commanders and Bush's
top two military officials, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Colin Powell.
   Bush said Monday that U.N. resolutions against Iraq, which
include one authorizing force if Iraqi troops aren't out of Kuwait
by Jan. 15, should be enforced ``right on schedule.''
   At the White House, presidential press secretary Marlin
Fitzwater said Wednesday when asked about Waller's comments, ``What
he really said is they might not be as ready as they would like to
be ... for all the contingencies.''
   ``We are assured they will be ready to do whatever they are
called upon to do,'' Fitzwater said.
   In Saudi Arabia, aides to Powell and to Waller's immediate boss,
Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, expressed concern that Waller had been
too candid in discussing U.S. readiness and deployment in his
meeting with reporters just after an initial meeting with Cheney
and Powell.
   Speaking privately, several senior military officials suggested
that his comments could undermine diplomatic efforts based on
persuading Saddam to take the Jan. 15 deadline seriously.
   Cheney fired former Air Force chief of staff Gen. Michael Dugan
in September after Dugan talked openly of the likelihood of bombing
certain Iraqi military and economic targets if hostilities began.
   Waller was the first senior military officer to say publicly
that the American deployment will reach 430,000 troops when
completed. But he said several vital components still were missing,
including Navy carriers due to leave home port just after
Christmas, combat aircraft due to arrive by Jan. 15, and some
117,000 Army armored forces coming from Fort Riley, Kan., and from
Germany.
   Some of the latter group, Waller said, might not arrive until
late January. And even if the troops did arrive by the U.N.
deadline, he said, ``there's a distinct possibility that every unit
will not be fully combat ready until sometime after the first of
February.''
   Likening himself to a football coach, Waller said:
   ``I certainly want everything that I can possibly get and have
at my side of the field when I get ready to go into the Super Bowl.
... I would say to the president and to the secretary and as well
to the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that until our full
complement of forces are on the ground that we should not initiate
hostile activities.''
   Of Bush, Waller said: ``It's my understanding that he's been
briefed and received briefings that the forces will not be ready
for combat activity until sometime after the 15th of the month.''
   In Washington, meanwhile:
   - Sens. Ted Stevens, R-Alaska, and Daniel Inouye, D-Hawaii, said
that on their just-concluded trip to the gulf U.S. military
commanders indicated a war with Iraq could be wrapped up within
five days. The senators commented after briefing Bush on their trip
but declined to say if the president shared their assessment.
   - White House spokesman Fitzwater said there had been no new
contact with Iraq on dates or times for the proposed visit of
Secretary of State James A. Baker III to Baghdad or the White House
visit by Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz. ``We get no response
... we don't see any opening,'' Fitzwater said.
   - The State Department said U.S. allies had contributed more
than $9 billion to support the American gulf effort and ``we are
satisfied.'' Several members of Congress have criticized the
allies' contribution as too small.
   - The White House announced that Vice President Dan Quayle will
visit the U.S. troops in the gulf on a Dec. 29-Jan. 2 trip during
which he will also meet with Saudi King Fahd.
   In Saudi Arabia, Cheney and Powell had nothing to say publicly
Wednesday after the initial round of meetings. Speaking to
reporters en route to Saudi Arabia, however, Cheney said concerning
the Jan. 15 date, ``Most of the forces will be there by then, but
obviously there is additional work to be done before you would
identify them as combat ready.''
   As for Saddam's intentions, Cheney said he saw no evidence that
the Iraqi president planned even a partial withdrawal from Kuwait,
a move some have suggested he might make in an effort to weaken the
international coalition demanding a total pullout.
   ``He might move the pieces around on the board, but our
objective is for him to get all of that stuff out of Kuwait - not
half of it, not 75 percent of it, not 10 percent of it, all of
it,'' Cheney said.
   Powell said he did not want to discuss any U.S. combat plans
because doing so could help Saddam.
   ``I want him to sit there in beautiful downtown Baghdad and
worry his butt off about it,'' Powell said.
   Cheney and Powell are to meet with American and Saudi military
officers Thursday and Friday morning before splitting up to make
pre-Christmas visits to some of the 270,000 U.S. troops already in
the gulf region.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
