ID: 311	RANK: 64	SCORE: 14.420019
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP901108-0192 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NY-11-08-90 2101EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-GulfRdp 2ndLd-Writethru a0737 11-08 0899</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Gulf Rdp, 2nd Ld-Writethru, a0737,1099</SECOND>
<HEAD>Soviets Support Military Action, Bush Orders in 150,000 Troops</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: LEADS throughout to UPDATE with deployment of up to 150,000
troops, Cheney, Bush and Colin Powell quotes. No pickup.</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos DHA1,2,3</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By LISA GENASCI</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   A U.S. campaign to gain support for U.N. military action against
Iraq got a boost Thursday, with the Soviet Union offering its
qualified approval. President Bush, as expected, ordered a new
round of troop deployments, adding up to 150,000 soldiers to the
multinational force facing off against Iraq.
   In another development, Iraqi strongman Saddam Hussein sacked
his army chief, suggesting dissension in the ranks over Kuwait,
which his forces overran three months ago.
   The deployment of as many as 150,000 troops represents a
substantial addition to the 230,000 U.S. military personnel in the
region. Allies from 26 countries have sent 70,000 soldiers to the
multinational force assembled in the area.
   ``If this movement of force is what convinces him (Saddam), so
much the better,'' Bush said in a nationwide broadcast from
Washington. ``Let's hope he comes to his senses.''
   Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, giving details of the new
buildup, said it would include two armored divisions and small
armored units from Germany as well as the famed ``Big Red One''
First Infantry Division (Mechanized) from Fort Riley, Kans.
   Pentagon officials in private conversations said full deployment
of the units would total about 150,000 troops.
   Said Bush, ``We're talking about significant numbers'' of
troops. Cheney, who faced reporters after Bush, added, ``We will
not put an upper limit on this deployment.''
   Gen. Colin Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said,
``Whether it will be adequate in the event of going to war with
Saddam Hussein's army, I'm not going to speculate.''
   ``Iraq's brutality, aggression and violation of international
law cannot be permitted to succeed,'' Bush said, referring to the
``dismantling of Kuwait'' by Iraq's Aug. 2 invasion.
   ``I find it hard to believe that today, November 8, that he
(Saddam) does not understand that he's up against a determined,
unprecedented alliance ...''
   ``When he surveys the force that's there ... he will recognize
that he is up against just a foe that he can't possible manage
militarily,' Bush said.
   Former West German Chancellor Willy Brandt, meanwhile, secured
the release of 50 more Westerners from Iraq, including Germans,
Italians, Dutch and Britons, the Iraqi News Agency reported. It did
not say when they would be freed. Iraq on Wednesday promised to
free more than 100 Westerners.
   Hundreds of Americans are among those still trapped, some held
at strategic sites to deter attack by the U.S.-led mutinational
force in the region.
   Secretary of State James A. Baker III met in Moscow with Soviet
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev. Baker wants Moscow to agree to
using force as a last resort to liberate Kuwait.
   Later, Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze said
military might should not be ruled out, but cautioned it should be
used only under U.N. auspices.
   ``A situation may emerge which effectively would require such a
move,'' Shevardnadze said.
   He played down any differences on Iraq between the superpowers.
Before Baghdad's invasion of Kuwait, Moscow was Baghdad's principal
ally and principal weapons supplier.
   ``I would advise against looking for some difference in the
positions between the Soviet Union and the United States,''
Shevardnadze told reporters.
   Bush said ``we're on the same wavelength'' with Gorbachev in
terms of his policy goals in the Middle East. He said he felt there
were no ``mixed signals'' from Moscow.
   The Bush administration, impatient that months of economic
sanctions have failed to dislodge Saddam from Kuwait, intends to
ask the U.N. Security Council to authorize force to liberate Kuwait
if Iraq doesn't pull out.
   Baker is on a weeklong tour of Middle Eastern and European
nations to gather support for such action. He travels to Paris and
London before heading back to Washington on Saturday.
   If such a measure were adopted, it would be the first time the
U.N. authorized a joint military command. During the Korean War, it
authorized the United States to command the U.N. forces repelling
North Korea's invasion.
   The United States and its allies are facing about 430,000 Iraqi
troops in Kuwait and southern Iraq.
   There seemed to be indications Thursday that cracks might be
opening in Iraq's stated determination to remain in Kuwait.
   Iraq's army newspaper and U.S. officials said Saddam replaced
his military chief of staff, Gen. Nizar Al-Khazraji, with the head
of his elite Republican Guards, Gen. Hussein Rashid. It did not say
when or why Khazraji was dismissed.
   Western analysts with knowledge of Iraq's military machine said
Khazraji's surprise dismissal indicated growing opposition in some
military quarters to Saddam's strategy on Kuwait.
   ``It's very ominous,'' said Hans-Heino Kopietz, with Control
Risks, an international security firm in London.
   ``It's not wise to change horses in mid-stream at this point in
time. Khazraji's dismissal now is indicative of some opposition to
Saddam within the military,'' said Kopietz, just back from a Middle
East tour.
   Khazraji had been chief of staff since 1985 and was one of the
top officers in Saddam's inner circle of military advisers.
   He was sacked amid increasingly tough U.S. and British warnings
that they might use force to dislodge Iraq from Kuwait if
necessary.
   Saddam regularly purges those he perceives as a threat. It was
the second replacement of a high-level Iraqi official in two weeks.
Oil Minister Issam Chalabi was fired Oct. 28 and replaced by Brig.
Gen. Hussein Kamel, Saddam's cousin and son-in-law.
   Some analysts said Rashid's appointment was in part designed to
keep the Republican Guards on Saddam's side. The guards are
considered Saddam's best troops among his million-man forces.
   In Amman, Jordan, 11 British women arrived Thursday en route to
Baghdad to seek the release of their husbands and relatives held
hostage after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait. They were expected to
leave Friday for Iraq.
   And in Warsaw, Poland, 241 Poles returned from Iraq on Thursday
and one told Polish TV at the airport that about 40 Americans being
held at a chemical plant were in ``tragic'' condition.
   Iraq offered to allow relatives of foreigners banned from
leaving to spend Christmas with loved ones. The British and U.S.
governments discouraged relatives from accepting the invitation.
   The women hope to negotiate directly with Saddam and ask him to
release the men on humanitarian grounds.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
