ID: 267	RANK: 32	SCORE: 28.072268
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911004-0030
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911004-0030.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   South Africa's Nobelist, Nadine Gordimer
   ----
   By Amy Gamerman
</HL>
<DATE>
10/04/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   New York -- Nadine Gordimer, who won the Nobel Prize in
literature yesterday, wedged a phone book underneath her and
faced the reporters and cameramen jamming the nofrills
offices of her U.S. publisher, Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux.
   "Naturally, I was delighted and tremendously surprised,"
said the 67-year-old writer in crisp, unflustered tones. She
happens to be in town for a series of readings from her new
book, "Jump and Other Stories" (20 pages, $25). "I've been on
the short list a number of times before, and I was thinking
of putting `Nadine Gordimer, Nobel Prize' and in brackets
`failed.'"
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But this year, the 18 life-appointed members of the
Swedish Academy in Stockholm seemed to have had their minds
made up in advance. For the first time in memory, the award
for literature was announced before any other Nobel Prize,
indicating an extraordinary lack of disagreement over the
choice.
   Ms. Gordimer is the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in
literature in 25 years, and the first South African. She is
the author of 10 novels, more than 200 short stories and
several works of literary criticism. Like last year's winner,
the Mexican writer Octavio Paz, she is also known as an
outspoken social critic. A committed foe of her country's
apartheid system and a friend of the African National
Congress, some of her books were once banned. She founded the
Congress of South African Writers, an association dedicated
to fostering black writers, and also acts as vice president
of International P.E.N.
   But if Ms. Gordimer is unambiguous about her politics, her
writing, at its luminous best, captures the contradictions
and strained loyalties that bind all South Africans.
   An early landmark in her career, the 1970 novel "A Guest
of Honour," told the story of an English colonial
administrator who returns to the newly independent central
African country he once governed. "He emerged among the
others into heady recognition taken in at all the senses,"
Ms. Gordimer writes, "walking steadily across the tarmac
through the raw-potato whiff of the undergrowth, the fresh,
early warmth on hands, the cool metallic taste of last
night's storm at the back of the throat, the airport building
with the five pink frangipani and the enclosure where
out-of-works and children still hooked their fingers on the
diamond-mesh wire and gazed."
   Ms. Gordimer knows this territory inside out: South Africa
is the only home she's ever had. Born in 1923 in a small
mining town near Johannesburg, her parents were Jewish
immigrants from Lithuania and England. While studying at the
University of Witwatersrand in Johannesburg, she first came
in contact with blacks as peers. "I felt greater affinity
with them than with the whites," she said.
   As Ms. Gordimer's writing evolved, she focused on the
embattled ground occupied by white upper-class liberals such
as herself in a racially divided South Africa, most notably
in "The Conservationist" (1974), "Burger's Daughter" (1979)
and "July's People" (1981). The last, the story of a white
family sheltered and protected during an armed rebellion by
its black houseboy, was especially cited by the Nobel
committee as a "masterpiece," for its portrait of a
master-servant relationship gone awry. In one passage, as the
shaken white housewife takes stock of her new surroundings --
a crowded mud hut -- her sense of identity starts to slip:
   "On an iron bedstead tidily made up with fringed plaid
blankets one of the halfgrown girls was plaiting the hair on
the bent head of another," Ms. Gordimer writes. "Perhaps they
had been out since first light gathering wood or working in
their fields -- Maureen was aware, among them in the hut, of
not knowing where she was, in time, in the order of a day as
she had always known it."
   Mirroring recent South African history, in which black
causes have taken center stage, Ms. Gordimer's writing has
also begun to push white concerns to the margins. In her 1990
novel, "My Son's Story," she plunges headlong into the world
of her black countrymen, telling a story of a mixed-race
family through its own eyes. While the Nobel committee
applauded its "enthralling . . . poetic values," not all
critics responded so warmly. On this page last year, Lee
Lescaze wrote, "It is too big a jump. The sophisticated
understanding that made her such an elegant observer of
white-black contacts when told from the white viewpoint now
deserts her."
   Ms. Gordimer defended her widening choice of subject
matter here today. "It's there. It's being lived by people
around me," she said. "It was Goethe who said: As a writer
you close your eyes and put your hand deep into the life
around you and what you bring up will have some truth in it."
   As "Jump," her new collection of stories shows, that truth
will invariably be an uncomfortable one. "The Moment Before
the Gun Went Off," a story about a proapartheid Afrikaner who
accidentally shoots one of his farm workers, shows Ms.
Gordimer as unwilling as ever to settle for easy answers. The
story's painful irony is that the dead boy is the farmer's
son.
   Although members of the South African government may not
have appreciated the irony, their ambassador to the U.S. sent
Ms. Gordimer his congratulations on her prize. But the
highlight of the day was a call from a fellow South African
Nobel laureate, Archbishop Desmond Tutu, who blew her a
string of loud kisses over the phone. "Typically Tutu," Ms.
Gordimer said.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
