ID: 267	RANK: 43	SCORE: 26.173164
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891009-0044 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-10-09-89 0818EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i PM-Nobel-Medicine 3rdLd-Writethru a0478 10-09 0800</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Nobel-Medicine, 3rd Ld-Writethru, a0478,0825</SECOND>
<HEAD>Nobel In Medicine Goes To San Francisco Cancer Researchers</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: LEADS thruout to ADD quotes from Nobel winners; No Pickup.</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By ARTHUR MAX ^Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>STOCKHOLM, Sweden (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Americans J. Michael Bishop and Harold
E. Varmus won the Nobel Prize in medicine today for their discovery
of a family of genes that has helped scientists understand how
cancer develops.
   Bishop, 53, and Varmus, 49, work in the Department of
Microbiology and Immunology at the University of California School
of Medicine in San Francisco.
   ``I was stunned,'' said Bishop, who lives in Belvedere, outside
San Francisco.
   Varmus said he was sleeping when he heard the news on the radio.
``I didn't know if it was a false alarm or they got my name
confused, not having talked to anyone directly,'' he said from his
home in San Francisco. ``As we say in science, I needed
confirmation of the information.''
   The 50-member Nobel Assembly of the Karolinska Institute,
Sweden's largest and oldest medical university, cited the
researchers ``for their discovery of the cellular origin of
retroviral oncogenes.''
   Their 1976 work on oncogenes, which control the division and
growth of cells, helped understand how malignant tumors develop,
the citation said.
   The discovery also ``widened our insight into the complicated
signal systems which govern the normal growth of cells,'' the
assembly said.
   Oncogenic virus was discovered as early as 1916, although it was
not known as such until nearly 50 years later.
   Bishop and Varmus ``published the remarkable conclusion that the
oncogene in the virus did not represent a true viral gene but
instead was a normal cellular gene, which the virus had acquired
during replication in the host cell and thereafter carried along,''
the citation said.
   Peter Reichard, chairman of the Nobel Assembly said, ``They have
clarified how cancer genes work.''
   ``The great importance of the discovery is that we have a
completely different view on how cancer can originate, and through
that we hope to be able to use this practically later on,'' he said.
   Varmus called the scientists' work a ``cornerstone in
understanding the genetic mosaic of cancer.''
   ``The basic idea that we helped establish is that cancer has its
origins in genes that normally do us some good. But after they
become abnormal through mutation, they cause a role in cancer.''
   He and Bishop will share a $469,000 cash prize.
   It was the third time the Nobel Prize has been awarded for
research in connection with this field of research. Peyton Rous was
first given the prize after his 1916 discovery of a tumor-inducing
virus, which was then called the Rous virus.
   In 1975, David Baltimore, Renato Dulbecco and Howard Temin were
awarded the prize for discovering the interaction between tumor
viruses and the genetic material of the cells.
   Bishop and Vermus were added to a long list of Americans who
have dominated the medicine prize over the last 20 years. They were
the 30th and 31st U.S. winners since 1969, compared with 19
laureates from all other countries combined.
   Bishop was born in York, Pa. on Feb. 22, 1936, studied at
Gettysburg College and Harvard and worked in the National
Institutes of Health outside Washington. He spent time in Hamburg,
West Germany before moving to the University of California in 1968.
   Varmus came from Oceanside, N.Y., where he was born Dec. 18,
1939. He studied at Amherst College in Massachusetts, and earned
his masters degree at Harvard in 1962, the same year Bishop earned
his medical degree at Harvard. Varmus received a doctorate from
Columbia University in 1966.
   Varmus also worked at the National Institutes of Health as a
clinical associate before becoming a postdoctoral fellow at the
California School of Medicine in 1970.
   The assembly of the Karolinska Institute never announces a list
of candidates for the prize, but officials say about 250 scientists
are considered each year. Many are nominated repeatedly.
   The medicine prize was the first of four Nobel awards being
announced this week. All are worth 3 million Swedish kronor, or
about $469,000. The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences will disclose
the economics prize winner Wednesday, and the laureates for
chemistry and physics Thursday.
   The date for the literature prize has not been announced.
   The Nobel Peace Prize was given Thursday to the Dalai Lama, the
exiled spiritual and political leader of Tibet, for his non-violent
struggle against China's rule of his Himalayan country.
   Last year's medicine prize went to Sir James. W. Black of Great
Britain, and to Americans Gertrude B. Elion and George H. Hitchings.
   They were cited for developing principles leading to new drugs
that have been applied against leukemia, AIDS, heart disease and
other lethal illnesses.
   The prizes were first awarded in 1901 from the estate of Alfred
Nobel, the inventor of dynamite.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
