ID: 267	RANK: 62	SCORE: 23.144999
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP881115-0219 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-11-15-88 1320EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>s i BC-WriterPoliticians ADV20   11-15 1205</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-Writer Politicians, ADV 20,1239</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv20</NOTE>
<NOTE>For Release Sunday, Nov. 20, and Thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>Vargas Llosa Joins Latin American Tradition of Writer-Politicians</HEAD>
<NOTE>EDS: An accompanying story is BC-Writers-Mexico, b0669.</NOTE>
<HEAD>An AP Extra</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto Planned</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By MONTE HAYES</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>LIMA, Peru (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   It came as no surprise to anyone in Latin
America that a novelist, poet and essayist, Mario Vargas Llosa,
would seek to become president of Peru.
   For Vargas Llosa, frequently mentioned as a future winner of the
Nobel Prize for Literature, is following a centuries-old tradition
of an area where cultural figures, both classical and pop, have also
played important political roles.
   Peru's Vice President Luis Alberto Sanchez, himself a writer and
educator as well as politician, says that in Latin America
individuals who have distinguished themselves in literature and art
can carry their prestige into politics because they live in ``half
finished'' societies that value men of multiple talents.
   ``In societies that have not evolved greatly, there is little
specialization,'' Sanchez, who is 88 and has written more than 100
books, said in an interview.
   ``The politician can be a writer, a priest, a military man, many
things.''
   Vargas Llosa, who once described himself as a ``specialist in
fanatasies, in dreams,'' stands in sharp contrast to the
professional politicians and technocrats in many other parts of the
world.
   ``This is definitely not my calling,'' the 52-year-old writer
said recently. ``If my country were not what it is, politics would
probably be a very secondary concern in my life.''
   Instead, the author of such books as ``The Green House'' and
``Conversation in a Cathedral'' finds himself leading a center-right
political movement that seeks to prevent the election in 1990 of
Alfonso Barrantes, a declared Communist now favored to win the
presidency.
   ``I am fundamentally a writer, but at the same time I am a person
concerned about the reality of his country and, above all, its
future,'' said Vargas Llosa.
   Peru is wracked by its worst economic crisis of the century, with
the annual inflation rate surpassing 1,200 percent. It also is
bloodied by a savage leftist insurgency that has claimed more than
12,000 lives.
   Vargas Llosa has been traveling into Peru's remote backlands,
climbing down mine shafts high in the Andes and visiting isolated
Indian villages in the Amazon forests to spread his message of the
dangers that await Peru if the next presidential election is won by
Communists.
   ``They would impoverish us even more than we are now and little
by little, just as has occurred with other Marxist regimes, they
would totally trample our political freedoms,'' he declared at a
recent rally.
   Elsewhere, Jose Luis Rodriguez, Latin America's most popular
ballard singer, speaks seriously of running for president of
Venezuela. Ruben Blades, one of the region's top singers and
composers of salsa music, talks of one day seeking the presidency of
Panama.
   Although writers and artists participate actively in politics
throughout the region, only a few have been successful in their bids
for the presidency of a country.
   Romulo Gallegos, Venezuela's greatest novelist, was elected
president in 1947. Juan Bosch, regarded as the Dominican Republic's
finest short story writer, was elected president of that Caribbean
country in 1962.
   Both men were overthrown after only months in office by their
countries' armed forces, which viewed them as arrogant and soft on
leftists.
   ``Gallegos had a lot of Communists around him and they began to
flatter him _ and that is a writer's great weakness, his vanity. We
are all vain,'' said Sanchez, a founder of Peru's populist Aprista
Party.
   Bosch's ouster led to a 1965 popular rebellion that ended after
U.S. troops invaded the Dominican Republic. At 79 Bosch is still
active in politics. He received 18 percent of the vote in 1986, but
polls indicate that if the elections were held today, he would win
against conservative President Joaquin Balaguer, a lawyer and also a
writer.
   In Brazil, where the national language is Portuguese, President
Jose Sarney has written collections of poetry and short stories,
some of which have been translated into English, Spanish, French and
Russian.
   Sarney has called his election to the prestigious Brazilian
Academy of Letters ``the greatest moment of pure happiness in my
life.''
   The list of distinguished Latin American writers and artists who
have sought public office or influenced public policy through their
political activism is long.
   Chile's most famed literary figure, the poet Pablo Neruda, winner
of the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1971, was the Chilean Communist
Party's candidate for president in 1970. But he withdrew to give his
support to a coalition candidate, Salvador Allende, a Marxist who
went on to win and was overthrown in a military coup three years
later.
   The region's best known writer, Colombia's Nobel Prize winner
Gabriel Garcia Marquez, is a vigorous defender of Fidel Castro's
Cuba.
   In Mexico the late world-renowned muralists David Alfaro
Siqueiros and Diego Rivera were leading members of the Mexican
Communist Party.
   Mexico's poet and essayist Octavio Paz and novelist Carlos
Fuentes have both won the Miguel de Cervantes prize, the most
important literary honor for Spanish-language writers, and are
perennial candidates for the Nobel Prize. Both have served in the
Mexican diplomatic service and have been outspoken in their
political views.
   Fuentes, currently a professor of literature at Harvard
University, has been a strong critic of U.S. policy in Central
America.
   Octavio Paz, going against the current of leftist sympathy among
Latin American intellectuals, says he has little use for Marxism.
Mexico's leftist intellectuals say they have little use for Paz.
   Although he never served in public office, Argentina's most
distinguished writer, Jorge Luis Borges, was known not for what he
did in the political arena but what he wrote and said about it. He
frequently expressed his scorn for elected governments in Argentina
and other Latin American nations.
   ``You Americans are worthy of democracy, but we are not,'' Borges
said in an interview before his death last year. ``In this country
we always find some rascal to vote for.''
   Nicaragua's leading poet is the Rev. Ernesto Cardenal, a Roman
Catholic priest who served for years as culture minister in the
leftist Sandinista government. An immediately recognizable figure
for his black beret, Cardenal has been criticized for using his
international prestige to defend the regime.
   But Vice President Sergio Ramirez of Nicaragua, who just
published his third novel, is considered the most influential
intellectual within the Sandinista government.
   The Venezuelan writer Carlos Rangel has sharply criticized the
role of intellectuals in Latin American public life in a
controversial book, ``From the Good Savage to the Good
Revolutionary.''
   ``The quality of work of these writers or their academic
distinction is often mediocre,'' he wrote. ``Many of them have
achieved prominence because they were born into undemanding
societies.''
   Rangel excepted from his criticism a handful of distiguished
writers, among them Vargas Llosa.
   Vargas Llosa has unleashed his own criticism of intellectuals in
politics, whom he accuses of irresponsibly urging violent revolution
in Peru.
   ``Many young men are killing and dying because of what they have
been taught by intellectuals, many of whom today are at American
universities, living off the imperialism they condemned,'' he said.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Sunday, Nov. 20</NOTE>
</DOC>
