ID: 267	RANK: 85	SCORE: 21.384413
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880518-0298 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-05-18-88 1439EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>s e BC-APArts:EthnicArts Adv29   05-18 1185</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-AP Arts: Ethnic Arts, Adv 29,1217</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv29</NOTE>
<NOTE>For Release Sunday, May 29 and Thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>Former Colonies Enrich Britain's Cultural Landscape</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   
   EDITOR'S NOTE: The British Empire is no more, but the children
and grandchildren of the former colonies have enriched Mother
England with an outpouring of novels, poetry and plays, and the
emergence of stage and screen stars. Such may be the finest
remaining jewels left by the empire builders of the 18th and 19th
centuries.
</TEXT>
<BYLINE>By MATT WOLF</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>LONDON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Ben Okri first came to England in 1978 eager to
experience the land of Shakespeare and Dickens, two writers in a
literary tradition he had long admired.
   A decade and three books later, the 29-year-old Nigerian writer
is broadening that tradition. Okri represents the artistic
dividends Britain has reaped from its days of spreading its empire
and language throughout the world.
   Indeed, any literary critic listing the five greatest living
British writers would certainly include Trinidad-born V.S. Naipaul,
especially after his latest acclaimed best seller, ``The Enigma of
Arrival.''
   However, this multicultural vibrancy is not new. Such writers as
Nobelist Wole Soyinka, Chinua Achebe and Samuel Selvon have been on
the scene for more than 20 years, opening readers' eyes to the
ethnic problems far removed from the domestic, bourgeois subject
matter often favored by Anglo-Saxon writers.
   What is new is the quantity of these so-called Commonwealth
artists _ sons and daughters of the almost vanished empire _ and
their increased visibility.
   Around 1960, the Nigerian-born Soyinka was testing the London
theater fringe with ``The Swamp Dweller'' and ``The Trials of
Brother Jero.'' In 1986, he won the Nobel Prize for literature, the
first black African to receive the honor.
   Achebe first won attention in 1958 with ``Things Fall Apart,'' a
tribal tragedy set in his native Nigeria which has sold more than 2
million copies. Last year, after a 20-year break from writing, his
``Anthills of the Savannah'' was nominated for the Booker prize,
Britain's most prestigious literary award.
   These older novelists are gaining numerous younger counterparts
including Okri and Buchi Emecheta from Africa, Salman Rushdie and
Vikram Seth from India, Timothy Mo from Hong Kong and Caryl
Phillips, Olive Senior and Derek Walcott from the West Indies.
   With the contributions of such artists as the
playwright-screenwriter Hanif Kureishi and actors Ben Kingsley, Art
Malik, Roshan Seth and Victor Banerjee, English culture's debt to
the Commonwealth is growing.
   ``We're looking at a world movement which covers every
conceivable theme,'' Alistair Niven, literature director at
London's Arts Council, said in an interview. ``One has to abandon
the notion of the Anglo-Saxon tradition. We're trying to
internationalize the view of literature in this country.''
   ``There's a growing awareness of these nations as nations in
their own right and also of the presence in England of a great many
people of Caribbean and African origin,'' said Lyn Innes, senior
lecturer in English and Afro-Caribbean Studies at the University of
Kent at Canterbury, one of a dozen British universities offering
Commonwealth literature courses.
   Where Commonwealth literature was once relegated to small
presses and limited print runs, it is now snapped up by mainstream
publishers and movie dealers and is alo receiving recognition from
the academic community.
   Indian-born Salman Rushdie, 40, won the 1981 Booker Prize for
his magical, panoramic novel, ``Midnight's Children,'' about
India's transition from colony to independence. He reportedly
received a $1.496 million advance for his next novel ``The Satanic
Verses,'' to be released in September.
   Mo's novel, ``Sour Sweet,'' set among London's Chinese
community, has been made into a $3.62 million movie. His best
seller, ``An Insular Possession,'' about the British in Hong Kong,
made the 1987 Booker list.
   Tim Cribb, director of English studies at Cambridge's Churchill
College, is leading a drive to raise $7.8 million for a chair in
Commonwealth studies.
   Many of the new novels deal with the disillusionment
Commonwealth immigrants suffer when they run into racism in Britain.
   Tanzanian-born Abdulrazak Gurnah, a faculty member at the
University of Kent, has just published ``Pilgrims Way.'' The novel
tells of an African immigrant named Daud who is drawn to Britain _
``the torch of wisdom and learning.'' Encountering persistent
racism, he finds his own small, personal triumph in a crushing
victory by the West Indian cricket team over England.
   The theme echoes Sam Selvon's 1956 ``The Lonely Londoners,''
whose main character, a Trinidadian, comes to London only to
discover that the home capital he had envisioned is in truth ``a
strange place on another planet.''
   In ``Disparities,'' an Okri short story, a Nigerian immigrant is
forced to sleep in subway stations and scavenge discarded yogurt
containers. He finds London ``a damn poxy place'' and its gentility
``an uneasy yoking of lies.''
   Some Commonwealth novels chart the sociological and identity
changes wrought by the end of empire.
   Caryl Phillips, in ``A State of Independence,'' describes
Bertram Francis returning to his newly independent West Indian
island after a 20-year absence and finding himself an alien.
Naipaul's ``The Enigma of Arrival,'' on the other hand, is an elegy
to the passing of ``the old England.''
   Nirad C. Chaudhuri's autobiographical ``Thy Hand, Great
Anarch!'' is a paean to Western civilization whose controversial
thesis is that India gained nothing by Britain's departure.
   Some English writers say they are spurred on by the blazing
assuredness of their Commonwealth colleagues and their looser
prose, which is rooted in an oral, story-telling tradition.
   ``There are a number of people, age 55 down to 30, who have
created a strong presence which has given me and other writers a
sense of British literature being global, not just insular,'' says
author Margaret Drabble.
   ``London now is one of the most cosmopolitan, most transcultural
cities in the world. It's very hard not to want to write about
that.''
   The Commonwealth presence is also felt in the performing arts
where attitudes are less open.
   Rita Wolf, the Bengali who starred in ``My Beautiful
Laundrette,'' complains that despite her experience, she has
difficulty getting work. Art Malik, the 35-year-old Anglo-Asian
actor, is only now beginning to get cast in non-ethnic roles,
following his compelling performance as the wronged Hari Kumar in
the hit TV series ``The Jewel in the Crown.''
   ``The problem is that in the minority area, every actor is a
minority of one, whether he be fat, thin, Chinese, a woman,'' Malik
said. ``If you're going to say we are a cosmopolitan society, you
have to go one step further.''
   More often, Commonwealth actors are expected to conform to
stereotypes, even if a few, such as the Academy Award-winner Ben
Kingsley, have built a career on uncompromising portrayals that
honor their own visions.
   In 1985 Kingsley, who is half-Indian, played Othello in a Royal
Shakespeare Company production as the robed North African, rather
than as the conventional elocutionary Englishman in blackface. He
won his Oscar for his portrayal of Gandhi.
   ``There are certain sensibilities in this country that I to my
dying day will never re-educate,'' Kingsley said. ``All I can take
with me is my version of the truth.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Sunday, May 29</NOTE>
</DOC>
