ID: 267	RANK: 92	SCORE: 20.963160
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900815-0070 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-08-15-90 1724EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-Soviet-Citizenship 1stLd-Writethru a0627 08-15 0932</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Soviet-Citizenship, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0627,0955</SECOND>
<HEAD>Restoration of Soviet Citizenship May Include Solzhenitsyn,
Brodsky</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: SUBS two grafs for 5th `Solzhenitsyn, who' to UPDATE with
comment from Solzhenitsyn's wife; pickup graf 6 pvs, `The brief...'</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto NY30</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By ANN IMSE</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>MOSCOW (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The Soviet Union on Wednesday restored the
citizenship of an undetermined number of exiles, and among those
reported on the list were Nobel Prize-winning authors Joseph
Brodsky and Alexander Solzhenitsyn.
   In his second major human rights decree in three days, President
Mikhail S. Gorbachev ``canceled the decrees on citizenship
concerning a number of persons who are now living abroad,'' the
official news agency Tass reported.
   Foreign Ministry spokesman Yuri Gremitskikh said the order
``concerns a rather large number of people. Some names were
mentioned _ Brodsky, Solzhenitsyn.''
   ``I just heard that ostensibly Mr. Solzhenitsyn got back his
Soviet citizenship, but I don't know for sure,'' Gremitskikh said.
   In a statement issued in her husband's name from their home in
Cavendish, Vt., Natalia Solzhenitsyn said: ``In Solzhenitsyn's
case, the original decree was not only a deprivation of
citizenship, but before that a forced eviction from the U.S.S.R.
that was accomplished through arrest and the accusation of treason.
Since nothing has been said about that in today's resolution, it
does not apply to Solzhenitsyn.''
   Brodsky, who lives in New York, were not immediately available
for comment.
   The brief Tass report said the order dealt with ``injustices
that occurred between 1966 and 1988,'' but did not say if it
affected everyone whose citizenship was revoked then. Nor did it
name anyone. Gremitskikh said he did not know the number of people
affected but that it was not in the thousands.
   Tass later reported that those people whose citizenship was
being restored would be informed by the Foreign Ministry.
   Solzhenitsyn is the author of ``The Gulag Archipelago,'' which
depicted the horrors of dictator Josef Stalin's prison camps. He
was charged with treason in 1974, stripped of his citizenship and
expelled.
   Brodsky, a poet and essayist, was forced to emigrate in 1972
under threat of imprisonment for his political comments.
   Publication of works by both Solzhenitsyn and Brodsky was barred
for years in the Soviet Union, but the restrictions were gradually
lifted under the reform policies pushed by Gorbachev, who came to
power in March 1985.
   On Monday, Gorbachev issued a decree restoring the rights of all
victims of Stalin's repressions, saying thousands of innocent
people still bore ``a stain of injustice.'' Gorbachev said he took
the action because ``our society ... has chosen the path of moral
revival, democracy, and legality.''
   A 1989 Soviet high school history textbook says 40 million
people were ``repressed,'' a word used to cover death,
imprisonment, exile and other punishments.
   Under Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Soviet government revoked the
citizenship of prominent authors and artists who spoke out against
domestic repression. However, Gorbachev has restored the
citizenship of such notables as cellist and conductor Mstislav
Rostropovich and his wife, singer Galina Vishnevskaya.
   Rostropovich, who has conducted the National Symphony Orchestra
of Washington, D.C. for 13 years, returned to Moscow in February
for a triumphant concert. He promptly held a press conference to
call for the government to drop treason charges against
Solzhenitsyn and apologize.
   Wednesday's announcement said nothing about the treason charges
against Solzhenitsyn.
   Other exiled cultural figures have returned for visits in recent
years under Gorbachev, although most have stayed in the West. One
exception was theater director Yuri Lyubimov, who has resumed his
job as director of Moscow's Taganka Theater.
   Solzhenitsyn won the Nobel Prize for literature in 1970.
Government pressure on him increased after that, and in February
1974 he was arrested on the treason charge, which carried a
possible death sentence. He was put on a plane to West Germany and
stripped of his citizenship.
   Solzhenitsyn's opus, ``The Gulag Archipelago,'' was published in
the Soviet Union last year. Other well-known works include ``One
Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich'' and ``Cancer Ward.''
   Brodsky was forced to emigrate in June 1972 after secret police
gave him a choice to leave or ``face the consequences.'' He
understood the threat to mean he might face another prison term if
he stayed.
   Brodsky left behind an eloquent appeal to Brezhnev, who was then
Soviet leader, that he be permitted to return home one day.
   ``Although I am losing my Soviet citizenship, I do not cease to
be a Russian poet. I belong to Russian culture, I feel part of it.
   ``I feel bitter as I leave Russia, I was born, raised and have
lived here and I owe everything I have in the world to Russia,'' he
said.
   He was sentenced to five years in a labor camp in 1964 after
being convicted in 1964 of ``parasitism,'' but released after 18
months. Parasitism was considered the crime of not holding a job.
Many dissidents were fired, barred from working and then found
guilty of parasitism.
   Brodsky moved to New York and became an American citizen. Only a
few of his works were published in the Soviet Union until the
literary monthly Novy Mir printed a selection after he won the 1987
Nobel Prize for Literature.
   Moscow News reported Wednesday that a book of Brodsky's poetry
is being published for the first time in the Soviet Union. The
Northwest publishing house in Leningrad plans 100,000 copies of the
book, ``The Autumn Cry of the Hawk.''
   Solzhenitsyn came under particular criticism in his homeland
because he condemned not only Stalin but also Soviet founder
Vladimir Lenin, calling him ``evil.'' Lenin is still revered by
most Soviets.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
