ID: 235	RANK: 28	SCORE: 21.096281
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911127-0070
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911127-0070.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Marketing:
   Toy Shoppers Seek Out Tried and True
   Amid Tough Times This Holiday Season
   ----
   By Joseph Pereira
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
11/27/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   GAL H.PLY HAS J.NTD J.SEL MAT TOPP TTI X.REV
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
PUBLISHING, INFORMATION SERVICES COMPANIES (PUB)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)
SOFTWARE (SOF)
TOY MANUFACTURERS (TMF)
</IN>
<NS>
ANALYSTS COMMENTS ON STOCKS, INDUSTRIES &amp; COMPANIES (ANL)
</NS>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
FAR EAST (FE)
JAPAN (JA)
NEW JERSEY (NJ)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
RHODE ISLAND (RI)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Peek into Santa's workshop today, and you glimpse the
ghosts of Christmas past.
   "Barbie dolls, Monopoly games and Lego blocks will be
piled high under the Christmas tree this year," predicts Paul
Valentine, Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.'s toy analyst. "They were
big a generation ago. They are selling well today."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   They are also relatively cheap, which explains why they
are holding their own in these tough economic times. But how
many newer toys and games, including video-game
introductions, will join them under the tree is a matter of
debate. Many toy retailers report store traffic in recent
weeks is down. "The question is, will it pick up and by how
much?" wonders Stephen Sandberg, co-owner of Sanco Toys Inc.,
a toy wholesaler in Foxboro, Mass., whose orders from
retailers haven't been as heavy as in past years. He adds:
"People are saying let's see how can we just get through this
holiday season, keeping damage to a minimum."
   Consider the shopping list of Anita Eichmann, a Boston
school teacher, browsing in a suburban Child World store one
recent weekend. Ms. Eichmann, who two years ago bought a
Nintendo video-game system, this year has picked up a packet
of Roger Clemens baseball cards, a Red Baron model-biplane
kit and a Young Readers Dictionary for her nine-year-old boy.
Her six-year-old girl will get a coloring book, a Barbie doll
and a doll house.
   "Times are tough," says Ms. Eichmann. "Nobody knows which
way the economy is going. As for buying myself a present,
maybe next year."
   Judging by what's selling so far this year, other parents
have similarly modest lists that harken back to the times
when they were growing up. The Erector set, that bygone play
set made by the French firm Meccano S.A., is making a
comeback. This year, the company estimates it will sell
nearly 200,000 units in the U.S., up from "only a few
thousand" last year, reports Stephane Treppoz, vice president
of Meccano Inc., the company's U.S. unit.
   "I don't think all of a sudden in America parents want
their children to become engineers," he explains. "I think
they are looking for basic things. They want something that
will keep their child occupied for a long period of time."
   Topps Co., which claims more than one-third of the $1
billion trading-card business, projects that its
baseball-card business will grow 12% this year and 25% next
year. Another booming business is that of Lego. U.S. sales of
the Danish-made plastic building blocks will climb 25% this
year, estimates Peter Eio, president of Lego Systems Inc.,
the U.S. unit of closely held Lego Group.
   Toys with familiar names sell well in a recession, Mr. Eio
notes. "In this economic climate, retailers prefer not to
take a lot of risks," he explains.
   A newer "old" favorite, Cabbage Patch dolls, also is
selling well. The revamped doll line, acquired by Hasbro Inc.
from now defunct Coleco Industries Inc. in 1989 is expected
to ring up sales of $100 million this year. Though well below
peak sales of $600 million in 1985 at the peak of the Cabbage
Patch craze, sales should be up slightly from last year but
nearly twice that of 1989, thanks to new versions of the doll
such as Crimp and Curl, which comes with a curling iron.
   Analysts say that another new Hasbro introduction, Yo-Yo,
a furry kitten that rolls on wheels, is also selling well and
could hit $50 million in sales this year.
   Another doll on the best-selling charts is Tyco Toys
Inc.'s new Little Mermaid, fashioned after the Disney
character. Projected sales of the toy are $50 million this
year.
   Mattel Inc. should do a tidy $50 million with its Li'l
Miss Singing Mermaid doll and another $50 million from its
Magic Nursery doll, now in its second year. Meanwhile,
Mattel's 32-year-old Barbie remains the reigning queen of the
toy industry. This year, sales of Barbie dolls, clothing,
toiletries and playhouses are expected to reach $800 million,
an 8% increase over last year.
   Other hits include: Hasbro's Nerf Bow and Arrow; Playmate
Toys Ltd.'s Water Babies, which feel like real babies when
filled with warm water; Tyco's Magic Copier, which makes a
copy of pictures drawn on an erasable screen; and Cosie Coop,
a toy car for preschoolers by Rubbermaid Inc.'s Little Tikes
unit.
   Also on the "what's hot" list of Toy Book, an industry
publication, to be published next month is Uno, the card game
by International Games Inc., and model kits by Revell Inc.
   For boys, Playmate Toys' Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles,
though past their prime, will claim better than 50% of the $1
billion retail "action figure" market in the U.S. A new entry
in the action-figure category that looks promising for boys,
retailers say, is Mattel's Hook, a line based on a bunch of
Peter Pan characters from Steven Spielberg's "Hook," to be
released next month. Because of the Hook line's late
introduction, however, it is difficult to estimate holiday
sales, a Mattel spokeswoman says.
   Many of the traditional and less-expensive toys are being
helped by the fact that video games have cooled off somewhat.
   Nintendo Co.'s new Super Nintendo system, more powerful
than its original game player, hasn't taken the market by
storm, retailers say. In part that is because, at $200, the
system is pricey at a time when lots of families are pinching
pennies and because rival Sega Enterprises Ltd.'s advanced
Genesis video game, had an 18-month head start in the market.
   "I think there's broad agreement that Super Nintendo is
underperforming and Genesis is overperforming, though it
doesn't sound a death knell for Nintendo," says John Taylor,
toy analyst for L.H. Alton &amp; Co.
   Sega expects to sell 1.6 million Genesis systems this
year, below Nintendo's anticipated sales but better than
expected. Nintendo says it plans to ship 2.5 million Super
Nintendo systems this year and is confident consumers will
buy up at least 2.2 million systems by Christmas. "We're
happy with our current rates of sales," a company spokesman
says.
   Surprisingly though, as sales of Nintendo's older and
less-powerful system is losing zip, a device made by Lewis
Galoob Toys Inc. that simplifies Nintendo games is having a
sales surge. The $50 gadget, Game Genie, was kept off the
market until this fall by legal challenges from Nintendo.
Galoob expects to ship one million units into stores by
Christmas.
   Many of the toys introduced with great fanfare last
February at Toy Fair, the industry's new-product show, have
flopped. Among the disappointments: Mattel's Attack of the
Killer Tomatoes, a line of bug-eyed creatures based on the
Fox Children's Network show; Hasbro's Bucky O'Hare, an
intergalactic rabbit; and Galoob's Harry and the Hendersons
action figures, based on TV characters. While "Robin Hood,"
the movie, was a hit with some parents, Robin Hood toys based
on the movie and made by Hasbro's Tonka unit weren't. The toy
characters "just did OK," says Mr. Taylor of L.H. Alton. The
release of the Robin Hood home video may not help, either.
Rentals and video sales of "Robin Hood" haven't been brisk,
says a spokesman for Fairfield Research, which follows the
home-video business.
   Other licensed toys have done modestly at best, including
Playmate's Garfield the Cat. Playmate is also shipping
Tailspin, based on a Disney cartoon character, to stores but
isn't sure how much to produce.
   Galoob's Suzy Snapshot, a doll that moved to the flash of
a camera, was a flash in pan in the U.S., though overseas
sales aren't bad, analysts say. Sales of Playmate's Toxic
Crusaders, another TV-show-based line of action figures, have
been disappointing, despite some speculation that the toy
could be the next Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles. As a result,
the line will be dumped next year.
   "With a few exceptions, I'm reading the market as soft,"
says Richard Sallis, Playmate's senior vice president. "Toys
are not as recession-proof as some people thought they were.
Retailers will be looking for ways to bring consumers into
the stores this Christmas."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
