ID: 235	RANK: 38	SCORE: 20.313663
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP881004-0239 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-10-04-88 1141EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>s f BC-PersonalFile-Boskin Adv09   10-04 1068</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-Personal File-Boskin, Adv 09,1100</SECOND>
<NOTE>$adv 09</NOTE>
<NOTE>For Release Sunday Oct. 9 and Thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>Michael Boskin: Showing Bush How To Keep Recovery Going</HEAD>
<HEAD>With BC-Personal File-Summers</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By DAVE CARPENTER</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP Business Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>SAN FRANCISCO (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   When Ronald Reagan was preparing to debate
Jimmy Carter in 1980, Stanford University economist Michael J.
Boskin had a background role as a practice questioner.
   One administration later, Boskin is providing some answers for
George Bush in his drive for the presidency.
   Boskin, 42, is by all accounts ready to follow Bush to the White
House in January to collect the reward due a highly regarded,
staunchly loyal Republican economist. The influential chairmanship
of the president's Council of Economic Advisers may await if Bush
wins.
   ``Michael is right there at the top'' of the hierarchy of
campaign advisers, said Mark Goodin, Bush's deputy press secretary.
``He is very heavily involved in advising the vice president on a
wide range of economic issues.''
   Boskin's most notable contribution to the campaign is a proposal
he helped to shape for dealing with the federal budget deficit. The
so-called flexible freeze would hold federal spending, except for
Social Security benefits, to the levels of the 1989 budget plus
inflation.
   The political beauty of the plan is that it doesn't commit Bush
to any specific budget cuts. Individual programs would not have to
be frozen, but additional spending in any category would have to be
balanced by reductions in other programs.
   This summer Boskin was quoted widely as saying it could
eliminate the $150 billion deficit, which he sees as the nation's
most pressing economic problem, in four years. But he contended in
a recent interview only that it would achieve the task ``over the
next few years.''
   ``It will depend partly on how the economy does,'' he said. ``I
never said it would entirely eliminate the deficit by 1993.''
   It is that caution and sense of what is both ``eminently do-able
and sound economics,'' as he describes the conditional freeze, that
has earned Bush's trust.
   As part of his growing campaign duties, Boskin now flies around
the country briefing reporters and audiences on the vice
president's proposals. He also prepares position papers and reviews
the proposals of other economists.
   Last May, he was one of a group of experts who visited Bush at
his home in Kennebunkport, Maine, to plot economic strategy. Among
others at that meeting was Martin S. Feldstein, former chairman of
President Reagan's Council of Economic Advisers, who also remains a
high-profile economic adviser to Bush.
   Boskin, like his counterpart in the Democratic camp, Lawrence
Summers of Harvard University, is at ease mixing economics and
politics.
   ``What's especially good about Michael is that he's had some
practical experience and has a good idea how the world works,''
said Martin Anderson, former domestic policy adviser to Reagan and
Boskin's colleague at the Hoover Institution.
   ``He has an excellent reputation as an economist, and he also
has an idea of the reasonable political thing to do,'' he said.
   A native of New York, Boskin moved to Los Angeles with his
family when he was 6. His father was working as a construction
contractor, his mother as a bookkeeper and then an accountant.
   He studied economics at the University of California at
Berkeley, where he was named the outstanding graduate of the class
of 1967.
   Boskin wrote his dissertation on the effects of welfare and
other income-maintenance programs on the size of the labor force,
winning the National Tax Association's award for outstanding
doctoral dissertation.
   He is described by Anderson as a hard-line Republican, but at
Berkeley in the tumultuous '60s Boskin was known as quite liberal.
   ``I was sympathetic with the goals _ freedom of speech, civil
rights _ and I still am,'' he said earlier this year. ``But I was
not sympathetic with the methods,'' such as student sit-ins and
strikes.
   He went from Berkeley to Stanford, where he has been ever since
except for a year of teaching at Harvard a decade ago and brief
periodic consulting jobs for Congress. Besides his unpaid work for
Bush this year, he has been busy writing two books on economics,
teaching a graduate course in fiscal policy and an introductory
economics course, and acting as West Coast director of the National
Bureau of Economic Research, a think tank.
   Boskin minces no words in his criticism of the economic policies
of Bush's campaign foe. He says Massachusetts Gov. Michael Dukakis
would foul up ``one of the best growth episodes in the 20th
century'' that has occurred over the past five years.
   ``That includes a huge reduction in inflation and interest rates
and immense expansion of employment,'' he said.
   While he acknowledges that growth in wages has fallen behind the
pace of the 1950s and '60s, he contends that's a by-product of
rapid job growth and says overall living standards have not
declined.
   ``We have the beginning of some major transformations in the
role of government in the economy. We've had success in reducing
marginal tax rates. ... We have to build on what we have,'' Boskin
said.
   Boskin was sharply critical of Reagan's early policies in his
book entitled ``Reagan and the Economy: The Successes, Failures and
Unfinished Agenda.'' But like Bush, who eight years ago brass who
appears on the new ABC sitcom ``Just the 10 of Us.''
   Commercials begin with the Maxie doll at school or with friends,
then switch to Theiss, the ``real-life Maxie,'' in the same
situations, Charness said, calling it ``innovative advertising for
a fashion doll.''
   The company expects to spend about $7 million on Maxie
commercials and live presentations through the end of the year,
Charness said.
   Maxie comes in several variations: three different ``Making
Waves'' dolls, a ``Looking Smart'' doll with skirt, stockings and
boots; and a scented ``Perfect Prom'' doll with pink mini-gown.
Prices range from $5.50 to $13.
   She also has four friends: Ron, her boyfriend; Carly, another
blonde; Ashley, a red-head; and Kristen, who's black. She has a
myriad of accessories, from a cordless telephone to a locker with
built-in shower.
   Hasbro is betting that Barbie has outgrown some of the potential
market among young girls.
   Barbie is older, ``a yuppie if you will,'' Charness explained.
``We felt there was a real need in the market for dolls that are
younger.''
   Maxie is a high school student who does ``the type of things
girls would (imagine doing),'' Charness said.
   But Mattel, the No. 2 toy company, says Maxie, a long-haired,
perpetually smiling teen with lace stockings, white boots and
various hair do-dads, won't even put a dent in the solid success of
Barbie.
   ``This year, we're selling tremendously more dolls, fashions and
accessories,'' said Jocelyn Carter-Miller, director of marketing at
Mattel, based in Hawthorne, Calif.
   She cited ``unprecedented growth,'' but would not provide
specifics.
   ``I don't feel it's a significant threat to Barbie's No. 1
position as a fashion doll,'' Mrs. Carter-Miller said of Maxie.
``She's been in the No. 1 position for 29 years, and this year is a
record year.''
   And Barbie is not just an executive yuppie, Mrs. Carter-Miller
said, but a teen-ager as well.
   ``Barbie represents everything, from being a teen-ager up to a
doctor,'' she said.
   Barbie, introduced as a teen-age fashion doll in 1959, was an
airline stewardess in the 1960s and 1970s, a registered nurse,
fashion editor, astronaut and skin diver in the 1960s, and a doctor
in the early 1970s.
   ``She has been able to be ageless. That's something that makes
Barbie very special and makes her existence difficult to compete
with,'' Mrs. Carter-Miller said.
   Industry analyst David Liebowitz of American Securities in New
York, although noting that Maxie can wear Barbie's clothes, said
Maxie could not survive if it were merely a Barbie clone.
   ``What we are seeing now are products that aren't competing
head-to-head with Barbie but are slightly differentiated,''
Leibowitz said.
   Steven Eisenberg of Bear, Stearns &amp; Co. in New York suggested
that Maxie's lower price range could bolster its competitive
position.
   Although basic-issue Barbies can be obtained for as little as
$4, the $13 top-of-the-line Maxie is slightly less expensive than
the comparable Perfume Pretty edition of Barbie, which sells for
$15.
   ``What Hasbro is attempting to do here is to capture a moderate
share of the fashion doll market at a low price range,'' Eisenberg
said.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv Weekend Editions Oct. 8-9</NOTE>
</DOC>
