ID: 235	RANK: 45	SCORE: 20.006773
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910930-0105
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910930-0105.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Marketing:
   Early G.I. Joe
   Is Called Back
   To Active Duty
   ----
   By Joseph Pereira and Francine Schwadel
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
09/30/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   DH HAS MAT
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)
BROADLINE RETAILERS, DEPARTMENT STORES (RTB)
</IN>
<NS>
LICENSING AGREEMENTS (LIC)
</NS>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
MINNESOTA (MN)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
RHODE ISLAND (RI)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   After a 13-year furlough, the original G.I. Joe, is back
-- for limited duty.
   In an unusual move, Hasbro Inc., maker of the doll, has
produced an early version of the Great American Hero
exclusively for Target Stores.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Target, a division of Dayton Hudson Corp., which featured
the doll in newspaper advertisements this weekend, hopes the
doll will give the chain, in Minneapolis, a slight edge in
battling competitors.
   "This is a coup in itself for Target," declared Mark
Pritchard, a Target toy buyer who thought up the idea.
   To be sure, the exclusive arrangement has irked a few
rival toy retailers. "My buyers were aware of this and they
were pretty upset about it," said Ronald Tuchman, president
of Child World Inc., Avon, Mass. But he added, Child World
plans "to aggressively pursue similar deals with toy
manufacturers."
   Indeed, Hasbro, is talking to a couple of toy retailers
about the possibility of striking similar limited edition
agreements to manufacture G.I. Joe, though production
wouldn't be for this Christmas, a spokesman for the
Pawtucket, R.I., toy maker said.
   Such arrangements, though rare in the toy industry, could
become more frequent soon. Mattel Inc., in El Segundo,
Calif., has assigned special staff to explore one-on-one
agreements. It has arranged deals with individual retailers
for the Christmas introduction of a line of Peter Pan
characters called Hook, a company spokesman said.
   The practice is fairly common in other markets. Tony
department stores are eager to get exclusive regional rights
to launch fragrances, such as the new Spellbound, believing
the excitement it generates will give them an edge, no matter
how fleeting. They also cut deals with clothing designers to
be the only chain in their region to carry a style -- and
sometimes an entire line.
   "Retailers are always looking for ways to come up with
exclusives," says Carl Steidtmann, chief economist at the
Management Horizons unit of Price Waterhouse accountants, New
York. "In many cases, they'll put an extra feature on or
change a color and say it's an exclusive."
   Chains today get exclusive rights to everything from
telephones to appliances and mattresses, with only slight
variations from models offered by competitors. In another
twist, Montgomery Ward &amp; Co., Chicago, is selling an
exclusive line of Admiral-brand televisions and videocassette
recorders under a licensing agreement with Maytag Corp.,
Newton, Iowa, which owns the trademark.
   Exclusivity can be beneficial for both manufacturer and
retailer.
   "It's a nice piece of incremental business for the toy
maker, and it gives the retailer a point of distinction,"
explained a spokesman for Mattel, which now makes customized
toys and gift sets for a number of retailers.
   Target, for instance, has "Golden Evening" Barbie, a
dress-up doll, that no other chain carries. Likewise Wal-Mart
Stores Inc., a unit of Walton Enterprises Inc., Bentonville,
Ark., has a lavender attired "Ballroom Barbie" and F A O
Schwarz, New York, has "Nights Sensation Barbie."
   For toy makers it is also a less risky approach to testing
new ideas, added a Hasbro spokesman. The company will closely
watch Target's sales to determine the viability of bringing
back the old Joe, he noted.
   Moreover exclusive toys afford retailers the luxury of
pricing items, without worrying about matching a competitor's
tag.
   G.I. Joe is a case under study, at least for a few
retailers.
   The toy -- introduced in 1964 and then pulled from the
market in 1978 -- is 12 inches tall, nearly three times the
size of the Joe found in toy stores today. A collector's
choice, particularly among those who grew up playing with the
doll, the old Joe, in mint condition, commands thousands of
dollars on the market.
   At KMart Corp. in Troy, Mich., boys toy buyer Kerry MacVay
said he was surprised when he heard about the exclusive
arrangement from his Hasbro contacts three months ago. But he
isn't pushing Hasbro to sell him any dolls -- yet.
   "I'm a little more skeptical than the Target people," he
says, explaining that he's taking a wait-and-see approach on
military toys. "My initial thoughts were it's a collectors
item," he adds. "If this works, {Hasbro is} planning on
coming out with a full assortment. They will get behind it
and that's when I will get involved."
   Mr. MacVay acknowledges that, in retailing, "it's
important to get out on the leading edge of something." If
the doll sells well at Target, he admits, "I'll kick myself
for not thinking about it first."
   A spokesman for Wal-Mart said that the discount chain's
toy buyers "haven't had time to talk to Hasbro about it.
Their plans were to talk with Hasbro, but it would be later
in the year."
   Exclusive deals, however, are a delicate matter. Mattel
sidesteps potential controversy by offering to make "private
label" toys for all retailers. The distinguishing point of a
toy could just be the color of a doll's dress or the
trimmings of a car.
   Hasbro apparently has left plenty of room for similar
maneuvering in agreeing to manufacture Target's Joe.
   The new doll, called "Duke," is fashioned after only one
of several hundred G.I. Joe characters, developed over the
years.
   Duke is 12 inches tall, and like the old Joe, comes in a
camouflage outfit made of cloth. The current crop of Joes
come in plastic clothes that are pasted on to the figure. But
not to be outdated, Duke carries a modern electronic light
and sound weapon, included separately in the box.
   The remake of old Joe isn't expected to impact the
collectors' market since the "Duke" character was created
only after the second generation of G.I. Joes was introduced
in 1982, and won't be confused with any from the old cast.
   Target officials won't disclose how many of the Duke dolls
will go on sale. Insiders put the number at 80,000, each of
which is individually numbered and comes in a package,
stamped with a gold seal. The doll retails for $22, a little
more than what the average action figure sells for.
   Duking it out with toy supermarkets, like Toys "R" Us
Inc., Rochelle Park, N.J., and Child World, which offer a
much broader selection of toys, can be a struggle for
department and discount stores. "Duke gives us a little
something extra against the super stores," Mr. Pritchard of
Target said.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
