ID: 235	RANK: 61	SCORE: 18.090801
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910129-0118
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910129-0118.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Tonka Discloses
   It Is in Talks
   To Be Bought
   ----
   By James P. Miller and Joseph Pereira
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/29/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   CWLD MAT TKA
</CO>
<IN>
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)
</IN>
<LP>
   The maker of Monopoly may be leaving the board, a move
that would reduce the number of big players in the
rough-edged game known as toy manufacturing.
   Tonka Corp., whose toy chest also includes Play-Doh and
sturdy dump trucks, disclosed it is holding talks over the
"possible sale of the company."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Reflecting the cutthroat nature of the toy industry, the
nation's third largest toy maker cited its weighty debt load
in the current sluggish retail environment.
   Tonka didn't identify the party or parties with which it's
talking and stressed the "preliminary" nature of the
discussions. But one source close to Mattel Inc., which is
vying to become the top toymaker, identified the El Segundo,
Calif., company as a suitor. Mattel, maker of the popular
Barbie dolls, is said to be particularly interested in
Tonka's line of Parker Bros. board games, including Monopoly,
and its boys' toy line.
   But Tonka officials want to sell the company as a whole
and not in pieces. One Mattel alternative would be to buy
Tonka and then sell the parts it doesn't want. Some industry
experts, however, wondered whether there would be much
interest in the less-desirable portions of Tonka's business.
   Tonka joins a list of slumping makers and retailers facing
deep troubles. Late last week, Lewis Galoob Toys Inc. said it
is considering a possible sale or merger. The San Francisco
toy maker, battered by declining sales of its Micro Machines
miniature vehicles, said it expects to post a 1990 loss of
about $30 million. And Child World Inc., a big toy retailer,
is having difficulties paying its bills.
   The latest Christmas selling season was a dreadful one for
toy manufacturers in general, as buyers cut back because of
recessionary fears. Tonka, for one, was hurt even more
because its licensed toys -- such as its Ghostbusters line --
have largely matured, and new offerings haven't yet produced
any similar big sellers. In addition, an agreement under
which it distributed a video game was terminated at the end
of 1989, trimming revenue.
   Mattel is one of the nation's few financially healthy toy
companies, having recovered from a major restructuring
undertaken three years ago. Mattel and Hasbro Inc. have been
vying for the industry's No. 1 position in toy sales. But as
business has slowed in the U.S., Mattel has been looking
abroad for expansion.
   A Mattel spokesman declined to comment on whether the
company is interested in Tonka's assets. But John Amerman,
Mattel's chairman and chief executive officer, has said over
the past year that the company would consider acquisitions in
areas where Mattel has less of a presence, such as boys' toys
or board games.
   Also, Mattel last October hired David M. Mauer, previously
president of Tonka's U.S. Toy Group, as one of two presidents
of Mattel USA. Mr. Mauer, 41 years old, is charged with
helping Mattel break away from its traditional position as a
girls' toy maker and boost its percentage of toys for boys
from 15% to between 25% and 30%.
   The company has not had a major hit in boys' toys since
its hugely successful HeMan line was launched in the
mid-1980s. Much of Mattel's recent success has stemmed from
old standbys such as Barbie and its Hot Wheels miniature
cars.
   Tonka said yesterday that it expects to report a
"substantial loss" for the fourth quarter and for the year.
It didn't quantify the projected loss, but said it would come
on sales that were flat with the year-ago period at about
$244.7 million.
   In composite New York Stock Exchange trading yesterday,
Tonka shares dropped 75 cents, or 15%, to close at $4.375.
The stock had been trading at just above $3 a share until
moving up on heavier-than-normal trading late last week.
   The Minnetonka, Minn., company loaded itself with debt in
late 1987 to acquire Kenner Parker Toys Inc. for about $555
million. That acquisition gave Tonka, known then for its line
of toy vehicles and promotional toys, some of the most famous
brand names in America's playrooms -- including Monopoly, and
the board game Sorry, along with Nerf balls and the PlayDoh
modeling compound. With Kenner, Tonka also picked up a
company known for its savvy in licensing toys linked to
movies and television.
   From the beginning, industry experts wondered whether
Tonka could absorb the heavy debt that the ambitious purchase
required. Those questions have grown even louder in recent
months.
   Last year, Tonka's strained finances caused it to
negotiate an amended payment schedule with bank lenders, and
both major rating agencies have recently marked down the
company's subordinated debt, citing concerns over what one
called Tonka's "deteriorating" financial situation.
   Through the first nine months of 1990, Tonka racked up
losses of $25.4 million, or $1.74 a share, on sales that
declined by 14% to $541.3 million.
   Tonka may also have to take a charge to cover money owed
it by Child World. Tonka says it is still "assessing" that
situation.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
