ID: 235	RANK: 71	SCORE: 17.324986
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910211-0166
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910211-0166.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Marketing:
   As Toy Makers Unwrap New Products,
   They Hope Video Games Are Peaking
   ----
   By Joseph Pereira
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/11/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   J.NTD TKA HAS GAL TTOY MAT RBD
</CO>
<IN>
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)
</IN>
<LP>
   This year, toy makers say, the video-game craze may
finally peak so that toys can rebound from several years of
flat sales.
   Okay, so they said the same thing last year. But in 1991
their wishes may come true. Video-game sales growth slowed a
bit last year, and price-cutting of some video-game software
indicates interest in electronic games may be waning.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   So it is with high hopes -- but a healthy dose of caution
-- that toy makers will give more than 10,000 toy buyers a
peek into their bags of new toys at the American
International Toy Fair that begins today in New York.
   There will be lots to see: dolls that dance at the flash
of a camera; Toxic Crusaders, one of many toys that seek to
cash in on the environmental movement; a play photo copier
that reproduces texts and, presumably, other children's
homework; an electronic easel that can be hooked to the
television to make home-made cartoons out of kids' drawings;
and a parade of other toys, including Miss America Pageant
dolls that the reigning Miss America will personally promote
at the show.
   But the 10-day gala glimpse of toys to come -- embellished
with sales spiels, previews of TV commercials and spiffy show
girls -- will offer few clues to whether the industry can
break out after four years of flat sales.
   The Toy Manufacturers Association is expected to announce
today that U.S. toy makers had sales last year of about $8.8
billion, the same as in 1989, while sales of video-game
makers, led by Nintendo Ltd., jumped 24% to $3.1 billion. The
video-game increase wasn't as steep as in previous years, but
this year Nintendo plans to unveil its new generation system,
which has twice the microchip power. Thus, many toy makers
are playing it safe.
   "If you talk to vendors in the Orient," says Jerry Cleary,
president of Tonka Corp.'s products division, "they'll tell
you there's a lot of capacity at the factories right now;
orders are down."
   Adds toy inventor and consultant Bernie Loomis, "At the
moment, the toy industry is in a very conservative stance.
You'll see a lot of extensions of existing lines. Many
manufacturers are struggling and have limited funds."
   Indeed, two toy makers have put themselves up for sale --
Tonka, which recently agreed to be acquired by Hasbro Inc.,
and Lewis Galoob Toys Inc. And Child World Inc., one of the
nation's largest toy retailers, is in financial trouble and
hasn't been able to pay many toy makers for past shipments.
Other retailers are also having problems paying their bills,
shrinking toy makers' profits and potential sales. Tyco Toys
Inc., for example, "expects to lose 5% to 6% of its
{retailer} customer base," says Richard Grey, Tyco president.
"If we sold 500,000 units last year, we'll do 475,000 this
year. Growth will come from abroad."
   Showing their conservative colors, toy makers this year
will introduce toys linked to movies and popular TV shows.
Playmates Toys Inc., which built a fortune on the biggest
risk in recent times, Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, will
bring out toys based on the hit TV cartoon "Tailspin" and
Garfield the Cat.
   "It's safe," explains Richard Sallis, vice president of
Playmates. "Rather than starting something from scratch,
you've got instant popularity." Royalties for licenses
usually range from 5% to 10% of sales -- making royalties
cheaper in most cases than, say, promoting a new line of toys
with a season's worth of cartoons.
   Hence from Mattel Inc. comes "Attack of the Killer
Tomatoes," a line of ambulatory bug-eyed creatures based on
the Fox Children's Network show; from Hasbro comes Bucky
O'Hare, an intergalactic time hopping rabbit; and from Galoob
come action figures based on "Harry and the Hendersons."
   Also expect Steven Spielberg's "Hook," due out in
December, to spawn a line of Peter Pan action figures by
Mattel. Meanwhile, Tonka's Kenner unit will offer a merry
line of Robin Hood toys that look like characters in "Robin
Hood," a summer release starring Kevin Costner.
   Toy makers are also seeking shelter in preschool toys, a
market segment that is unscathed by the video-game craze and
has benefited from a population miniboom. Children should be
cleaner this year: A flotilla of toys are for bathtub play,
including Murduck, a bathrobe-clad, battery-operated,
wise-cracking talking duck from Video Technology. It spouts
lines like "you quack me up," and "egg scuz me."
   Toys for small children don't always have tiny price tags.
Little Tykes' Castle, a backyard structure with drawbridges
and chutes children can slide through, will sell for $100.
"Many times grandparents will ask the parent what to get for
little Johnny, and the parent will suggest some of these
toys," says Kimberly Chapman, a spokeswoman for the
Rubbermaid Inc. unit. "For many of them I don't think money
is an issue."
   Indeed, despite the recession, toy makers aren't shying
away from expensive toys. Tyco's radio-controlled Jetstream,
a model airplane whose twin engines are powerful enough for a
takeoff from the ground, will retail for about $200,
including a rechargeable battery pack.
   Carrying a similar sticker price is Video Technology's
Advantage Computer, a real computer that the company says
will be child friendly. Also from Video Technology comes
Video Painter, an electronic sketch pad on which children can
draw their favorite characters. Hook it up to the TV and
watch airplanes, hot-air balloons, monsters, submarines and
people become animated. It will sell for $99.
   Toy makers are also betting big on the environment, with
more than 60 playthings. XTC Products Inc. will launch
Hugg-A-Planet, a stuffed globe. University Games Corp. is
offering a Captain Planet board game, in which rain forests
carry Park Place value. The game is "totally recyclable.
We're using wooden dice," says President Robert Moog.
   Though "in," the environment can turn children off if they
sense the games are disguised classrooms. To avoid that,
Playmates Toys will offer a line of characters named Toxic
Crusaders, based on a new TV show and starring Toxie, a
former health-care executive whose name was Melvin until he
got tossed into a vat of toxins. Humiliated, this nerd turns
chief crusader against Dr. Killemoff, who as leader of the
Pollutant Mutants is out to poison the world. Toxie has an
assistant, Nozone, an acrobatic pilot, who was disfigured
when he accidentally flew through a hole in the ozone. "We
don't want to preach," says Richard Sallis, vice president of
Playmates.
   Another fad: adult board games. In the early 1980s, only
5% of board games on the market were for adults; today nearly
20% of the $1.2 billion business is aimed at adults, says Mr.
Moog. Still, it's hard to come up with a winner, says Steve
Peek, director of Game Inventors of America. Two years ago,
nearly 100 board game businesses were started up. "Today I'd
be surprised if two are still in business," Mr. Peek says.
   George Chanos of San Diego knows the routine well. Two
years ago he left a $100,000 a year job as a lawyer to make
Notable Quotables. "He discovered nobody cared what
Shakespeare said," says Mr. Peek, his printer. So he turned
to People magazine, U.S.A. Today and the National Enquirer
for lines. The new Notable Quotables is more promising. For
instance, players must guess who said, "I think I'm the best
reporter on television." (The answer: Geraldo Rivera.)
   The National Enquirer itself will be the name of a new
game from Tyco. Players draw phrases out of a box and piece
together wacky National Enquirer-style headlines.
   Perhaps the biggest challenge of the year faces Kenner's
Miss America Pageant dolls, which are targeting the market
dominated by Mattel's Barbie, the 33-year-old queen of
fashion dolls. Hasbro has already tried -- and failed --
twice with Jem and Maxie. Last year, Matchbox Toys Ltd.
offered Christie Brinkley, Cheryl Tiegs and Beverly Johnson
dolls. The tally at the end of 1990: Barbie, $740 million in
sales; Matchbox's three dolls, $2 million.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
