ID: 235	RANK: 76	SCORE: 16.964695
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910201-0173
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910201-0173.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Hong Kong's Playmates May Have
   Tough Act to Follow With Ninja Turtles
   ----
   By Stephen F. Stine
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/01/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), NO PAGE CITATION
</SO>
<CO>
   H.PLY
</CO>
<IN>
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)
</IN>
<LP>
   HONG KONG -- Are today's toy-world heroes destined to
become tomorrow's industry has-beens? Playmates Ltd., maker
of Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles action figures, earned a
record profit in 1990 on sales of the popular line, but
analysts warn that unless the company can diversify its toy
offerings, its fortunes could take a turn for the worse if
the Turtles fall out of favor.
   The Turtles, now in their third year as a toy of choice
among U.S. children, remain Hong Kong-based Playmates' core
product. Figures aren't due until March, but analysts say
that based on the company's first-half earnings, Playmates is
likely to report profit of between 850 million and one
billion Hong Kong dollars (about US$109 million to about
US$128 million) for the full year, compared with HK$167
million for 1989. Playmates estimates that 80% of total
revenue is generated by Turtle sales.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   In a report released last week, Morgan Stanley Asia Ltd.
listed Playmates shares as the top-performing stock in Asia
in 1990, rising 732% during the year. The stock has continued
to surge this year.
   "Everyone is buying in anticipation of high results and a
good payoff," says Russell Young, toy analyst with Cresvale
Far East Ltd. Rumors of a special dividend have prompted some
analysts to predict that Playmates will announce 1990 profit
of about HK$1 billion, at the high end of earlier estimates.
"I now think market expectations are on the low side," says
Pamela Cheng, an analyst with Baring Securities (Hong Kong)
Ltd. Playmates wouldn't comment on the rumors of a special
dividend.
   No matter what the actual profit figure turns out to be,
many agree that once it is announced, the stock will lose
much of its allure. Analysts say that for Playmates to
maintain profit and retain its title as the darling of the
Hong Kong toy industry, the company must decrease its
reliance on the Turtles. Industry experts say Playmates would
benefit in the long term by stressing development of new
promotional toys while increasing production of basic toys.
Promotional toys are those whose identities are linked to
other media, such as films, music and television programs.
   Says Aroon Balani, an analyst with Peregrine Investments
Holdings Ltd.: "They have to begin building up their share of
safe earnings from basic toys." He and other analysts point
to the experience of Coleco Industries Inc., the U.S. maker
of Cabbage Patch Kids that sought Chapter 11 bankruptcy-law
protection from creditors after efforts to diversify failed
to offset a plunge in sales of the cloth dolls.
   Playmates joint managing director Paul Y.C. Kwan concedes
that as much as 90% of the company's revenue comes from
promotional toys, the majority of which are Turtle products.
Company executives argue that the thin margins earned on
sales of basic toys make promotional toys more appealing, if
more risky.
   Last year, Playmates tried its hand again at promotional
toys with the launch of Dick Tracy action figures, timed to
coincide with the release of the motion picture based on the
comic-strip character. By October, industry analysts were
saying that Dick Tracy figures were threatening to overtake
the Turtles in sales volume. Since then, however, enthusiasm
for the line has waned, and Playmates director of finance
B.F. Chu expects that Dick Tracy sales accounted for less
than 5% of last year's total profit.
   "Unless Walt Disney Co. tries to further promote the film
or comes out with a second movie, the (Dick Tracy) product is
finished," he says. Meanwhile, says Mr. Kwan, there is plenty
of life left in the Turtles.
   "They (Playmates) see the Turtles as the next Barbie,"
says Mr. Balani of Peregrine Investments. The problem,
according to industry analysts, is that the decades-long
success of Barbie dolls lies in the consistency of the
product. They say that Mattel Inc. has maintained the basic
concept of the Barbie doll while relying on accessories to
shape a series of new images for the figure. The Turtles, on
the other hand, "don't have the history" required for them to
be successful, says Cresvale's Mr. Young.
   Playmates' management, however, believes it can achieve
the same with the Turtles, updating their image by linking
new accessories to the release of new Teenage Mutant Ninja
Turtle adventure films and cartoons.
   The Turtles first popped up in 1984 as U.S. comic-book
characters. In 1986, their creators approached Playmates,
which agreed to manufacture a line of Turtle action figures.
Mr. Kwan says the toys never would have caught on without the
accompanying television cartoon series, which began airing in
the U.S. in 1988. Playmates initially sponsored the TV series
but later left production to more experienced hands.
   Still, the company's cooperation with producers of the TV
series and of the Turtle films is essential to creating and
releasing new Turtle products. "We have to find a way to
prolong the product life through creative marketing," says
Mr. Kwan.
   Mr. Kwan credits the first Turtle motion picture, which
was a hit world-wide, for the huge sales increase Playmates
saw last year. The second film is due out in March, on the
eve of the wholesale toy-buying season.
   Cresvale's Mr. Young, however, says that when film
producers tire of Turtle sequels, the toys won't be able to
maintain sales on their own.
   Mr. Kwan says that despite the current recession,
Playmates expects its overall sales to grow in the U.S.,
where Turtles last year accounted for 60% to 80% of all
action-figure sales.
   Orders from the Christmas season are still being filled,
and company officials say they are in no rush. Analysts say
Playmates is regulating output to stimulate consumer demand
-- as did Coleco when its strategy with Cabbage Patch Kids
resulted in department-store scuffles for the limited supply
of dolls. "Even the government has to control its money
supply," says Mr. Kwan.
   Last year, Playmates began marketing the Turtles in Europe
-- first in Britain, then in France, Italy and most recently
in Germany. Baring's Ms. Cheng says sales outside the U.S.
could sustain Playmates' profit growth for the next 1 1/2
years but warns that promotional toys aren't as popular with
European children as they are with Americans. "European kids
seem to be more content with basic toys," she says.
   Playmates will launch the masked heroes this year in
Japan, following the release in that country of a made-for-TV
Turtles cartoon series. "The response to the show will
determine the success of the toy," says Mr. Kwan.
   As part of a process that began three years ago, Playmates
says it will continue to shift away from toy production to
stress promotion and marketing. Mr. Kwan says Playmates sold
the last of its production facilities last year but still
holds a 30% stake in toy maker Harbour Ring Industries Ltd.
He says Playmates has no plans to buy back into the
manufacturing sector.
   "For now, they are holding a lot of cash, protecting
themselves against a downturn in the market as best they
can," says an analyst. Others suspect that Playmates is in
the market for small U.S. toy companies with limited product
lines. By acquiring such companies and their trademarks,
analysts say, Playmates would be able to market existing
products under its own name. That strategy would allow it to
increase exposure of its product line while it searches for
the next promotional-toy sensation.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
