ID: 235	RANK: 86	SCORE: 16.160465
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910822-0064
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910822-0064.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Enterprise:
   Doll Line Is History -- and a Pleasant Hit
   ----
   By Suzanne Alexander
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
08/22/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   MAT
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
OTHER SPECIALTY RETAILERS OF LIMITED PRODUCT LINES (OTS)
CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)
ALL SPECIALTY RETAILERS (RTS)
</IN>
<NS>
CORPORATE PROFILES (PRO)
</NS>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
WISCONSIN (WI)
</RE>
<LP>
   Nine-year-old history buff Jennifer Johnson flew from
California to Colonial Williamsburg this week. But she won't
have time to watch the fife and drum corps march or tour the
wheelwright's stable. Jennifer came to see a product
introduction.
   The product, named Felicity Merriman, is a new doll line
being introduced by tiny Pleasant Co., a doll and book
concern based in Middleton, Wis. And even though tickets to
the unveiling and related program cost $50 for adults and $30
for children, more than 10,000 people from across the nation
are flocking to Williamsburg to see it.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "This is going to be really fun. I'm so excited," says
Jennifer, of San Juan Capistrano, Calif., who ordered her
tickets six months ago. Jennifer's aunt, Dolores Frost,
agreed to join her for the trip from her home in Mauni Lani,
Hawaii. "It's like studying history while playing. Once you
get hooked on these dolls," you want to see more, says Ms.
Frost, 56.
   Indeed, thousands of parents and their daughters can't
seem to get enough of Pleasant's line of historical dolls. In
just five years, the company's sales of dolls and related
accessories have surged to nearly $50 million.
   With such success, five-year-old Pleasant is demonstrating
that sometimes small companies are better suited to discover
and pursue niche markets than larger concerns. "Big companies
are essentially mass-market driven," says Saul Jodel,
president of product development at Lewis Galoob Toys Inc.
"It doesn't pay for us to chase that specialty niche
business."
   Adds Michael Lyden, senior vice president of business
development at Tyco Toys Inc., "We have a hard-enough time
serving our current masters without segmenting the market."
If only a few of the company's retail customers will stock a
specialty toy, Tyco isn't interested in developing it, he
says.
   Pleasant has put together a clever package. Its American
Girls Collection is centered on four 18-inch historical dolls
-- Felicity (1774), Kirsten Larson (1854), Samantha
Parkington (1904) and Molly McIntire (1944) -- aimed at girls
aged seven to 12. Each doll is the heroine of a set of books
that describes her adventures, and each has a line of clothes
and accessories appropriate to her period. Kirsten, for
example, can be dressed in pantalettes and flannel underwear,
and Molly finds a Mickey Mouse flip book in her Christmas
stocking and carries a brown bag lunch because "metal was in
short supply during the war."
   The products are available only through catalogs, and
while the dolls themselves sell for $82 apiece, buying
Samantha and all her accessories would cost more than $1,000,
not including gift wrapping. In addition to the doll lines,
the company sells matching children's clothes (a flannel
nightie for Kirsten costs $18; one just like it for an
eight-year-old is $50). It also offers activity books --
cookbooks and diaries, for example -- and craft kits -- like
embroidery samplers and lacy valentines -- that are linked to
the dolls.
   "Parents get hooked on the education {aspect}, and the
kids think it's a beautiful doll," says toy analyst Thomas
Kully of William Blair &amp; Co. in Chicago. "The book may be the
parent's crutch to justify the expenditure. It gives kids a
story line to identify with."
   With catalogs and direct mail, Pleasant pursues a more
upscale consumer than many retail chains might attract. "We
could never have competed with Hasbro or Mattel for shelf
space," says Pleasant T. Rowland, company president. Still,
she says, "there are enough people in America who care about
this kind of product. They've been immensely loyal and on
their referrals, others have come."
   Ms. Rowland, 50 years old, a former grade-school teacher,
television-news anchor and author of children's textbooks,
founded the company in 1986 after noticing a dearth of
educational toys for little girls.
   Using $1 million from her personal savings plus bank loans
and an outside investor, she hired a small staff to design a
catalog and an assortment of products. Then she purchased
advertisements in magazines like the New Yorker and
Smithsonian and mailed out 500,000 catalogs to affluent
prospects chosen from mailing lists she had purchased.
   To anchor the company product line, Ms. Rowland has
developed a total of 21 books featuring the doll characters.
The books spin tales of summer, birthday and other adventures
that "allow girls to compare and contrast their own lives to
what life would have been like in the past," the company
catalog notes.
   The books, which sold 4.5 million copies last year, are
marketed in major retail chains nationwide, including Barnes
&amp; Noble Inc. and Waldenbook Co., a unit of Kmart Corp., for
about $6 each. Many school libraries also stock the
collection. "It's one of the fastest selling series in
children's books overall," says Donna Passannante, a
spokeswoman for Barnes &amp; Noble. "It's strong competition for
the `Little House on the Prairie' series."
   In "Meet Kirsten," readers learn about the Larson family's
journey from Sweden to a tiny farm on the American frontier
and Kirsten's life in a world of log cabins and one-room
schoolhouses. The doll itself is sold in a blue calico dress
with, the catalog says, "a `grow stripe' at the bottom that
her mother let out as she grew taller."
   The accessories that go with the "Happy Birthday,
Kirsten]" book include a trestle table and matching chairs,
"handcrafted of solid pine," that "are copied from the sturdy
furniture that early Swedish settlers like the Larsons made
for their simple cabins." Also available: handmade stoneware
plates and wooden bowls to set the table for Kirsten's
birthday party.
   Emily Komaromi, a 10-year-old in Fair Oaks, Calif., owns
most of the Pleasant books, as well as two dolls and various
accessories. "I was learning about Victorian times in school.
I wanted to know more," says Emily, explaining the $400 to
$500 investment her parents have made. Emily now hosts tea
parties at her house with several friends and their Pleasant
dolls.
   In its first year, Pleasant had $1.8 million in revenue.
By 1988, its third year, the concern had $17 million in sales
and had started turning a profit. For 1990, Pleasant posted
$48 million in sales.
   Last year, Pleasant introduced a second product line, the
New Baby Collection, to help "parents prepare toddlers for
the arrival of a new baby." A pop-up book with rhyming text
describes to preschoolers how babies are cared for, from
feedings to lullabies. Children can practice their skills
with 15-inch soft-cloth Asian, African-American and white
dolls and their accessories, like diaper bags, baby powder,
stuffed animals and bibs.
   The collection includes infant and children's clothing
that matches illustrations in the book. The baby dolls cost
$54 while the pop-up book is priced at $19.95. Accessories
range from $14 to $78.
   In the $14 billion toy industry, experts agree there's
room in America's playrooms for Pleasant. Long-term success,
however, is far from guaranteed. Pleasant's collection may
soon grow passe. Moreover, there's always the risk of a
competitive response from companies that have, until now,
ignored the niche.
   "Mattel makes $740 million a year with Barbie. Does that
mean it hasn't looked at other doll lines? Of course not.
Mattel is fully capable of designing new lines," warns Steven
Eisenberg, an analyst with Oppenheimer &amp; Co. in New York.
   Pleasant's future growth may also be limited if it
continues to restrict itself to a relatively small customer
base. For now, the company has no plans to develop
lower-priced dolls.
   Analysts also caution that a reverse phenomenon is
possible -- Pleasant could become too big a trend, too soon.
"The most difficult problem the industry has is not losers
but controlling winners -- winners who become losers because
they can't control their inventory," says Mr. Eisenberg.
Since Pleasant imports its inventory from all over Europe,
Asia and the U.S., orders could back up.
   But Ms. Rowland contends her marketing strategy will
forestall any backlog. "We really don't want to hype this
thing into oblivion," she says. "We've turned down requests
from others to market for us. We built this for the long
run."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
