ID: 235	RANK: 94	SCORE: 15.872459
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910927-0110
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910927-0110.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Improved Profit
   Seen for Several
   Toy Makers
   ---
   Turtles Hit by Water Guns
   As Trend to Traditional
   Toys Propels Industry
   ----
   By Joseph Pereira
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
09/27/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4A
</SO>
<CO>
   HAS J.NTD J.SEL MAT RVL TOY TTOY
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
SPECIALTY RETAILERS OF LIMITED PRODUCT LINES (OTS)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)
ALL SPECIALTY RETAILERS (RTS)
SOFTWARE (SOF)
</IN>
<NS>
ANALYSTS COMMENTS ON STOCKS, INDUSTRIES &amp; COMPANIES (ANL)
EARNINGS PROJECTIONS (ERP)
PATENTS (PAT)
</NS>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
FAR EAST (FE)
JAPAN (JA)
MASSACHUSETTS (MA)
NEW JERSEY (NJ)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
RHODE ISLAND (RI)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Several toy makers are expected to report improved
third-quarter results, as their more traditional toys appear
to be gaining market share against the big hits of recent
years -- video games and Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles.
   Analysts see per-share earnings gains of about 22% at
Hasbro Inc.; 13% at Mattel Inc.; and 17% at Tyco Toys Inc.
They also see continued sluggishness for toy retailers, with
industry giant Toys "R" Us Inc. expected to report flat
per-share earnings on a 2% increase in revenue at stores open
more than a year. The retailer's overall sales, however,
should jump about 15% as a result of new store openings.
                                                                                                       

   But few have signed off on video games. On close watch is
the new batch of more powerful video game systems -- like
Nintendo Co.'s Super Nintendo and Sega Enterprises Ltd. of
Japan's Genesis -- which have nearly twice the computer power
as many existing game players.
   Some analysts even predict that the new video game systems
are expected to be in short supply by Christmas. Most of the
two million sets of Super Nintendo ordered this year should
be sold by Christmas, they say. Meanwhile, Genesis, which has
been on the market for more than a year, has sold out in many
toy stores, prompting Sega to ship new supplies by air in
time for the holiday shopping rush. Sega admits it
underestimated demand; it now expects to ship more than one
million units by year end.
   "There's no question the new systems will move off the
shelf this Christmas," says Robert Kleiber, analyst for Piper
Jaffray &amp; Hopwood in Minneapolis. "The question is can it
hang on after that. At this point no one knows."
   If video games make a comeback it could mean fewer retail
dollars for traditional toys. Yet there's been significant
enough shifts in momentum recently within the industry to
incite some optimism among a few toy analysts.
   "Clearly, retailers are playing it nice and safe," notes
Paul Valentine, analyst for Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. "Even so,
this is going to be the best Christmas in a long time for
American toy companies," he predicts, citing downshifts in
the video and Turtle businesses.
   NPD Group Inc., which polls consumers on shopping trends,
notes that the video game business for the first six months
of the year was down 20%. Sales of small portable hand-held
video game units are still doing nicely, but not well enough
to offset the decline of the old Nintendo systems.
   Surveys also indicate that overall Ninja Turtle
action-figure sales continue to slide, despite the popularity
of its 1991 Turtles. This summer the Playmate Toys Inc.'s
megahit accounted for about 45% of total dollars spent on
boys' action figures, down from 65% last summer, NPD tracking
systems indicate.
   A good indication that children are turning their thoughts
to other toys is the brisk business done in water guns this
summer, notes Bill Pearse, associate editor for Playthings
Magazine, an industry publication. "The only problem
retailers are having with water guns is empty shelves," he
says.
   Among the chief beneficiaries of changing interests is
Hasbro, whose recent acquisition of Tonka Corp., fortified
its position as the world's largest toy manufacturer. This
summer the company's G.I. Joe, World Wrestling Federation
figures, and Tonka's Robin Hood action figures ranked among
the best selling on toy charts.
   Having written off most of the expenses from its Tonka
acquisition in the second quarter, the Pawtucket, R.I., toy
maker is expected to report a 22% increase in per-share
profit to 70 cents in the third quarter, up from 57 cents in
the year ago period, estimates Gary Jacobson, analyst for
Kidder Peabody &amp; Co. Mr. Jacobson expects Hasbro's revenue to
be about $700 million. Of that, $480 million is estimated to
come from Hasbro's businesses up 7% from $448.8 million in
the year-ago quarter. Tonka sales, though, distressed by the
fading popularity of former hits, like Ghostbusters, is
expected to shrink to about $220 million from $259.1 million
in the year-ago period, Mr. Jacobson says.
   Mattel, continuing to sail on the heady steam of its lead
doll, Barbie, is expected to report a 13% increase in
per-share earnings to $1.07 from 94 cents, estimates Steven
Eisenberg, analyst for Oppenheimer &amp; Co. Revenue of the El
Segundo, Calif., toy maker is expected to climb 9% to $535
million, Mr. Eisenberg projects. Mattel's six biggest retail
accounts report 20% increases in Barbie doll sales over a
year ago, he notes.
   Tyco Toys, based in Mount Laurel, N.J., is expected to
report per-share earnings of $1.10, a 17% jump over last
year's 94 cents a share computed on a fully diluted basis.
Revenue should climb 13% to $191 million, estimates Mr.
Jacobson. Several good-selling Tyco products, including its
Little Mermaid doll and Radio Control cars, have fueled the
company's growth, Mr. Jacobson says.
   Revell Monogram, the Des Plaines, Ill., plastic model kit
manufacturer, also is expected to report strong financial
results, partly because of increased distribution channels.
It is anticipated that Monogram, which now sells its products
in drug stores and supermarkets as well, will report profit
of 30 cents to 32 cents a share, compared with a loss of
seven cents in the year-ago quarter. Revenue is expected to
climb 20% to $30 million, projects Mr. Eisenberg.
   Among retailers, Toys "R" Us, facing a recessionary and a
competitive market, is expected to report flat earnings of 10
cents a share and revenue of about $1.2 billion, up 15% from
its year-ago $1.05 billion, estimates Barry Rothberg, analyst
for Mabon Nugent &amp; Co. Comparing sales in stores doing
business for at least a year, the increase should be about
2%, he adds.
   Profit margins have been hurt partly because Toys "R" Us
has had to compete with the price cuts of financially
struggling retail rivals. Toy chains, including Lionel Corp.,
operating under bankruptcy protection laws, and Child World
Inc., having only recently negotiated a debt-repayment plan,
have discounted a variety of their products to attract more
customers.
   "This kind of price war doesn't make the near-term outlook
for Toys `R' Us rosy," said Neil Subin, managing director of
Trendex Capital Management. "The long-term picture looks
good, however," he adds, particularly if some of its
competitors have to downsize operations.
   On the product front, the picture isn't as stark for
retailers. Despite its decline, Ninja Turtles remains a
traffic generator. "Rumors of the Turtles demise are greatly
exaggerated," declared American Securities Corp. analyst
David Leibowitz, borrowing from Mark Twain.
   Also a number of new products, including Mattel's line of
Peter Pan figures, based on Steven Spielberg's movie "Hook,"
planned to be release this Christmas, should drum up new
business, Mr. Leibowitz adds.
</LP>
<TEXT>
</TEXT>
</DOC>
