ID: 131	RANK: 37	SCORE: 19.273052
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880528-0088 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-05-28-88 1151EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r p AM-Veep-History Bjt   05-28 1100</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Veep-History, Bjt,1,070</SECOND>
<HEAD>History of Vice Presidential Choices Looks to Shape Party Picks in
'88</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By DONALD M. ROTHBERG</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP Political Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   George Bush isn't likely to forget that night
in July 1980, when his hopes of being the Republican vice
presidential nominee were dashed and then suddenly restored. It was
a night certain to have a profound impact on how Bush goes about
filling the No. 2 spot on the 1988 GOP ticket.
   Michael Dukakis was only an observer of the long process that
led Walter F. Mondale to the historic decision to fill out the 1984
Democratic ticket with a woman. But the impression that process
created and the impact of disclosures about the dealings of
Geraldine Ferraro's husband are equally certain to affect how
Dukakis chooses a running mate.
   The selection of a running mate is often described as the most
important decision a presidential nominee makes.
   And Dukakis has followed tradition by declaring that his choice
will be dictated by the need to have someone qualified to serve as
president if ``heaven forbid'' something should happen to him.
   Thirteen vice presidents eventually moved to the top office _
eight of them upon the death of the president. Four others were
later elected president, though only one, Martin Van Buren, was
elected while serving as vice president. One vice president, Gerald
R. Ford, gained the presidency when the incumbent, Richard M.
Nixon, was forced to resign.
   Despite the fact that nearly one-third of presidents first
served as vice president, the No. 2 spot on the ticket historically
has gone to someone chosen at the last possible moment for reasons
based far more on politics than qualifications.
   According to Robert F. Kennedy, Texas Sen. Lyndon B. Johnson was
an accidental choice to be John F. Kennedy's running mate in 1960.
   The new book, ``Robert Kennedy, His Own Words,'' quotes Kennedy
as saying that when his brother offered the vice presidential
nomination to Johnson ``he never dreamt there was a chance in the
world he would accept it.''
   After Johnson accepted the offer, Robert Kennedy quoted his
brother as asking, ``Now what do we do?''
   The brothers tried to convince Johnson that putting him on the
ticket would provoke a liberal revolt on the convention floor. But
Johnson said he was willing to risk such a fight.
   As it turned out, Johnson's presence on the ticket was a
critical factor in helping Kennedy carry Southern states,
particularly Texas, in his narrow victory over Nixon.
   Harry Truman was little known outside his home state of Missouri
when he was tapped by Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1944.
   Roosevelt cared little about the vice presidential nominee as he
prepared to run for a fourth term although he decided well in
advance of the Democratic convention to dump Henry A. Wallace, who
had served four years as vice president and wanted another four.
But Southerners opposed Wallace and he was not well-liked in the
Senate.
   With World War II moving to a close, Roosevelt was looking ahead
to the possibility of Senate fights over peace treaties and
establishment of the United Nations. Truman was popular with his
Senate colleagues.
   In his memoirs, Truman recalled that when he arrived in Chicago
for the convention he brushed aside suggestions that he seek the
vice presidency.
   But Truman's old friend from Missouri, Robert Hannegan, was
Democratic Party chairman, and he was lobbying to get the senator
on the ticket.
   Truman resisted when party leaders asked him to allow his name
to be put forth to the convention as vice president.
   Then came a telephone call from Roosevelt. Hannegan held the
phone away from his ear and Truman could hear the president say,
``Bob, have you got that fellow lined up yet?''
   ``No, he's the contrariest Missouri mule I've ever dealt with,''
replied Hannegan.
   ``Well you tell him if he wants to break up the Democratic Party
in the middle of a war, that's his responsibility,'' said
Roosevelt, who then hung up.
   ``I'll have to say yes,'' Truman told Hannegan.
   Eighty-three days after taking office as vice president, Truman
succeeded to the presidency.
   Ford was the first vice president to attain that office under
the more deliberative process of the 25th Amendment. Then, after he
succeeded Nixon, Ford named Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller of New York
as his vice president. Rockefeller won out over a little-known
Texan named George Bush.
   In 1976, Jimmy Carter settled on Minnesota Sen. Mondale after a
process in which prospective choices trooped to Plains, Ga., to be
interviewed by Carter.
   Eight years later, Mondale used a similar process. The people
who traveled to North Oaks, Minn., included three women, a black, a
Hispanic, and a white Southern senator.
   When Ferraro, a congresswoman from New York, was selected,
feminists were ecstatic. But the benefits Mondale reaped from the
bold choice of a woman quickly faded when the following weeks
brought headlines with accounts of her husband's business dealings.
   Bush was caught in one of the strangest sequences ever at a
nominating convention.
   The scene was Joe Louis Arena in Detroit on the night of July
16. For days Republicans had talked of a ``dream ticket'' made up
of Reagan and Ford. The former president would technically be vice
president but would actually assume far greater responsibilities,
becoming in effect a co-president.
   As the convention got under way that Wednesday night, Bush was
waiting to deliver a unity speech before the balloting to nominate
Reagan.
   He recalled waiting in the wings ``when a backstage worker came
by, patted me on the back, and said, `I'm sorry, Mr. Bush, really
sorry. I was pulling for you.'
   ```Sorry about what?' I asked, as we shook hands.
   ```You mean you haven't heard? It's all over. Reagan's picked
Ford as his running mate.'''
   Bush was described as furious as he left the hall, angry that
the Reagan people had not told him of the decision to choose
someone else.
   But the Ford option was looking less attractive. Among
considerations that disturbed Reagan advisers was the fact that
during the campaign, Ford would be addressed as ``Mr. President,''
while Reagan would be referred to as ``governor.''
   Then Ford appeared on television being interviewed by Walter
Cronkite. He said that he would not go to Washington as ``a
figurehead vice president.''
   Reagan was stunned to see the former president talking on
national television about their private discussions. The
impossibility of the projected arrangement was growing clearer.
   A call went out to Bush.
   ``It came out of the clear blue sky,'' he said. The ticket was
forged.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
