ID: 131	RANK: 51	SCORE: 18.568893
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880616-0115 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-06-16-88 1420EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a PM-ZaccaroSentencing 7thLd-Writethru a0658 06-16 1142</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Zaccaro Sentencing, 7th Ld - Writethru, a0658,1173</SECOND>
<HEAD>John Zaccaro Jr. Sentenced To Four Months in Jail</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Leads with 13 grafs to UPDATE with Ferraro comments after
sentencing, edit, picking up 12th graf pvs, `Zaccaro faced ....'
^LaserPhoto RUT2</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By DANICA KIRKA</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>RUTLAND, Vt. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The son of former vice presidential
candidate Geraldine Ferraro was sentenced today to four months in
jail for selling $25 worth of cocaine to an undercover police
officer two years ago.
   John Zaccaro Jr., 24, and his parents stood stoically as Judge
Francis McCaffrey handed down the sentence in Vermont District
Court in Rutland.
   ``I can't in good conscience sentence you without any time to
serve,'' McCaffrey said. The sentence also includes 300 hours of
community service and a $1,500 fine.
   ``We are obviously very disappointed by the harshness of the
sentence,'' Ferraro said, noting that other defendants in Vermont
drug cases have received lighter penalties.
   ``We'll continue on our way with an appeal. We love our son,''
she said.
   A tearful Ferraro had asked McCaffrey not to treat her son
differently than any other person convicted of selling a quarter of
a gram of cocaine.
   Ferraro, who ran on the Democratic ticket in 1984, said her
son's arrest and conviction has taken a heavy toll on her family
and her son.
   ``He doesn't go to church with us,'' she said in Vermont
District Court. ``He doesn't want to be seen with us. It's not
because he's ashamed of us. It's because he's ashamed of what he's
done.''
   Zaccaro told McCaffrey in a quivering voice that he has sworn
off drugs.
   ``I'd like to make a personal pledge to you and my family that I
will never again be involved in drugs or any illegality,'' he told
McCaffrey.
   McCaffrey suggested that the jail time be served through the
Chittenden Community Correctional Center in Burlington so that
Zaccaro could participate in a special corrections program that
allows him to be kept under house arrest.
   However, Addison County State's Attorney John Quinn said later
that Zaccaro would have to be accepted into the program.
   Zaccaro is free during the 30 days he has to appeal the sentence.
   Zaccaro faced up to five years in prison and a $10,000 fine.
   His attorney, Charles Tetzlaff, had asked McCaffrey to accept a
probation officer's recommendation of a suspended sentence,
probation and community service of unspecified length.
   Quinn recommended a jail term, citing the deterrent effect on
drug cases in society. He did not specify the length, but said
afterward he was pleased with the sentence.
   He denied that he had treated the case differently.
   ``This was a case in which we caught someone red-handed, and I
mean red-handed,'' Quinn said. ``I felt that it was important for
the court to say it doesn't matter who you are. If you commit a
drug offense in the state of Vermont, you'll be treated with great
severity.''
   Also at the sentencing hearing, the founder of Covenant House, a
New York City shelter for runaways, said he believes that Zaccaro
has learned from his mistakes and should not be imprisoned.
   Zaccaro has worked as a volunteer for the shelter in a program
that brings runaways, child prostitutes and other children from the
streets to the center.
   ``You can't try and reach these kids ... without coming into a
far better and deeper understanding of your own value system,''
said the Rev. Bruce Ritter. ``Probably the most important things we
learn are from our mistakes. John has learned them.''
   Quinn said earlier that he wants the sentence to be noticed to
deter other drug sellers and users.
   ``If you want to get a message out to people, you certainly want
to send that in a high-profile case,'' the prosecutor said. ``We
need to educate people about the horrors of drugs and if that
doesn't work, at least scare them away because of the possibility
of legal sanction.''
   At the hearing, Quinn asked Ritter what message the sentence
should send regarding drug use.
   ``I doubt that incarceration of John would be much of a
deterrent to anyone,'' Ritter replied. ``Incarceration for John
right now would be more in line of society seeking retribution
rather than deterrence.''
   Also testifying this morning was former Middlebury police Sgt.
David Wemette, who said that while investigating the case he found
highly sophisticated scales on Zaccaro's desk.
   ``He needs no more punishment,'' Ferraro said of her son in a
letter written to McCaffrey. ``He has been publicly `flogged' on
national and international TV.''
   ``He will never touch drugs again and maybe someday I'll even
say it was a blessing in disguise,'' Ferraro wrote. ``Right now, it
still hurts too much to do so.''
   Zaccaro has grown into ``a mature, much quieter, much more
self-conscious adult'' since his arrest, Ferraro wrote.
   The letter is among 30 that McCaffrey has received before
sentencing Zaccaro. The contents of the letters are a part of the
court record. Ferraro's 1984 running mate, Walter Mondale, also put
in a good word for Zaccaro, said court clerk Ann Dingler.
   ``I saw him as a very fine young man who quickly became good
friends with our children and who campaigned in a spirited and
strong way around our nation,'' said Mondale.
   Zaccaro was convicted by a jury in April in Vermont District
Court in Rutland. He was arrested in February 1986 after selling
$25 worth of cocaine to undercover agent Laura Manning while he was
attending Middlebury College.
   Manning testified that she went to Zaccaro's off-campus home and
inquired about buying cocaine. She said Zaccaro produced a tray of
cocaine packets from underneath the living room sofa. Zaccaro was
arrested that night outside the restaurant where he worked.
   Tetzlaff claimed Zaccaro had been entrapped, saying police had
used Manning as bait to snare him during a college party weekend.
The prosecution denied the charge.
   Quinn had filed a motion asking that he be allowed to introduce
at the hearing photographs of evidence seized from Zaccaro's car.
Police said the evidence included $1,600 in cash, 8 grams of
cocaine and records of drug transactions.
   The evidence was excluded two years ago when McCaffrey ruled
police had insufficient evidence when they obtained the warrant to
search Zaccaro's car.
   On Wednesday, a judge denied Quinn's motion, setting the stage
for today's sentencing.
   Zaccaro wrote about his work at Covenant House in the March
issue of Women's Day magazine, describing at length the experiences
of children on the streets and his decision to volunteer.
   ``When I told my parents, they were pleased. When I told my
lawyers, they were not. They knew it meant my dealing with drug
users. It would not be good for my image. I laughed,'' he wrote.
``There were kids who needed help. ... I've been lucky. These kids
never had a fair chance.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
