ID: 131	RANK: 93	SCORE: 16.198454
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880428-0067 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-04-28-88 0613EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r p PM-TrialHeats 1stLd-Writethru a0439 04-28 0805</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Trial Heats, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0439,770</SECOND>
<HEAD>Six Months Before Election, Polls Portray a Close Race</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Adds 1 graf after 7th graf pvs, bgng The biggest ..., with
margin of error info; picks up 8th graf pvs, History demonstrates
...</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By GARY LANGER</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>NEW YORK (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Polls are pointing to a potentially close
general election race between George Bush and Michael Dukakis, with
Jesse Jackson more hindrance than help as a Democratic vice
presidential nominee.
   Voter opinions change in the course of a campaign, and the
recent round of surveys testing Bush against Dukakis, with and
without Jackson, may bear no resemblance to the outcome six months
from now, pollsters said in interviews this week.
   But the polls do establish a benchmark from which future
movement can be judged, they said. And taken in context, the polls
can highlight candidate strengths and weaknesses, providing clues
to the campaign's likely course.
   ``We're not clairvoyant. This the way it is right now. It's
April. It's not November. It's close in April,'' said ABC News poll
chief Jeff Alderman. ``If Dukakis was trailing Bush by 20 points,
we could say something now.''
   That lack of a big lead for the better-known Bush is one
important result of the recent polls.
   ``It's not too early to know that it's a close race,'' said CBS
News poll director Warren Mitofsky. ``Obviously things are going to
happen between now and November that will change this. That's what
campaigns are all about. But it's fair to conclude that there's
going to be a contest.''
   The biggest spread between the likely nominees was in a poll
conducted April 21-22 for Time magazine: Dukakis had an 11-point
lead over Bush, 50 to 39. A Gallup poll April 21-23 showed a
virtual tie, Bush 45, Dukakis 43, as did a USA Today-CNN poll April
20-21, Dukakis 45, Bush 43.
   The margin of error was plus or minus three percentage points
for each of the three polls.
   History demonstrates that such early polls don't always predict
the result. In late May 1984, an ABC News-Washington Post poll put
Walter Mondale 11 points behind President Reagan among likely
voters. Immediately after the Democratic convention, Mondale, on a
crest of good publicity, pulled even with Reagan in some polls. But
he lost in November by 18 points.
   During the campaign, Mitofsky noted, Mondale came out for higher
taxes. A similar ``silly'' move could cost Bush or Dukakis just as
dearly, he said.
   Because many voters have not made firm choices thus far this
year, poll numbers are liable to ``jump around,'' partly through
differences in survey methods, said Andrew Kohut, Gallup's
president. He said that could explain the Time poll's relatively
large lead for Dukakis.
   More important, while polls ``are a pretty good indication of
how voters feel today,'' Kohut said, ``you have to keep in mind
what today represents.''
   The polls were done shortly after Dukakis' big win in New York,
and thus amid considerable positive publicity for the Massachusetts
governor, Kohut noted. In contrast, there was little news of Bush
that week. The result: a favorable bias for Dukakis.
   That may change, Alderman said, as Dukakis becomes better known
and undergoes more critical scrutiny. The polls' key message for
the moment, he said, is that Bush is not the shoo-in some analysts
thought him to be.
   ``One of the myths of the election was that the Democrats can't
win,'' Alderman said. ``The Democrats can win. I think people are
beginning to see that now.''
   There is less agreement among pollsters on surveys that suggest
vice presidential candidates. Alderman said other polls have
indicated that most voters solely consider the presidential
nominee: Even the dramatic choice of Geraldine Ferraro as
Democratic vice presidential nominee in 1984 seemed neither to help
nor hurt the ticket.
   Nonetheless, the recent polls did indicate an impact if Jackson
ran as the vice presidential candidate. While the Gallup poll
showed Bush and Dukakis about even when their names alone were
given, a proposed ticket of Bush and Rep. Jack Kemp, R-N.Y., had a
10-point lead over a Dukakis-Jackson ticket, 50-40.
   The USA Today-CNN poll, asking about Bush with an unnamed
running mate against Dukakis and Jackson, had the Republicans up
49-42. The Time poll, done the same way, had the Democrats ahead
47-42, but had Dukakis farther ahead of Bush without Jackson on the
ticket.
   ``I think it's clear ... that Jackson hurts the ticket,'' said
I.A. Lewis, pollster for The Los Angeles Times. Also, because
opinions are not fully formed, the proposition of a Dukakis-Jackson
ticket right now may be drawing uncritical support from both
Dukakis and Jackson supporters, he said.
   ``What you're not measuring now is the people who like Dukakis
but not Jackson, or the people who like Jackson but not Dukakis,''
Lewis said.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
