ID: 241	RANK: 12	SCORE: 21.085320
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890407-0204 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-04-07-89 1815EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-Gorbachev-Queen 1st-LdWritethru   04-07 0806</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Gorbachev-Queen, 1st-Ld Writethru,a0739,0824</SECOND>
<HEAD>Gorbachev Pops Question &amp; Queen Accepts Invitation to Moscow</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: INSERT 3 grafs after 8th pvs, `In November...' to ADD Soviet
comment on invitation to queen. Pickup 9th pvs, `Gorbachev was...'</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By EDITH M. LEDERER</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>WINDSOR, England (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Mikhail S. Gorbachev followed in the
footsteps of the czars and came to Queen Elizabeth II's castle on
Friday, then asked the question Britons have been speculating about
for months.
   He asked the monarch if she would come to Moscow. Prime Minister
Margaret Thatcher said the queen gave ``a very definite yes.''
   Winding up his two-day visit, the Soviet leader sampled
old-fashioned British pageantry _ first in the oak-paneled splendor
of the Guildhall, for 800 years the seat of London city government,
then in majestic Windsor Castle overlooking the River Thames.
   Elizabeth will be the first British monarch to visit the Soviet
Union since the revolution that ousted the czars and brought the
communists to power.
   The invitation has great implications because of the close
kinship of the Russian and British royal families. Czar Nicholas
II, a cousin of the queen's grandfather, was murdered with his
family in 1918, ending the Romanov dynasty.
   The queen's reaction sounded somewhat guarded. A Buckingham
Palace statement said: ``Thanking Mr. Gorbachev, Her Majesty
explained that the program for her visits were fixed a number of
years in advance. She hoped it would be possible to visit the
Soviet Union in due course.''
   But Mrs. Thatcher, whose government has the final word on
approving or rejecting a visit, said: ``It's a very definite yes.''
She added the queen was ``very positive, very glad, very happy''
about the invitation.
   In November, a month before Gorbachev originally was scheduled
to visit Britain, reports of a Soviet prospective invitation to the
queen started circulating and Mrs. Thatcher let it be known she
thought it was too soon to give such a resounding stamp of approval
to the Soviet leader's reform plans.
   At a news conference in London Friday night, Soviet officials
were asked whether the palace or British government had insisted
the Soviets apologize for the treatment of the Russian royal family
before the queen accepted the invitation.
   Yevgeny Primakov of the Soviet Institute of World Economic and
International Politics said there were ``no preconditions on either
side.''
   He said Soviets are reasessing their history but added: ``This
is not the point. This is an invitation to a head of state of a
country with which we are trying to find points of convergence.''
   Gorbachev was driven to Windsor Castle, 21 miles west of London
_ the first Soviet leader since 1967 to visit the queen.
   In drizzling rain, he took the Royal Salute from the Guard of
Honor mounted by the 1st Battalion Coldstream Guards. The captain
then reported to Gorbachev in Russian and the Soviet leader,
carrying his hat in his hand, reviewed the troops clad in gray
greatcoats and bearskin hats.
   The queen, wearing a pink cape and matching skirt, then took
Gorbachev and his wife, Raisa, on a quick tour of the palace _ past
relics from the Crusades, medieval knights on horseback, King Henry
VIII's suit of armor, and a painting of the Russian Emperor
Alexander I. Gorbachev beamed in recognition.
   The party made a brief detour to enable Gorbachev to look at a
malachite vase given to Queen Victoria by Czar Nicholas I.
   Nicholas I was the first of the czarist cousins to come to
Windsor, spending three days in June 1844 as Victoria's guest.
Alexander II, the future Alexander III, and the future Nicholas II,
were also entertained at Windsor by the British royals.
   Buckingham Palace said Gorbachev invited the queen to visit the
Soviet Union over a lunch of smoked salmon, pastry filled with
layers of beef, duck puree and artichoke and avocado salad, and
three wines.
   The 34 guests included Mrs. Thatcher and her husband, Denis, and
the queen's youngest son, Prince Edward, who will be visiting
Moscow next week with the National Youth Theater.
   Lord St. John of Fawsley, a constitutional expert, said the
invitation ``will cement the very warm relationship between
ourselves and the Soviet Union. I think it will put an end to all
tensions that could have come from the memories of the
assassination of the czar and I think the queen will have a very
ecstatic reception.''
   Harold Brooks-Baker, publishing director of Burke's peerage,
said the queen should insist that the Soviets disclose where Czar
Nicolas II and his family are buried, and that she be allowed to
pay her respects.
   ``The fact that the queen could see the graves of her relations,
and repair the damage done after the Russian Revolution in a
Christian and religious way, would perhaps bring these countries
closer together than anyone ever thought possible,'' he said.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
