ID: 241	RANK: 43	SCORE: 15.631263
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920317-0016
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920317-0016.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Time Off: Diversions and Excursions March 17-30
</HL>
<DATE>
03/17/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>

                                                                                                       

                     Washington, D.C.
          Guercino: Master Painter of the Baroque
          Guercino: Drawings From Windsor Castle
                                                                                                       

</LP>
<TEXT>
   These twin exhibitions commemorate the 400th anniversary
of the birth of the Italian baroque painter Giovanni
Francesco Barbieri, known as Guercino. "Master Painter of the
Baroque," the first American exhibition devoted to the
artist's paintings, consists of 60 works. Highlights include
"Susanna and the Elders" (1617), from the Prado; and "Apollo
Flaying Marsyas" (1618), from the Palazzo Pitti in Florence.
The drawings on view in the accompanying show are from the
collection of Queen Elizabeth II at the Royal Library,
Windsor Castle. Included are a number of preparatory sketches
for paintings in the first show.
   National Gallery of Art: Fourth Street at Constitution
Avenue NW. Through May 17. (202) 737-4215.
   "Drawings From Windsor Castle," which was seen at the
Kimbell Art Museum in Fort Worth, Texas, will travel to the
Drawing Center, New York (June 2-Aug. 1).
                                                                                                       

                          New York
                   Bridges and Boundaries:
             African Americans and American Jews
                                                                                                       

   Presented by the Jewish Museum in collaboration with the
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People
(NAACP), this show examines the complex relationship between
African Americans and American Jews during the 20th century.
The 350 artifacts, photographs, media materials and works of
art document periods of cooperation between the two groups,
as well as of conflict.
   New-York Historical Society: Central Park West at 77th St.
March 22-July 19. (212) 399-3434.
                                                                                                       

                          FLOWERS
                                                                                                       

                         New York
                  The Spring Flower Show:
               The American Romantic Garden
                                                                                                       


sweet william, foxglove and other blooms of the season at the
Enid A. Haupt Conservatory, pausing for a break at the rustic
gazebo designed and made of red cedar, locust and Osage
orange by furniture designer David Robinson.
   New York Botanical Garden: the Bronx. March 21-May 17.
(212) 220-8700.
                                                                                                       

                           DANCE
                                                                                                       

                         New York
            Carlota Santana Spanish Dance Company
                                                                                                       

   This 12-member troupe based in New York makes its Joyce
Theater debut with the premiere of a major new work, "El
Encuentro de Dos Mundos" ("The Meeting of Two Worlds"), a
three-part music/dance piece that explores the fusion of
Spanish and Latin American cultures. The first part of the
piece examines the ties between Cuba and Spain; part two is a
duet mixing flamenco and Argentine tango; the third part is
based on a flamenco music-and-dance form inspired by the
rhythms of Colombian folk music.
   Joyce Theater: 175 Eighth Ave. March 24-29. (212)
242-0800.
                                                                                                       

                           MUSIC
                                                                                                       

                         New York
                    Metropolitan Opera
                                                                                                       

   A new production of Richard Strauss's "Elektra," directed
by Otto Schenk with designs by Jurgen Rose, features
Hildegard Behrens as Agamemnon's vengeance-wreaking, slovenly
daughter. Deborah Voigt sings her sister Chrysothemis; Leonie
Rysanek is their mom. James Levine conducts.
   Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center: 65th Street and
Broadway. March 26 and 31; April 3, 6, 10, 14 and 18. (212)
362-6000.
                                                                                                       

                     Wilmington, Del.
                       OperaDelaware
                                                                                                       

   Libby Larsen's space-age fantasy "A Wrinkle in Time,"
based on the science fiction novel by Madeleine L'Engle,
premieres on March 27 complete with otherworldly music and
characters, including a flying centaur. The opera -- a
collaboration with the Playhouse Theatre -- has a double cast
made up of students and professional singers from Delaware
and Pennsylvania. David Price stars as Dr. Murry, an atomic
physicist who disappears while on a secret mission; Barbara
Boyle and Andrea Brown alternate in the role of Meg, Dr.
Murry's 12-year-old daughter. Evelyn Swensson conducts;
Leland Kimball directs and designed the set.
   The Playhouse Theatre: Du Pont Building. March 27, 28 and
29. (302) 656-4401.
                                                                                                       

                      Jackson, Miss.

                                                                                                       

   The company ventures into the shadowy, mysterious realm of
Claude Debussy's "Pelleas and Melisande" with a new
production featuring Betsy Norden and Matthew Carey as the
youthful lovers who wander, singing softly, through grottoes,
forests and medieval castles. Very French, subtle and
strange, this only opera by Debussy is much admired, but
infrequently staged. John Claassen is the designer; Frank
Marion Johnson conducts and Bogo Igesz directs.
   Jackson Municipal Auditorium: Pascagoula Street. March 20
and 21. (601) 960-2300.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
