ID: 241	RANK: 6	SCORE: 25.689907
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-4912</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CK3BQABRFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921130
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  30 NOV 92 / Arts: A foolish plan to reinvent Windsor - Architecture
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By COLIN AMERY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Watching the flames at Windsor was a numbing experience and only the gradual
passage of time has put the disaster into some perspective. The losses are,
in architectural terms, immense. The stroke of luck, if one can call it
that, was that important works of art had been moved from some of the rooms
in preparation for the next stage of a comprehensive rewiring programme. Six
major rooms have been destroyed or badly damaged with roofs and ceilings
suffering the most.
The fire began in the private chapel, a relatively modest room that was
refurbished by Sir Hugh Casson in a wave of modernisation early in the
Queen's reign. Will this be the first room in Britain to be restored in the
Casson style? The Octagon Room, close to the chapel, was also damaged but
the serious losses are the enormous St. George's Hall, the Grand Reception
Room, the State Dining Room, and the Crimson Drawing Room. All these rooms
represent part of the complete transformation of the castle by King George
IV in the 1820s. There is no doubt that George IV, both as King and Prince
Regent, was the finest royal patron of the arts since King Charles I.
Windsor Castle was extensively altered by Charles II, but by the 19th
century it had become unsuitable for the residence of the sovereign of a
major world power. In 1824, the House of Commons granted the not
inconsiderable sum of Pounds 150,000 for improvements at Windsor. Sir
Charles Long, the King's principal artistic adviser, organised an
architectural competition. He invited three architects from the Office of
Works - Sir John Soane, Sir Robert Smirke and John Nash - to compete with
one outsider Jeffry Wyatt (who was to rename himself when he was knighted,
Sir Jeffry Wyatville). After long consultations with the King, Charles Long
produced a fascinating and extremely detailed brief. Wyatville followed the
brief very precisely and won the competition.
Wyatville's ambition at Windsor was to create in the Upper Ward a series of
State Apartments on the north side with a new grand entrance, the George IV
gateway, on the south side. An important part of the brief and of
Wyatville's plan was to improve and romanticise the castle's silhouette.
This included raising the height of the Round Tower by 33 feet to make it
the dominant element in the new group of battlemented and machicolated
towers. As an exercise in the picturesque, Wyatville and his patron achieved
a remarkable success; seen from the Great Park, or even from the M4
motorway, the castle makes one of Europe's most romantic skylines.
I am amazed that the Royal Institute of British Architects has reacted to
the fire at Windsor not with a scholarly and thoughtful response based on
historical knowledge, but with a Pavlovian reaction urging: 'an
architectural competition be held for the rebuilding of Windsor Castle. An
architectural competition would be a far more positive assertion of
tradition than the slavish recreation of Victorian pastiche. A contemporary
rebuilding could also provide an unrivalled opportunity to combine new state
rooms with acceptable modern galleries in which the Queen's art collection
could be put on permanent, and safe, public display. This really would be
worth every penny of the public money that the rebuilding will cost.' The
RIBA's statement goes on to urge the Queen to take advice from the president
of the Institute and Sir Hugh Casson.
Apart from the breathtaking ignorance that tries to suggest that good
Regency architecture is Victorian pastiche, I wonder whether any member of
the RIBA has recently been to Windsor or taken the slightest interest in
English artistic and architectural history. The facts are that the walls of
these important state rooms remain and there is sufficient plasterwork in
the Grand Reception Room, for example - one of the finest neo-Rococo
interiors in the world - for the only solution to be painstaking and
accurate restoration. There is plenty of archival evidence of how these
rooms looked and only a committee of historians and the finest conservation
architects can ensure that a decent job of restoration is carried out. I can
only suppose that the Institutional architects did not notice that most of
the furniture, tapestries and pictures that belonged in these rooms was
carefully rescued and is of a quality that deserves appropriate
reinstatement in properly restored rooms.
In Vienna last Friday another architectural loss was sustained when a part
of the Hofburg Imperial palace was badly damaged by fire. The main loss
seems to have been the great Redoutensaal built by the Empress Maria Theresa
and used for international conferences. The reaction of the Austrian
Chancellor Franz Vranitsky was the appropriate one. 'The whole area was
recently renovated and was one of the prominent jewels of our city. We'll
just have to renovate it again.'
The same sentiments should apply to Windsor Castle. There is an aesthetic
consistency in the Gothic progression of rooms from the Great Staircase
(later altered by Salvin) through the great vaulted Guard Chamber with its
military decoration and tributes to Marlborough, Wellington and Nelson to
St. George's Hall and the State Apartments. The dining room, and the vaulted
octagon room which serves as an ante-room in the Brunswick tower (both badly
damaged) continue the Gothic theme. Pugin's sideboard may have to be
replaced and the challenge will be to find craftsmen to recreate that sense
of Gothic chivalry and romance that is so important a part of the Windsor
style. No amount of prevarication about cost and stylistic treatment should
be allowed to cloud the fact that the only right course for Windsor Castle
is complete and accurate reconstruction.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
