ID: 136	RANK: 26	SCORE: 7.976272
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP881205-0225 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-12-05-88 1353EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>s i BC-Germany-BuyingArt Adv11   12-05 1113</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-Germany-Buying Art, Adv11,1139</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv11</NOTE>
<NOTE>For Release Sunday, Dec. 11, and Thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>West Germany Buying Back Art that `Wandered' During Nazi Era</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By CAROL J. WILLIAMS</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>BONN, West Germany (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Quietly, unobtrusively and with limited
funds, West Germany has been buying back important artworks that
left the country during the Nazi era.
   Officials involved in the slow recovery of what Germans call
their ``wandered culture'' decline to say how much they've spent to
bring home some historically important works.
   But at least $29 million is known to have been spent over the
past five years in the effort the government has deliberately kept
on a low key.
   West Germany struggles with a particularly acute problem of
exiled art because of the volume of works sold during World War II
to help bankroll the Nazi war effort.
   Thousands of paintings, manuscripts, sculptures and other
cultural goods were salvaged from private collections or produced
abroad by Jews and intellectuals hounded from their homeland by
Adolf Hitler's regime. But only a fraction of the displaced art made
its way back to Germany after the war.
   ``We have no defined plan for buying up all the important
artworks that have wandered out of the country over the years, but
when the opportunity arises we make our best effort to get back what
has been lost,'' explained Hans Hieronymus, who heads the Interior
Ministry's office responsible for art acquisitions.
   In an interview with The Associated Press, Hieronymus produced a
list of the major works repatriated over the past few months. They
included three 16th century paintings by Albrecht Durer, original
compositions of Richard Wagner and Robert Schumann, Franz Kafka's
1920 manuscript of ``The Trial'' and some personal letters, and a
1463 edition of ``The Apocalypse,'' one of the earliest products of
Johann Gutenberg's block-printing press.
   The most stunning indication of West Germany's commitment to
restoration of Germany's cultural heritage was the purchase five
years ago of The Gospel of Henry the Lionhearted, a handwritten,
552-page, 12th century volume that has commanded the highest price
to date for a book _ $18.8 million.
   A government art appraiser, Hartmut Vogel, says the Henry the
Lionhearted purchase was an inspiring success for West German art
circles as it rewarded an unprecedented effort of cooperation among
the sometimes fractious state and federal art dealers and private
cultural foundations.
   ``This was our masterpiece acquisition, but for the most part our
funds are too small to achieve much headway,'' Vogel told AP.
   He alluded to the purchase in mid-November of the Kafka
manuscript by the state of Baden-Wuerttemberg as a bargain at $1.98
million. But that kind of surprise acquisition is unlikely to be
pulled off with any degree of frequency, he conceded.
   ``We have to be careful not to appear to be hunting dogs,'' said
Verena Tafel, one of five art historians busy collecting works for
West Berlin's Museum of German History, expected to open in the late
1990s.
   ``Every national museum tries to repatriate those artworks that
were lost during the Nazi regime,'' Ms. Tafel said. ``But being too
aggressive can have the result of driving the prices up.''
   An official with the Interior Ministry who spoke only on
condition of anonymity said recovery of famous German works from
abroad is an important facet of the government's acquisition policy,
``but we'd be stupid to publicly present this as a campaign.''
   He explained that a restrained profile in the international art
market is essential in outbidding hesitant competitors, and for West
German buyers to put out the word that they are embarked on a
repatriation project would serve only to price themselves out of the
market.
   Ms. Tafel noted, however, that museum collectors have to maintain
a delicate balance between discretion and enlisting popular support.
After learning of the West German government's plan to open a
historical museum in West Berlin, she said, the St. Louis Science
Center this fall returned free of charge an early German-made
scientific model of the human body that had been taken out of the
country during the Nazi period.
   Earlier this year, the U.S. government agreed to return about
6,200 paintings and drawings from the Nazi period that were
confiscated at the end of World War II. The propaganda artworks
commissioned by Hitler to depict model soldiers and citizens are
currently in storage at the Bavarian Army Museum in Ingolstadt
pending official decisions on how they should be presented.
   In cases where outright purchase is the only means of retrieving
expatriated artworks or items of special interest for German
museums, West German buyers concede they are fighting a losing
battle against wealthy Japanese collectors and British and American
curators with claims to significantly larger private funding sources.
   Sabine Fehlemann, director of the Von der Heydt Museum in
Wuppertal, traveled to London on Nov. 28 with authorization to bid
as high as $5.8 million for Pablo Picasso's ``The Acrobat and the
Young Harlequin.'' The bidding was opened at $8.6 million and closed
with the $38.6 million offer of Tokyo collector Akio Nishino.
   The 1905 masterpiece was a treasured possession of Wuppertal
until 1937, when Nazi forces confiscated the painting, declared it
``degenerate art'' and sold it to a Swiss collector for 80,000 Swiss
francs.
   ``I thought we had little chance,'' Ms. Fehlemann said after the
auction. ``But I wanted to see our Picasso just once more before it
disappears into a Japanese repository.''
   West German state collectors contend they enjoy fewer advantages
in the international art arena than their competitors because of the
dearth of private foundations to generate funds for public
acquisitions.
   The Interior Ministry's Hieronymus explained that public
offerings of important artworks often are advertised only a few
weeks or days prior to the auction, triggering a scramble for
donations from each of the 10 West German states, the federal
government and the public foundations. The cumbersome effort often
serves to stall presentation of a reasonable bid, he conceded.
   Increasingly priced out of the market for the best-known works,
the state collectors have concentrated instead on preventing the
further migration of German treasures.
   Under a 1955 law that charges the state with protecting national
culture, some 1,000 artworks in West Germany are designated by the
government as national valuables, restricting though not prohibiting
their sale or exchange abroad.
   ``We have to concentrate on preventing further losses,'' Ms.
Tafel said.
   ``In general, if a famous German work of art is on public display
in another country, that's enough to make us happy,'' she said.
``We're not like Melina Mercouri (the former actress who is Greece's
culture minster) _ we don't insist that everything must come back.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Sunday, Dec. 11</NOTE>
</DOC>
