ID: 136	RANK: 28	SCORE: 7.821228
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920116-0125
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920116-0125.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Croatia's Art and Architecture Buried in Rubble
   ----
   By Alexandra Tuttle
</HL>
<DATE>
01/16/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A11
</SO>
<LP>
   Zagreb, Yugoslavia -- Smack in the middle of Europe,
divided by warring Byzantine and Frankish, Ottoman and
Austro-Hungarian claims to sovereignty, Yugoslavia's
Dalmatian coast has long been trod upon, plowed under and
fought over by a variety of civilizing influences with
dishonorable intentions: Saracens, Bulgaro-Macedonians,
Serbs, Venetians, Austro-Hungarians, Ottomans and Nazis. And
then there are the periodic earthquakes that shake up the
coastal towns, a matter of nature taking up where man-made
destruction leaves off.
   Through all of this, the medieval city of Dubrovnik -- an
almost perfectly preserved town that was once the seat of the
Republic of Ragusa -- has managed to remain intact. Until
now. More than 40% of the inner city has been destroyed in
the civil war between Serbs and Croats that began seven
months ago. The Serb-controlled federal navy showed up in
port in October and began shelling the 14th-century city
walls. In three months of fierce artillery and mortar
attacks, many of Dubrovnik's fine Gothic and Renaissance
structures have been reduced to rubble or burned down; what
remains has been scarred and pockmarked by federal forces
bent on teaching the secessionist Croats a lesson neither
they nor the rest of the world is likely to forget.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   In a civil war that has claimed so many lives and
displaced more than half a million people -- mostly Croats
fleeing the inexorable advance of the federal army -- concern
for carved stone and painted wood, however beautiful, may
seem fatuous. On the other hand, the sheer tonnage of
materiel dropped on Croatia, far more than the firepower
needed to secure key cities and land, belies the purely
aesthetic character of the damage. The wholesale destruction
of Croatian art and architecture has a sinister political
significance. Indeed, the Serb-backed forces seem bent on
destroying everything that bears witness to Croatia's potent
national identity.
   Hence the disproportionate number of historical, cultural
and religious buildings struck by shelling and bombing; the
more precious the site, the more vulnerable it is to attack.
The Ministry of Culture in Croatia claims that more than 500
monuments and historical buildings have been damaged or
destroyed in the fighting. Sacred buildings, notably Roman
Catholic churches, monasteries and cemeteries, are especially
popular targets: In just seven months of fighting, nearly 250
have been hit. The other repositories of Croatia's cultural
heritage are another army favorite; more than 370 museums,
libraries and archives have been damaged or destroyed.
   What's more, the monuments destroyed or under threat are
among the most beautiful in Europe; they represent a trove of
European art and architecture that stretches from antiquity
to the 18th century. A look at the places hardest hit by
federal troops makes it clear that they do not waste their
shells on insignificant buildings or plain little towns; in
November, Yugoslavian gunboats shelled the old coastal town
of Split, hitting the 11th-century St. Trinity Church, the
cathedral converted in the seventh century from Diocletian's
Mausoleum, and the newly excavated fourth-century Palace of
Diocletian. This palace, the largest and perhaps most perfect
example of late Roman palatial architecture extant, survived
the decline and fall of the Roman empire but has not
withstood the demise of the 20th-century Soviet empire built
in part on its foundations. A view of Split from the sea once
showed a gently aged jumble of Roman, medieval and
Renaissance buildings, their hard edges softened by centuries
of discreet decay; now the newly jagged skyline is decorated
by truncated spires and gaping holes in the city walls.
   The federal government's forces have also destroyed
several towns on the Serbo-Croatian front in the Yugoslav
interior. Vukovar, an ancient city on the Danube with many
buildings dating from the 16th-century Turkish occupation,
was substantially demolished in shelling during the early
months of the war. All that remains of one old quarter of the
town is half a church belfry and the Renaissance portico of
the narthex that stand precariously amid the
indistinguishable lumps of rubble that once made up the rest
of the church. In neighboring Ilok, a Yugoslavian patrol boat
on the Danube shelled the 15th-century St. John Capistran
Church and monastery; the roof has caved in and the
monastery's rich furnishings and considerable library have
been exposed by gaping holes in the walls.
   Such cities as Dubrovnik and Split are lucky in that they
retain much of their pre-war look and identity despite the
damage. But Karlovac is another matter altogether. The
16th-century Habsburg town built in the shape of a
six-pointed star has been hit by repeated waves of mortar and
shelling from the federal government's assault on this
strategic town. By mid-December, both Karlovac's industrial
sector and the old historical center had been razed by the
fighting, blurring the once-distinctive pattern created by
Hapsburg architects. More recently, however, the bombs came
so thick and fast (more than 500 mortars were fired on one
late December day) that no one knows how much or how little
remains.
   The Croat government in Zagreb takes its cultural heritage
seriously and has moved much of its portable art, including
paintings, icons and sculptures, and its sizable archives to
underground bunkers. But the army mortar often gets there
first, and much of the Renaissance and baroque art that
decorated the churches has been lost; what remains once the
smoke clears is carried off by looters. After Vukovar's old
Eltz castle was blitzed, its archives disappeared along with
its paintings and a valuable prehistoric collection excavated
from the neighboring settlement of Vucedol. A source in
Belgrade claims that the federal government has stockpiled a
huge collection of medieval and Renaissance art stolen from
Croatian churches. "We only hope," says a weary archivist
from the eastern town of Osijek, heavily battered by the Serb
forces that surround it on three sides, "that the Serbs
appreciate the value of all the loot they have carted off."
   It appears, to Croatians at least, as if the rest of the
world has been standing by while Croatia slowly drowns in its
own rubble. As is often the case, it has been left to a small
group of art historians, patrons and restorers under the
aegis of the Croatian Ministry of Culture, the
Kunsthistorisches museum in Vienna and Francesca
Thyssen-Bornemisza's ARCH foundation, an organization set up
to protect the cultural patrimony in Eastern Europe, to do
something. The group has set about compiling an inventory of
destroyed, lost or damaged property and is busy collecting
the material and equipment needed to restore the damaged
monuments and protect those that have been spared by the
federal pyrotechnics. Following a two-day conference held in
Zagreb in December, the group called on Unesco to sponsor a
fact-finding mission to assess the damage and to look into
the many artifacts carted off by looters and thought to be
stashed away in Belgrade. So far, the answer from Unesco has
been a resounding silence.
   A two-week-old ceasefire continued to hold yesterday as
the 12 members of the European Community, as well as a number
of non-EC countries such as Austria and Ukraine, recognized
Croatia and Slovenia. The United Nations sent 50 unarmed
peacekeepers to the area on Tuesday and promised as many as
10,000 if the truce is maintained. But fighting could begin
again any day. And unfortunately, no proposal drawn up by a
group of concerned art historians, however courageous, is
likely to prove equal to the Soviet-style arsenal still
available to the federal side. Until a definitive political
solution is reached, the destruction of both Croatia's and
the world's cultural heritage will continue -- not only in
the shelling of churches and archaeological sites but also in
the destruction of Croatia's vernacular culture, its wooden
farming villages and churches, less likely to be restored
than the grander historical monuments.
   ---
   Ms. Tuttle writes regularly on the arts for The Wall
Street Journal Europe.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
