ID: 136	RANK: 3	SCORE: 21.189545
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910424-0170
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910424-0170.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Art Crime Update:
   The Quedlinburg Quagmire
   ----
   By Constance Lowenthal
</HL>
<DATE>
04/24/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   Forty-six years after an American soldier took medieval
treasures from the cave where they were stored, his heirs --
almost $3 million richer as a result of their brother's
misdeed and a German foundation's willingness to pay -- have
agreed to return the precious objects to Germany. The
settlement did not, however, "settle" all the issues in this
momentous repatriation, and the flap should continue on other
levels and in other jurisdictions.
   The parties to the Dallas lawsuit announced earlier this
year that they were settling out of court. "Final wording has
yet to be worked out," said Thomas R. Kline, who represents
the Quedlinburg church and Germany's Cultural Foundation of
the States. After the settlement, the art is expected to be
exhibited for two months at the Dallas Museum of Art before
it makes the return voyage.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The soldier's heirs want the church and the foundation to
tell U.S. authorities that they are content with the return
of the objects, an implicit request that the government not
pursue the defendants. Transporting the manuscript to
Switzerland for sale may have been a violation of the
National Stolen Property Act, and estate taxes may have been
due on the treasure, but no charges have yet been brought.
Final wording might characterize the exchange of Quedlinburg
treasures for cash as something other than a sale, putting
the money outside the reach of the IRS. A private settlement,
however, would not be binding on U.S. government officials.
   Last spring, the Cultural Foundation of the States agreed
to pay a "finder's fee" of $3 million for Quedlinburg's
Samuhel Gospels, a highly important luxury manuscript of the
Carolingian period. The seller represented Jane Cook Meador
and Jack Meador, the brother and sister of the soldier who
died in 1980. The transaction was widely reported and led to
the discovery of more objects from Quedlinburg in a bank
vault in Whitewright, Texas, the Meadors' hometown. The
priceless works were there as a collateral for a loan. The
Quedlinburg church then sued for their return. The settlement
assures both sides an end to a long legal wrangle of
uncertain outcome. The Germans will get all the Quedlinburg
objects that were in the bank for somewhat less than they had
agreed to pay for the Gospels manuscript alone.
   In agreeing to pay the heirs of a thief, the German
foundation has opened itself to further "offers" from others
who possess Joe T. Meador's war booty. He gave an unknown
number of objects to friends and casual acquaintances in his
social circle in Dallas. If charges are not brought against
the heirs, what will deter the others from trying to arrange
similarly lucrative exchanges?
   It is hoped that the liturgical objects will return to
Quedlinburg, the medieval cloister to which they were given
by the Ottonian dynasty in the 10th and 11th centuries. When
added to the 20 still in Quedlinburg, the 10 objects from
Texas would almost restore the treasury to its original size.
A suitably secure housing to display the newly famous works
is needed, an expensive proposition for a poor East German
town. The treasure would undoubtedly compensate for these
costs by attracting tourists and scholars to Quedlinburg.
   In a parallel turn of events, a March settlement for
"undisclosed consideration" allowed a Hans Baldung Grien
drawing, missing since World War II, to be carried back to
the Netherlands. It was returned by the estate of Ian
Woodner. A year ago, the Netherlands announced that it was
actively seeking the return of works from a collection of old
master drawings formerly belonging to financier Franz
Koenigs, who fell on hard times in the early '30s. The
government published a fully illustrated catalog of the 526
missing works from this superb collection of more than 3,000
drawings, which was purchased for the Museum Boymans in
Rotterdam from Koenigs's bankers as they fled from Hitler's
advance.
   The drawings soon caught the eye of Hitler's grand
acquisitor, Hans Posse, director of the Dresden Picture
Gallery, who was amassing art for the Fuhrer's proposed
museum in Linz. As the military prospects of the Third Reich
dimmed, Hitler shelved his museum plans and stored the art in
a Saxon castle. When the Soviets liberated the area,
thousands of works of art were carried to the U.S.S.R. The
Koenigs drawings are believed to be there too, but some
surfaced in the West in the early 1980s, and the Netherlands
realized that a major effort would be timely, given the new
openness in the Soviet Union.
   The drawing in question, a "Virgin and Child" by the
16th-century German master, turned up in the prominent New
York collection of Ian Woodner. The Netherlands approached
Mr. Woodner to ask for its return; rebuffed, it brought suit.
As is common, the trial was delayed by procedural motions,
and, indeed, a time-consuming translation of voluminous Dutch
documents and legal statutes was under way when Mr. Woodner
died. His heirs decided not to continue the fight.
   One of the fascinating issues that might have been
determined in trial is whether the decrees of the Dutch
government in exile, declaring invalid such sales of national
treasures for worthless Reichmarks, would have been
recognized by a U.S. court.
   ---
   An ancient marble Jupiter Capitolinus, just 10 inches
tall, was stolen from the Daedalus Gallery on Manhattan's
57th Street last fall. It was recovered, only three blocks
away, in March. That morning, Judith Nugee, a Christie's
expert in antiquities, was in New York reviewing possible
consignments. She was leafing through the January issue of
IFAR reports and recognized the Jupiter she had just examined
in storage.
   Christie's counsel, Patricia Hambrecht, called IFAR with
the news, then telephoned Detective Joseph Keenan of the New
York Police Department to come to collect the object. Later
that afternoon, Daedalus's director, Thomas Swope, identified
the sculpture in police offices. Christie's then asked the
would-be consignor to come in to sign a contract, and upon
leaving the auction house, the suspect was met by the police.
After questioning, the police arrested him; the man is said
to be cooperating, and the investigation continues.
   ---
   Ms. Lowenthal is executive director of the International
Foundation for Art Research (IFAR).
</TEXT>
</DOC>
