ID: 136	RANK: 6	SCORE: 13.126184
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920110-0116
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920110-0116.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   IRS Says Stolen Art Treasures Are Subject to Estate Tax
   ----
   By Scott R. Schmedel
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/10/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   TAXES
</CO>
<NS>
TAXES (TAX)
</NS>
<GV>
INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE (IRS)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
TEXAS (TX)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   After Joe Tom Meador of Whitewright, Texas, died in 1980,
his sister, serving as his executor, filed a state
inheritance-tax return showing an estate of about $120,000 in
stock, real estate and life insurance.
   The amount was too small to require a federal estate-tax
return. However, it failed to take account of Mr. Meador's
secret hoard of religious and art treasures that he stole in
Germany and France at the end of World War II while a first
lieutenant in the U.S. Army artillery. At his death, the
stolen art passed to his heirs.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The Meador cache included medieval manuscripts and
reliquaries from the Quedlinburg, Germany, cathedral. It came
to the attention of the public in 1990, when Mr. Meador's
heirs sold a ninth-century illustrated manuscript of the four
Gospels to a foundation representing the Quedlinburg church
for a "finder's fee" that some reports say was as much as $3
million.
   Now the Internal Revenue Service claims that the stolen
works are subject to federal estate tax. In a private ruling
dated last Aug. 30 that has just come to light, the IRS also
declares that:
   -- The value of each item for tax purposes is the price it
would have brought, at the time of Mr. Meador's death, on the
open market -- including the illicit market of international
traffickers in stolen art.
   -- The estate isn't entitled to reduce its taxable value
by deducting recovery claims made by the Quedlinburg church
and other theft victims against Mr. Meador's sister and
executor, Jane Meador Cook, of Mesquite, Texas, and their
brother Jack, of Whitewright. The two siblings inherited the
stolen art. The IRS contends they knew something of its
origins and value.
   Attorneys for the heirs say they would have income-tax
liability for any money received in settling the recovery
claims or disposing of the art objects. But the attorneys
insist that there can be no estate tax on Joe Meador's
estate, because he never had legal title to the treasures.
   The IRS position is that Joe Meador had the economic
equivalent of ownership of the objects for 35 years and at
his death was able to transfer the same benefits to his
heirs. While the IRS found no such precedent in estate-tax
law, it said Joe Meador clearly would be treated as the owner
under income-tax law and, therefore, must be for estate-tax
purposes.
   But, says Randal Mathis, a Dallas lawyer for the heirs,
"We think the ruling is in error, and we're quite confident
that in the long run a court will so determine." Donald Lan
Jr., a partner of Mr. Mathis in the firm Strasburger &amp; Price,
adds: "It's a very big stretch to extend to estate taxes the
principles of income-tax law."
   Lawyers for the Meadors and the church say no overall
valuation has been placed on the collection. The recently
issued public version of the IRS's private ruling doesn't try
to set a value and doesn't name any of the parties to the
matter. But the facts described clearly relate to the
Quedlinburg-treasures affair, which was widely reported
starting in mid-1990.
   The treasures are being stored for safekeeping at the
Dallas Museum of Art, pending the final settlement of a
tentative agreement to restore them to the church. The Meador
heirs agreed a year ago to give up all of the objects in
return for a sum that hasn't been disclosed. Lawyers for the
family and the church won't discuss the dollar figure but say
it is less than the German foundation originally agreed to
pay for the single manuscript.
   Mr. Mathis says the final agreement has been delayed by
the difficulties of communication and of working within
different legal systems. He says the documentation ending the
church's civil suit against the heirs should be completed
amicably within two weeks, after which the financial terms
would be disclosed.
   Mr. Mathis and Mr. Lan say that they haven't discussed a
settlement with the IRS and that they are awaiting a formal
deficiency notice. At that point, the Meadors could appeal to
the U.S. Tax Court.
   The IRS could add claims for interest or for civil
penalties for such things as negligence or failure to file a
return. If it prevails, it could claim the heirs are liable
for the estate tax.
   The IRS won't discuss confidential matters about specific
taxpayers. But a spokesman for Texas state tax authorities
says: "Our file on the Meador case is open. We've been in
contact with federal authorities about it."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
