ID: 136	RANK: 64	SCORE: 6.511791
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910325-0163
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910325-0163.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Art Crime Update:
   Caveat Emptor in New York
   ----
   By Constance Lowenthal
</HL>
<DATE>
03/25/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8
</SO>
<LP>
   A unanimous decision on Feb. 14 by New York's highest
court, the Court of Appeals, has definitively clarified that
state's rule on when an art theft victim may bring suit to
recover property. This will allow the Guggenheim Museum to
pursue its claim to a Chagall gouache in the possession of
Rachel Lubell, who bought it almost 20 years ago. The court
ruled that while there is no specified time period in which
the victim must locate the property, the true owner must
bring suit within three years after he or she discovers the
present possessor and a demand for return is refused.
   Since almost 90% of stolen art has yet to be recovered,
the ruling is favorable for any art theft victim whose
property might turn up in New York. It also puts New York
buyers on notice that they must ask enough questions to
satisfy themselves that their sellers can convey good title.
IFAR submitted an amicus curiae brief to the Court of
Appeals, advancing many of the arguments embodied in the
decision.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The court affirmed the three-year demand and refusal rule
in New York, a rule thrown out by a federal court for the
Second Circuit a few years ago. In that case, Edith
Baldinger, a New York resident and a good-faith purchaser,
was allowed to keep a Monet stolen from Dorothea DeWeerth
during the U.S. occupation of postwar Germany. Rather than
putting the question to a panel of New York judges, the usual
procedure, the Deweerth court independently interpreted New
York law.
   The Guggenheim suit arose soon after the surprising
outcome of DeWeerth and, since it is a dispute between two
New York parties, it went through state courts. Here, the
Court of Appeals corrects the federal court's creative
reading of New York law.
   ---
   To understand an art thief's mind most people draw on
fictional accounts of capers and heists. Firsthand accounts
are scarce, since apprehended art thieves are rare -- like
paintings by Vermeer. But two who were caught, George
Athanasatos and Ronald Cortiselli, told their story to the
prosecutors. The pair were responsible for a series of thefts
from American museums in the winter of 1989. Since they
pleaded guilty and did not stand trial, the world had to wait
almost two years to learn about their methods in a juicy
sentencing memorandum submitted by the prosecutor in a
related case.
   In early January of this year, Michael Weisbrod, a Madison
Avenue dealer in Asian art, was sentenced to six months in
prison and six months' home confinement after pleading guilty
to having conspired to possess three works of art that he
knew to be stolen. Confessional information from the two
thieves provided lively background for the judge sentencing
Weisbrod.
   By their account, the two thieves were "inspired" to
switch to art from audio; they had been routinely stealing
records and tapes from retail stores when they learned of the
theft of a Manet from a small Long Island museum. On a Sunday
afternoon, a man lifted the picture from its hook and walked
out the nearby exit. (The Manet was recovered within days,
but no thief was caught.) It struck them as an easy and
lucrative thing to do.
   Athanasatos and Cortiselli traveled from city to city, as
they had when they hit the audio stores. In the winter of
1989, they made off with a silver Tiffany pitcher in Detroit,
a Ming dynasty bowl in Columbus, Ohio, three objects from
Albany, N.Y., and Adelaide Alsop Robineau's "Scarab Vase," an
important turn-of-the-century work, in Syracuse, N.Y. Then
they went on to Boston and took an exceptional blue-and-white
Yuan dynasty vase and finally to Baltimore, where they stole
a fine collection of antique English pocket watches. They did
these jobs in workmen's clothing during museum hours. Then
they shipped the priceless objects home to Brooklyn by
Federal Express.
   The thieves did not have a fence. To sell the works,
Athanasatos and Cortiselli walked around town looking for
similar goods in shop windows. Weisbrod's window had Chinese
porcelains, and Athanasatos just went in and asked the owner
if "he had anything in a Ming?" They made a deal for the
Columbus bowl and the Boston vase (together worth well over
$1 million) for just $53,000, and then Athanasatos threw in a
17th-century coral carving from Albany. The memorandum said
Weisbrod went to his office library and exclaimed over one
illustration of the Boston vase that it was "identical." He
never asked for identification, and Athanasatos wore a
disguise (wig and glasses) during his first visit to
Weisbrod's place. According to the memorandum, Weisbrod asked
about the Ming bowl, "How warm is it?" Athanasatos coolly
replied, "Don't sell it in California."
   After buying the stolen goods, Weisbrod learned that the
bowl had been on the cover of IFAR Reports, but he made no
effort to contact law enforcement or the museum in Columbus.
The bowl and each of the other works of art stolen were
reported to IFAR within two days of each theft, and had
Weisbrod asked IFAR for a search, he could have avoided
buying the goods. Athanasatos was caught when he tried to
sell the watches from Baltimore at Fanelli Antique
Timepieces, another Madison Avenue establishment, one Friday
afternoon.
   The next morning, however, the Fanellis received a museum
circular about the theft, and when Athanasatos returned
Monday, expecting to make a cash sale to someone the Fanellis
thought would be interested, it was the FBI. His partner was
arrested a few days later.
   ---
   Ms. Lowenthal is executive director of the International
Foundation for Art Research (IFAR).
</TEXT>
</DOC>
