ID: 136	RANK: 68	SCORE: 6.442818
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920212-0115
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920212-0115.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- The Gallery:
   Jewish History Reconsidered in Berlin
   ----
   By John Marks
</HL>
<DATE>
02/12/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A18
</SO>
<LP>
   Berlin -- A hundred yards from the Martin-Gropius Museum
entrance, a provisional building of concrete and glass
encloses a Gestapo barrack complete with kitchen. It was
found in the rubble of World War II and preserved. Now it is
the prelude to an enormous historical exhibition of Jewish
social and intellectual history.
   "Judische Lebenswelten," or "Patterns of Jewish Life," up
through April 26, inevitably is connected with Germany's Nazi
past. Looking out the museum windows, visitors can discern a
mountain of rubble and an empty field, the former site of
S.S. and Gestapo headquarters. Not far away, at Potsdamer
Platz, a nondescript mound marks Hitler's bunker, and around
the corner what was once Hermann Goering's Air Transport
Ministry is now a bazaar where East German industry is sold
off.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Given the current overall atmosphere of healing and
reunion, the reconsideration of Jewish history by Germans is
well timed. Last month, German politicians, Jewish leaders
and survivors of the Holocaust gathered in Berlin for the
50th anniversary of the Wannsee Conference in the villa in
which the plan to annihilate all of Europe's Jews was
announced.
   If this seems to symbolize reconciliation, a recent poll,
jointly taken by a German and an Israeli firm, also indicates
that one in every eight Germans professes some degree of
hatred toward Jews and that a majority of Israelis are not
ecstatic about German unification.
   "Patterns of Jewish Life" will strike a blow against these
trends, its organizers contend, by dispersing ignorance about
Jewish culture and stressing its continuity from biblical
times through the present.
   "My deepest concern is for the people of the five new
German states," writes Heinz Galinski, the head of Berlin's
Jewish community, in the introduction to the show's catalog.
"In East Germany, the subject of Jewish life was largely
taboo, and this project will have reached its goal in a
certain sense if as many visitors as possible from these
states come to see it."
   The objects on view, lent by some 300 donors in 19
countries, include: a menorah (ritual candelabrum) made of
small souvenir Statues of Liberty, an ornate Torah ark that
protected a scroll of the first five books of the Old
Testament in an Indian synagogue, an illuminated Haggada
(Passover prayer book) from 14th-century Spain, Torahs from
China, an Afghan sacramental cup, and a scorched set of the
Talmud, the central work of scriptural commentary in Jewish
tradition, from pre-World War II Berlin. These objects are
meant to convey the vitality and diversity of Jewish culture
through the ages, and to draw attention away from Holocaust
images of packed trains, concentration camps and gas
chambers.
   Showing such images "has become almost a ritual with which
we begin and end every exhibition," says the show's director,
Andreas Nachama. "As a result, the image persists of the Jew
as victim, as a dead body. This exhibit should counter that
image."
   In trying to display the length and breadth of Jewish
culture, the curators have taken on an enormous and at times
futile task. The show begins with artifacts preceding the
destruction of the Temple of Jerusalem in A.D. 72 and moves
through the Diaspora and the Middle Ages to present-day
Israel. But this history is only one facet of the
presentation. The show covers rituals, sacred objects,
customs, architecture, institutions such as community and
synagogue, holy days and the different permutations of Jewish
culture as it developed in North Africa, India, China, Spain,
Northern Europe, the U.S. and the Soviet Union.
   At the center of "Patterns of Jewish Life," metaphorically
and physically, are texts, an astounding collection of rare
Hebrew religious, legal and scientific works dating as far
back as the 10th century. These are collected under a
tabernacle-like tent and surrounded by a history of secular
Jewish culture from Moses Mendelssohn in 18th-century Berlin
through Heinrich Heine, Karl Marx, Sigmund Freud and Franz
Kafka to Woody Allen in contemporary New York. This is the
imaginative high point of the show, a demonstration of the
centrality of the book, and hence the life of the mind, in
every manifestation of Judaism, no matter how far-flung.
   Despite many wonders, the show is too much. It succumbs to
the German propensity for exhibitions of Wagnerian excess,
and one senses beneath the plenitude a thread of despair, as
if the curators were launching one last mad attack on
forgetfulness.
   The sections on Asia seem underdone when compared with
those on Eastern Europe, a fact partly due to the rarity of
artifacts from that region. The early history of Judaism, a
room filled with fragments of ancient temples and synagogues,
seems unnecessary, a nod for the sake of comprehensiveness to
a period in Jewish history that would fill several museums on
its own. Most disappointing are the rooms dedicated to
Israel, which contain displays of photography, Israeli art
and video footage of Jews talking about the country. Not only
is the visitor exhausted by this time, but the imagination of
the curators seems to have flagged -- a crucial failure given
the importance of Israel to contemporary Judaism.
   The fact that the show falls flat in some areas does not
reduce its power, and to quibble over aesthetics is to miss
the point. Relations between Germans and Jews are at a
turning point. The generation that lived through World War II
-- victims and culprits for whom the experience is most
painful and most real -- are passing away. The vast majority
of German citizens were born after the war or during its
final stages, and many of them reject the burden of inherited
guilt. Over the years, the number of Jews living in Germany
has remained small, from a prewar total of 500,000 to a tenth
of that today. Jews elsewhere, Israelis in particular, have
derided German Jews for staying in the country of the
Holocaust. They have pleaded with Jews from the former Soviet
Union arriving in Germany to come to Israel and not repeat
the mistake of living among the sons and daughters of
National Socialists.
   In the end, no one can say for sure what will happen
between Germans and Jews, but one German sees the end of the
Cold War as a great opportunity to grapple with the past as
never before.
   "The Cold War was not the time for dealing seriously with
the past and for finding out what went wrong in this
country," says Georg Schoenberner, who has spent his life
documenting the Holocaust and most recently organized a small
museum in the Wannsee villa. "Now, so many decades later, we
have a chance. The majority of people haven't the slightest
reason for feeling personally guilty. For them, the war is
history. They have the inner freedom to find a new approach."
   ---
   Mr. Marks is a free-lance writer based in Berlin.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
