ID: 136	RANK: 92	SCORE: 6.051033
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920113-0061
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920113-0061.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Art Crime Update:
   The Amber Room Mystery
   ----
   By Constance Lowenthal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/13/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   The wonder of St. Petersburg, the fabled Amber Room from
the palace of Tsarskoe-Selo, a gift from Frederick William I
of Prussia to Peter the Great in 1716, may soon resurface.
The treasure, which was last seen in April 1945, was feared
lost forever.
   The room panels, carved from six tons of amber collected
over a period of 10 years, are a treasure both in material
and workmanship. Peter the Great's taste leaned toward
austerity, but his daughter, Empress Elisabeth, found the
Amber Room to her much more extravagant taste and hired
architects and designers to enlarge and embellish it with
mirrors and carved, gilded wood paneling for installation in
Tsarskoe-Selo, later known as Catherine's palace. There the
Amber Room remained, surviving the Bolshevik revolution,
until September 1941, when German troops took it back to
Konigsberg, where it once graced a Prussian royal residence.
This northern Prussian city was renamed Kaliningrad after
Soviet annexation. Some believed the treasure perished there,
either during firebombings or the leveling of the city by
Soviet bulldozers after the war. The last people believed to
know its whereabouts died under mysterious circumstances.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Only four Florentine "pietre dure" mosaic panels of
semiprecious stones, made for the empress's expanded Amber
Room, and one amber panel of the original 22 were found.
Soviet workers were attempting to re-create the room on the
basis of the surviving panel and one color photograph when
the big news broke.
   During his November visit to Germany, Russian President
Boris Yeltsin told members of Bonn's parliament that he knows
where in eastern Germany the treasure is buried. He asked
permission to dig it up and bring it back to St. Petersburg.
The favorite guess for a hiding spot is mine shafts in
Ohrdruf, a small town in the southwestern corner of what used
to be East Germany. Even if Mr. Yeltsin really knows the
location of the most famous work of art missing from the
U.S.S.R. during the war, numerous mysteries abound. If the
panels are hidden in eastern Germany, why didn't the Soviets
arrange to reclaim the Amber Room during their 45 years of
domination?
   ---
   Stephen Shih, the 27-year-old unemployed truck driver who
was arrested last year for the 1988 theft of Rodin's "Mask of
the Man with the Broken Nose" from the Rodin Museum in
Philadelphia, pleaded guilty in May to the charge of armed
robbery. In stealing the bronze at gunpoint, Shih may well
have committed the first armed robbery of a museum in the
U.S. (The 1985 theft of impressionist paintings at the Musee
Marmottan in Paris was also at gunpoint.) Rodin's
12-inch-high bronze of 1864 has been returned to the museum
and is again on display.
   Shih also pleaded guilty to the robbery of a supermarket,
during which he fired two to three shots at an employee who
pursued him. The plea agreement, which included both
robberies, calls for a sentence of 7 1/2 to 15 years in
prison. Special Agent Robert Bazin of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation in Philadelphia, who was closely involved in
both Shih's arrest and the subsequent recovery of the bronze,
said he was pleased by the outcome.
   ---
   Henri Kuntz of Toronto, who went to jail in 1986 for art
theft and forgery, was arrested again in May on similar
charges. First time around, Kuntz's game was to order thefts
and have forgers make copies of the stolen works. Kuntz then
sold them all, either directly or through consignment at
auction. At that time, Kuntz was known to use several
aliases, some of which he used again: Henri Beaulieu,
Beauchamp, Henry Hoffman and Henry Louis.
   Last spring and summer, investigations by Detective Neil
Stokes of Toronto Metro Police led twice to Kuntz's home on
Spadina Road. The scope of Kuntz's suspected activities is
not yet clear. Detective Stokes described the house as
decorated with about $1 million of art and antiques. Works
stolen from galleries in the Toronto area were found in the
basement and in envelopes under carpets. Among them were
lithographs stolen in 1990 from the warehouse of the Albert
White Gallery, a theft that netted more than $650,000 of
modern prints and drawings.
   ---
   A prison term of 18 months was handed down to John Quentin
Feller, a scholar of Chinese export porcelain whose many
thefts came to light earlier this year. Feller pleaded guilty
to two counts of transporting stolen property across state
lines and also admitted stealing eight objects valued at
$133,000. He received the minimum term required under federal
sentencing guidelines. The court also ordered him to pay a
fine of $30,000.
   Feller, a professor of history at the University of
Scranton in Pennsylvania, had published five books and some
34 articles about his specialty, Chinese export ware. He had
access to storerooms in many museums and was a trusted
visitor to private collections. After being caught a year ago
taking a platter that had once belonged to George Washington
and to Robert E. Lee, Feller fessed up to a Delaware state
police officer. He admitted that over a period of 18 years he
committed a long string of thefts, mostly from U.S. museums.
FBI agents found nearly 100 stolen porcelains in his
apartment. Many of the thefts took place so long ago that
Feller could not be prosecuted for them.
   Feller saw his activity as a way to redistribute the
hidden wealth of Chinese export porcelain buried away in
major collections. He stole from museums that had more than
they could display, such as the Wadsworth Atheneum in
Hartford, Conn. There, he saw 30,000 items in storage. He
presented his trophies as loans or gifts to institutions that
he felt would appreciate them. As a result of his generosity,
he was made a trustee of the Peabody Museum in Salem, Mass.,
an institution with a strong interest in China trade. After
entering his guilty plea, Feller resigned from the museum's
board.
   ---
   Ms. Lowenthal is executive director of the International
Foundation for Art Research (IFAR).
</TEXT>
</DOC>
