ID: 261	RANK: 11	SCORE: 10.709219
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920211-0092
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920211-0092.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
   Selling Pessimism
   ----
   By Joe Cobb
</HL>
<DATE>
02/11/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14
</SO>
<LP>
   Since the mid-1980s, books have regularly appeared
proclaiming the Great Depression of the 1990s. A book with a
similar title made the best-seller list. There is a deep
belief somewhere in the human psyche that good times have to
come to an end but that bad times can go on forever. Maybe
it's in our genes. It could be argued that from the days of
cavemen until the 19th century, the norm for humankind was
starvation, disease and oppression by warlords.
   Stephen Delos Wilson, a go-go treasurer of Citicorp's
mortgage banking subsidiary in the 1980s and now a professor
at Christian Brothers University in Memphis, Tenn., has
produced "The Bankruptcy of America" (Ridge Mills Press,
through Publishers Distribution Service, 1-800-345-0096, 206
pages, $19.95), an interesting, short history with a general
theme that "excesses of the 1980s" produced today's problems.
Far from predicting the permanent decline of America,
however, the author carefully hedges his bets, just in case
the recession already really is over. But you could read the
book either way.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Mr. Wilson has a smooth, journalistic style and cites a
lot of facts and statistics that appeared in news magazines
and newspapers throughout the decade. Ten years from now,
when we've all forgotten the details of the Carter and Reagan
administrations, this book will be a good refresher course in
the history of a decade of prosperity. But was it a decade of
"excess"?
   "The Bankruptcy of America" opens with three chapters that
suggest Mr. Wilson wants to advance a theory of the business
cycle. Chapter 1 proclaims that voodoo economics launched
America on a boom that had to lead to crisis. He spends
chapter 2 reviewing business cycles in the 19th century, and
chapter 3 on the Great Depression. But he drops a clue at the
end of chapter 2 that this book is much more shallow than
that: "Marx was perhaps better as an economist than as a
social theorist . . . there is much to be admired in his
understanding of the capitalist business cycle and how it
occurs. . . . However, one thing is clear: to rise above the
economic cycle would be to rise above history."
   So Mr. Wilson tells us right up front not to expect any
real analysis of today's economic downturn. We're just caught
in a cycle of history. His last chapter, "Whither America?"
closes with the doomsayer's characteristic reference to
Kondratieff's theory of historical cycles. But Mr. Wilson
doesn't dump the reader into a fatalistic swamp. His
question, "whither America?" is answered much in the way Bill
Bennett or even George Bush might answer it -- improve our
schools, rely less on debt and more on equity financing, and
above all improve our morality.
   The reader might wonder at this point if the author simply
didn't know how to write a final chapter, so he decided to
punt. Aside from his book's subtitle, "How the Boom of the
80's Became the Bust of the 90's," which seems to promise the
reader some answer, Mr. Wilson doesn't even try to suggest a
theory of business booms and busts. Of course, the economics
profession doesn't have a generally accepted theory of the
business cycle, and Mr. Wilson's failure to suggest one is
fairly normal.
   Basically there are three kinds of theories of business
cycles: some natural disaster or political crisis upsets the
economy; deliberate government policy has perverse results;
or, as Mr. Wilson seems to argue, good times eventually run
out and we have to sober up. It is a disappointment, however,
when the author doesn't even try to find some
cause-and-effect connection. It's not that hard.
   In the summer of 1990, when the current slump started,
many commentators blamed Saddam Hussein and the oil-price
spike, but the "natural-disaster" people are at a loss for
words today. In "The Way the World Works," Jude Wanniski
demonstrated a close connection between the Smoot-Hawley
tariff and the crash of 1929 (followed by the Great
Depression), but today imports from Japan are supposed to be
part of the problem. In "A Monetary History of the United
States," Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz showed that the
business cycle is related to changes in money-supply growth,
so should we blame the Fed? Keynesian theory might argue that
the 1986 Tax Reform Act killed real estate, the crash in
consumer confidence increased our private savings rate, and
brain-dead fiscal policy under the 1990 budget agreement
caused the current slump.
   If it is correct to say Ronald Reagan's economic program
caused the boom of the 1980s, perhaps we should allow that
George Bush's economic program has caused the slump of the
1990s. Some economists have pointed to the great leap forward
in regulation under the Bush administration, and the prospect
of even more government micromanagement under the Clean Air
Act. Congress has enacted a number of boons to litigation in
the past two years, in the Americans with Disabilities Act
and the Civil Rights Act. Businessmen are an endangered
species.
   Yet, one thing can be said in favor of Mr. Wilson's
"moral-exhaustion" explanation of the economic downturn --
nothing President Bush, or Congress, or any Democrat
currently running for president can do will make it go away.
It is either going away by itself or it isn't. So save your
money and pay off debts. Teach your children morality. And
join the local PTA.
   ---
   Mr. Cobb was Republican staff director of the
congressional Joint Economic Committee in 1990-91.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
