ID: 261	RANK: 41	SCORE: 8.333746
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911213-0188
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911213-0188.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Letters to the Editor:
   Stop Seeking Answers
   In the 1930s and '40s
</HL>
<DATE>
12/13/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A15
</SO>
<IN>
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
</IN>
<NS>
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
</NS>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Robert Kuttner's policy recommendations in "The Real
Keynes Could Fix the Economy" (Counterpoint, op-ed, Nov. 7)
are a perfect example of a warning I give my students in
basic macroeconomics: Beware of any policy prescription
supported by events in the 1930s and 1940s. Both decades were
unique periods in our economic history, and consequently have
little relevance for current economic problems.
   In respect to the Great Depression of the 1930s, it is
absurd to compare the 25% unemployment at the cyclical trough
in 1932 with today's 6.8% rate, which is not so far above the
lowest rate of the 1980s (5.3% in 1989), and is lower than
all the annual rates from 1980 through 1986.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   It is equally absurd to dismiss current monetary policy as
equal to the 1930s "pushing on a string." There is no current
buildup of excess reserves in the banking system as in the
'30s. The system is using the reserves provided by a rather
cautious Federal Reserve. More rapid monetary growth, a lot
more patience and fewer "Chicken Littles" are all the economy
needs to continue the recovery.
   It is true that the huge deficits of World War II rushed a
depressed economy back to full employment by 1943. However,
Mr. Kuttner overlooks the fact that the tremendous burdens of
this debt were bearable only because:
   -- The Federal Reserve fixed interest rates at
artificially low levels (3/8 of 1% for three-month bills) and
greatly inflated the money supply.
   -- A comprehensive system of wage-and-price controls,
widely supported out of patriotism, was able to suppress
explosive inflationary forces.
   -- Extensive rationing of basic consumer goods accompanied
the price controls, and the combined effects resulted in
massive "forced savings" that helped finance the war effort.
   Today, the interest cost of the national debt is a little
more than 3% of gross national product, compared with 1.9% in
1945 (when the national debt was 130% of GNP). To argue that
Congress needs to increase this burden, in what promises to
be a contentious election year, is to invite a frenzy of
pork-barrel spending, higher long-term interest rates, and
crowding out of investment by the corporate and municipal
sectors.
   We certainly do have infrastructure problems, but the
necessary tax revenues can be generated by growth incentives
for the private sector. We need productivity increases, not
policy prescriptions from out of the past.
   Robert F. Stauffer
   Associate Professor of Economics
   Roanoke College
   Salem, Va.
   ---
   Mr. Kuttner refers to economist Irving Fisher's
debt-deflation analysis of depression and concludes that
"cheaper money doesn't help much. . . . This is the famous
case of `pushing on a string.'" Unfortunately, Mr. Kuttner
has confused cheaper prices with cheaper money. When prices
fall, money acquires more purchasing power, hence money
becomes dearer, not cheaper. The problem would then become,
how to flood the economy with enough additional nominal money
to really cheapen money. This could require depressing
interest rates to unprecedented levels, to zero or to
negative rates. Fortunately, we do not have to pursue these
policies, by circumstance and choice, so it is unlikely that
we shall see lenders pay borrowers to take out loans.
   For all this, the Fisher analysis is chilling and
interesting, but unfamiliar now. Today, the recession
suggests an easier monetary policy (which we are getting) and
a differentially neutral fiscal policy, where personal and
corporate income-tax rates are cut in line with cuts in
government expenditures, so the net deficit is unchanged but
the after-tax rate of return on private goods is enhanced.
With lower interest rates and higher disposable incomes and
net profits, more borrowers may qualify for new loans and the
credit impasse will be passe.
   Ogden O. Allsbrook
   Economist
   College of Business Administration
   University of Georgia
   Athens, Ga.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
