ID: 261	RANK: 45	SCORE: 8.215177
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911107-0091
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911107-0091.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Counterpoint:
   The Real Keynes Could Fix the Economy
   ----
   By Robert Kuttner
</HL>
<DATE>
11/07/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A15
</SO>
<CO>
   LABOR
</CO>
<IN>
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
</IN>
<NS>
LABOR, UNIONS, STRIKES, WAGES, RECRUITMENT (LAB)
</NS>
<GV>
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   This week's election reversals are only the beginning of
the price George Bush will pay for the sins of Ronald Reagan.
   Any thinking person should now appreciate the following
about the 1980s. First, Mr. Reagan's "record peacetime
recovery" was really a Keynesian boom of an irresponsible
kind. The economy was stimulated by immense deficits; these
deficits mainly financed consumption. The savings rate did
not increase; it fell. Investment barely kept pace, thanks
mainly to foreign replenishment.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Second, financial deregulation turned out to be far worse
than regulation. The commercial real estate mania and the S&amp;L
blowout left hundreds of billions of dollars worth of vacant
buildings, now mothballed or sold cheap at taxpayer expense,
dragging down their sound neighbors. Third, tilting the tax
system to serve the rich squeezed the middle class. Citizens
for Tax Justice, citing government data, calculates that
between 1977 and 1992, the top 1% of the population will
increase its after-tax income by an astounding 136%. The
bottom 60% has lost income. Even the second-highest quintile
barely held their own in the past 15 years.
   The result is a structural impasse. After a decade of
borrowing, consumers are tapped out. The implosion of asset
values and weakness of the financial sector preclude an easy
recovery.
   The only remedy is a true Keynesianism, based not on
deficit-financed consumption, but on massive investment. In
1933, the economist Irving Fisher wrote a classic article
titled "The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions." His
point was that when a period of debt-driven speculation
collapses into an unwinding of asset values and a contraction
of credit, a general deflation is triggered. In such
circumstances, cheaper money doesn't help much, for there are
too few borrowers and too little likelihood of new
investments paying off. This is the famous case of "pushing
on a string."
   Our situation today is not as bad as in the 1930s, for
despite the best efforts of ultra-conservatives to dismantle
it, much of the mixed economy remains. Social Security still
sustains purchasing power. Banks may fail, but the FDIC and
the Fed make sure that even hundreds of failures do not
cascade into general financial collapse. Still, Fisher's
description is chillingly familiar, and it suggests why
neither fiscal policy nor monetary policy -- nor selective
tax incentives to capital -- are likely to do the job.
   The only real alternative is the World War II cure -- a
public investment -- led recovery. In standard economics,
savings equals investment. That's why most economists want to
reduce the public deficit -- to increase savings, which would
presumably translate into investment and renewed growth. But
savings do not necessarily drive investment. In a Fisher
depression, increased savings do not increase investment,
since private entrepreneurs are rationally hesitant to
invest. The economy is stuck, performing below its potential,
because of effects of past traumas.
   To date, President Bush has presided over the weakest
economic performance of any postwar president. In his 1988
acceptance speech, he pledged that in eight years as
president, he would create 34 million jobs. Net job growth
since he took office has been just 210,000, the weakest
figure of any president in half a century. As for growth, the
average annual rate in the Bush era has been 0.6%, compared
with 2.9% for Jimmy Carter and 1.6% for Gerald Ford, both of
whom were denied reelection.
   The recent economic debate has been remarkably sterile.
The supply-side right claimed low taxes and dismantled
government would make the economy soar. The respectable
center, appalled at the fiscal legacy of the supply-side
experiment, spent a decade crusading for austerity.
"NeoKeynesians" became improbable champions of
belt-tightening. Democratic candidates failed to grasp why
austerity as a rallying cry did not attract voters already
reeling from diminished living standards. As the Pennsylvania
election of Harris Wofford to the Senate shows, Democrats are
awakening from their slumber and are likely to offer a true
alternative.
   In the recent past, economists have uselessly debated
whether America's economic problems are macroeconomic or
structural -- when they are clearly both. The structural
problems include a short-term focus for financial markets; an
equally short-term culture of labor-management relations; an
education system that fails to produce a high-skill,
high-productivity, high-wage work force; a national
technology policy that is the ward of the Pentagon. Over the
next decade, public policy needs to address these problems.
There is a shelf-full of sensible reports, reflecting
surprising ideological consensus on how to proceed -- from
the MIT Commission on Productivity, the Cuomo Commission, the
Skills Commission, to mention just three. However, none of
this is of much use to stimulate a recovery here and now.
   In World War II, the economy blasted out of the depression
on a massive explosion of public investment, financed by both
taxes and borrowing. In a Fisher depression, direct public
outlay is the most efficient way of restoring investment --
not "aggregate demand," but investment. In present
circumstances, a program of public investment could include
conventional public works, such as roads, bridges, water and
sewer systems; it also could invest in advanced technologies
such as high-speed rail, municipal photovoltaic power
systems, and optical fibre cable. Though nominally "public,"
most of the money would flow through private firms, and would
jump-start a depressed economy much more efficiently than
capital-gains tax cuts or investment tax credits, or even a
deficit-neutral "tax break for the middle class."
   This approach would have three other virtues. It would
begin to remedy the neglect and deterioration of public
infrastructure. At a time of diminishing military spending, a
civilian public investment strategy could replace the
unacknowledged role of Pentagon spending as a stimulus to
commercial technology. And nearly all of the increase in
demand would go to create investment and jobs in the United
States.
   As in World War II, new public investment could be
financed partly by selective taxes, partly by borrowing. Too
much deficit-financed consumption is bad, especially when
investment lags behind. But debt incurred to finance
investment can be sensible. The premise that government
spending necessarily equals consumption is mistaken. An
investment is an investment, whether it occurs in the public
sector or the private. At the end of the war, the national
debt equaled 119% of GNP, more than double its current ratio
-- yet the massive investment in plant, equipment,
technology, human capital and purchasing power stimulated
three decades of prosperity, during which GNP growth quickly
outstripped accumulated debt.
   This strategy, of course, is available in peacetime, too.
Historically, Americans have embraced a public investment
strategy only in national emergencies. This economy could
soon meet that condition.
   ---
   Mr. Kuttner writes for The New Republic and Business Week,
and co-edits The American Prospect.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
