ID: 261	RANK: 47	SCORE: 8.056271
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911206-0022
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911206-0022.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   REVIEW &amp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):
   Remember Pearl Harbor
</HL>
<DATE>
12/06/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14
</SO>
<IN>
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)
INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)
</IN>
<NS>
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
FOREIGN EXCHANGE (FRX)
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)
TRADE ISSUES (TRD)
</NS>
<RE>
EUROPE (EU)
FAR EAST (FE)
JAPAN (JA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   By all means we should remember Pearl Harbor. Above all,
given the current fashion of Japan-bashing and economic
nationalism, we should remember that it came in an era of
isolationism, protectionism and American flight from the
responsibility of world leadership.
   The intention of this remark is anything but to denigrate
the heroic period of American leadership that started on that
Sunday morning 50 years ago tomorrow. The American nation
bled and died to crush the Japanese militarists, and to save
the world from Nazi insanity. Even more impressively, the
America of that era had the wisdom and foresight to lead in
constructing a peace. On its conquered enemies it bestowed
the gift of democracy. It led the free nations in creating
the institutions of an open and liberal world economy -- the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the Bretton Woods
International Monetary System. When a totalitarian Soviet
Union blocked the high-minded attempt to forge a world legal
order with the United Nations, the North Americans and
Europeans combined to erect the bulwark of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization and practice a policy of patient
containment.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   In historic terms this was a period of stunning leadership
-- an American half-century. Japan and Germany became
peaceful nations. The ancient quarrels of Europe were
stilled. While war was of course not abolished, there was no
World War III, let alone a general nuclear exchange. And if
Korea and Vietnam were in their ways mistakes, in the end
containment prevailed. A week ago, the Soviet Union simply
vanished.
   Yet on this anniversary, what do we hear in America but
new talk of a yellow peril? In many corners of America,
foreigners have become the enemy -- the Japanese in
particular. Their sin is selling us too many goods with
irresistible combinations of price and quality. Also of
sending us too much of their savings to invest in American
securities and companies. The corrective for this horrible
state of affairs is seldom explicitly proffered, but between
the lines you can always read it: isolationism, protectionism
and American flight from world leadership.
   ---
   So the most constructive way to honor the anniversary is
to contemplate the lessons of Pearl Harbor as they so clearly
appeared to the statesmen who built a peace in 1945. These
statesmen well understood that while the Japanese air raid
was a naked, unconscionable aggression, it is also true that
it arose out of the general disintegration of world order
between 1929 and 1941. War was already under way, after all,
with the German invasion of Poland in 1939 and the Japanese
occupation of Mukden as early as 1931. And the statesmen
understood that such military aggression was inseparable from
the era's huge economic events -- the Great Depression, trade
wars, the collapse of the international gold standard, the
postwar debt and reparations issues, the great inflations of
Germany and China.
   So when the aggression had been defeated, the statesmen
set out to cure the ills that gave it birth, designing
institutions to protect international economic relationships.
It is not necessary to condone aggression, let alone the
Holocaust or the Bataan death march, to understand as they
did that the German Nazis and Japanese militarists were
thrust into power by the economic confusions of the 1930s.
   In the case of Germany, this is by now fairly well agreed.
As early as 1928 John Maynard Keynes had polemicized against
the Versailles Treaty and its reparations in his famous
tract, "The Economic Consequences of the Peace." Even today,
received wisdom somehow connects Hitler with ruinous
inflation. While it was less dramatic and far less
understood, much the same thing happened in Japan.
   ---
   Take the analysis of Goronwy Rees, British historian and
novelist. In his "The Great Slump: Capitalism in Crisis"
(Harper and Row, 1970), he writes of the Japanese occupation
of Mukden in Manchuria, on the pretext of the murder of a
Captain Nakamura. This took place on Sept. 18, 1931, the same
weekend that the Bank of England went off gold. The widely
separate events were part of the same spreading crisis. Mr.
Rees writes:
   The effects of the financial crisis of 1931 were all the
more overwhelming because they were superimposed on a system
which was already gravely weakened by the economic
depression. In some countries the strain proved too much to
bear, and from the end of 1931 onwards the economic crisis
became transformed into a political crisis and perhaps also
into something which went even deeper; a profound
psychological crisis which drove some nations into paths of
violence and aggression which marked yet another stage in the
collapse of the existing world order.
   In no country was this process more clearly revealed than
in Japan, the most advanced industrial country of Asia. Since
the end of the war, and particularly the Washington
Conference of 1921-22, Japan had for ten years turned away
from the aggressive expansionist policy she had hitherto
followed; in 1922, she withdrew her troops both from Russia's
Maritime Province in China and from the Chinese province of
Shantung. She had tried to find in industrial expansion, in
the growth of her foreign trade, and in political
cooperation, the answer to her population problem, which had
grown more pressing every year; in the five years up to 1930
the average annual increase in her population had amounted to
nearly a million.
   The coming of the depression appeared to demonstrate the
hopelessness of such an attempt; and in particular the
passing of the American Hawley-Smoot Tariff in 1929 convinced
Japanese public opinion that American policy would not
tolerate the legitimate expansion of Japanese trade. In the
three years from 1929 to 1931 Japanese foreign trade fell by
nearly a half, imports falling from 2,169 million yen to
1,206 million and exports from 2,100 million yen to 1,116
million. The murder of Captain Nakamura (if Captain Nakamura
ever existed) was a warning that Japan had passed from trade
to conquest.
   ---
   Again, none of this excuses Pearl Harbor or the cruelty of
Japanese imperialism in Asia. Nor is a threat that if we
exclude Toyotas, the Japanese will again bomb Pearl Harbor.
But it is a lesson about the kind of world order our nations
should be trying to build today. On our own part, we're
particularly struck by the invocation of a profound
psychological crisis; we are quite persuaded that the growing
American suspicion of Japan, and for that matter the growing
Japanese suspicion of America, arises mostly from talking
ourselves into a funk.
   Lacking a real war, we somehow insist on making a war out
of trade, which after all takes place between consenting
adults. We are fixated on economic competition among nations,
blindly defining globe-spanning transnational corporations as
"American" or "Japanese" or "European" by the historical
accident of where they built a headquarters facility. We are
further fixated by the trade balance, an essentially
meaningless statistic; it is neither normal nor healthy that
exports and imports should "balance."
   For in principle a trade deficit is the flip side of an
investment inflow. This is admittedly somewhat complicated by
central bank operations; we think that it is a grave error to
depreciate the dollar in a futile attempt to "cure" the trade
"balance." This folly also arises from failing to understand
the reality of trade across economically arbitrary borders.
   In the simplest terms, for every buyer there has to be a
seller. If the Japanese want to sell us their autos, they
have to buy something from us -- if not goods then assets
that invest their money in the American economy. Recently our
negotiators have trumpeted the "success" of getting the
Japanese to reduce the trade deficit. This has meant keeping
their funds at home to invest in the Japanese economy, but
somehow this is thought to relieve the American funk.
   ---
   This is not to suggest that the Japanese are easy to
negotiate with or play strictly fair with their own trade.
Their policies have had a mercantilist bent, meaning that
their policy makers too have been keeping score with illusory
trade statistics. They have been piling up bigger and bigger
trade "surpluses" while their people live in rabbit warrens.
In today's world mercantilism cannot go on forever, precisely
because its exploited victims are not foreigners but a
nation's own population. Under the pressure of world
competition, Japan too is already changing, as Melanie
Kirkpatrick describes nearby (see editorial story: "The
Japanese -- More and More Like Us" -- WSJ Dec. 6. 1991).
   The truth is that economically America, Japan and Europe
are not merely "interdependent"; they are an organic whole.
This was already true in the 1920s, as we learned to our
sorrow. It is even more true today, with instant
communication, globe-spanning corporations and 24-hour
financial trading. The danger lies in denying reality, in
trying to erect walls against history, in believing that the
world's largest nation can stop the globe and get off.
   If after 50 years of leadership America talks itself into
repeating its mistake, only bad things can happen. It was
tragic that Americans were the victims of Pearl Harbor, but
it would be even more tragic if they failed to remember its
most profound lesson.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
