ID: 261	RANK: 61	SCORE: 7.549878
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891205-0188 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-PX-12-05-89 1133EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>a a BC-The'80s-Bust&amp;Boom Adv16   12-05 1056</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-The '80s-Bust &amp; Boom, Adv 16,1080</SECOND>
<HEAD>$adv16</HEAD>
<HEAD>For Release Weekend Editions Dec. 16-17 and Thereafter</HEAD>
<HEAD>From `Voodoo' to Reaganomics; Creditor to Debtor; Bust to Boom</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By MARTIN CRUTSINGER</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP Economics Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The U.S. economy during the 1980s was a study
in contrasts: the deepest recession since the Great Depression
followed by the longest peacetime economic expansion in history.
   It was a decade in which the spiraling inflation, economic
stagnation and successive oil shocks of the 1970s were replaced by
new headaches _ huge budget and trade deficits, and fears the
United States was becoming a second-rate economic power.
   It was the decade when Americans went on a spending spree,
financed by foreign capital.
   The profligacy meant that the United States, the world's richest
creditor nation at the start of the 1980s, ended up as the largest
debtor nation, facing the threat of declining living standards as
U.S. wealth moves into foreigners' hands to pay the interest.
   Reaganomics, defined in vastly different ways by friend and foe,
dominated the decade. Ronald Reagan campaigned for the presidency
on a pledge of cutting tax rates, boosting defense spending and
balancing the budget, all at the same time.
   ``Voodoo economics,'' sniffed George Bush, Reagan's competitor
for the 1980 Republican nomination. Bush was proven correct, but in
winning the presidency in 1988, Bush took his own no-new-taxes
pledge.
   He promised to boost spending on education, environmental
cleanup and the war on drugs, all without a tax increase. He
promised a balanced budget, as well. It would be accomplished with
something called a flexible freeze, but Bush never got specific
about which programs he would put on ice.
   As a consequence, the federal government recorded a $152.1
billion deficit in 1989, Bush's first year in office, more than
double the deficit in 1980, Jimmy Carter's last year as president.
   The national debt, the accumulation of all the past deficits,
had not reached $1 trillion when Reagan took office. As the decade
ended, the national debt was closing in on $3 trillion; Reagan had
piled up more red ink than all of his predecessors put together.
   Despite that, Reagan held true to his promise to cut tax rates,
persuading Congress to slash the top personal rate from 70 percent
to 33 percent.
   Reagan also succeeded in slaying the inflation dragon. As the
decade began, the country was in its worst economic predicament
since the Great Depression, a long-simmering bout of inflation
fueled by successive oil shocks that had sent consumer prices into
double-digit territory, climbing by 12.5 percent in 1980 alone.
   Paul Volcker, serving as chairman of the Federal Reserve Board,
used high interest rates to dampen economic growth and whip
inflation, getting support for the task from Reagan. The medicine
worked, but not before interest rates hit levels not seen since the
Civil War, devastating the housing industry and shoving the country
into the steep 1981-82 recession.
   At its depth, 12 million Americans were out of work, the
unemployment rate hit 10.8 percent, its highest level since the
Depression, and news reports focused nightly on soup lines and
crowded public shelters.
   But the hard times have been followed by 84 months of
prosperity, a period of growth unmatched in peacetime and nearly
three times longer than the average expansion period.
   While growth was slowing as 1989 ended, economists held out hope
that falling interest rates would spur a rebound in economic
activity in 1990.
   Despite the long expansion, the percentage of Americans living
in poverty refused to budge below 13 percent, remaining higher
throughout the decade than it had been at any time during the
1970s. The gap between the wealthiest Americans and the poorest
also widened to its broadest range in 40 years.
   Critics blamed the high poverty rate on holes in the ``safety
net'' that David Stockman, Reagan's budget director, had erected to
protect the neediest from the pain of government budget cuts.
   It wasn't only people on welfare who were squeezed. The income
for a typical American family last year was $32,191, which meant
that even with more two-earner households and a long expansion,
family incomes had only made it back to where they had been in 1973.
   Democrats attributed the modest income gains to the fact that
high-paying industrial jobs were being replaced by minimum-wage
jobs in the service sector, transforming the country into a
``nation of hamburger flippers.''
   Nonsense, said Republicans, who pointed to the 20 million jobs
created since the recession ended in 1982, a level of job growth
that sent unemployment down close to 5 percent, the lowest it has
been since 1973.
   The modest wage gains didn't stop Americans from going on a
spending spree. The heavy consumer purchases and the huge
government budget deficits fueled the expansion.
   The trouble was that much of the demand was met by foreign
producers, as the country's trade deficit widened to historic
levels. The broadest measure of U.S. trade was in surplus as the
decade began, deficits in merchandise trade being more than covered
by Americans' earnings on their overseas investments.
   But a huge surge of imports, spurred by a strong dollar, pushed
the current account deficit to a record $154 billion in 1987, with
only modest improvement since that time.
   The billions of dollars flowing into foreign hands came back
into the United States as a wave of investments in everything from
high-rise office buildings to Hollywood movie studios. For the
first time since 1914, U.S. investments overseas were exceeded by
foreign investments in this country, presenting a host of problems
concerning how the interest owed to foreigners will be paid.
   But still, economists saw reasons for optimism in the 1990s. The
crumbling of the communist bloc was expected to produce a ``peace
dividend'' of lower defense spending that would help the federal
government balance its books.
   In addition, many analysts were looking for the low personal
savings rates of the 1980s to begin rising in the 1990s as the Baby
Boom generation moves into middle age.
   A larger pool of savings could spell big dividends for the
United States, lowering the cost of capital and allowing American
businesses to make the investments in research and modernization
that will be needed to keep up with the Japanese and other global
competitors.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Weekend Editions Dec. 16-17 and Thereafter</NOTE>
</DOC>
