ID: 261	RANK: 65	SCORE: 7.482444
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910808-0137
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910808-0137.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Believers in One Wave Theory
   See U.S. in Deep Trough Soon
   ----
   By Stanley W. Angrist
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
08/08/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C1
</SO>
<IN>
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
FORECASTS &amp; ANALYSIS OF U.S. ECONOMIC INDICATORS (EMJ)
STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
</IN>
<NS>
STOCK &amp; OTHER MARKET NEWS (STK)
</NS>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   According to some market forecasters -- a distinct
minority, to be sure -- the U.S. economy will soon be swamped
by the dreaded Kondratieff wave.
   Nikolai Kondratieff was a Russian economist of the 1920s
who postulated that nations' economies move in broad swells
lasting about 48 to 60 years each. For simplicity's sake,
many people think of it as a 50-year cycle, roughly 25 years
up and 25 down.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Since the last trough in the wave occurred in the 1930s,
the theory predicts another trough no later than the 1990s.
Proponents of the wave theory say that soon -- certainly
within three years -- the U.S. economy will be in a
bone-jarring depression accompanied by a stock-market
collapse.
   "We are now facing runaway deflation," says P.Q. Wall,
editor of a market newsletter and one of the more fervent
believers in the K-wave, as some devotees call it. "Both
stock and commodity prices will crash." He says the collapse
in commodity prices started gradually a decade ago but will
accelerate this year. Mr. Wall foresees the Dow Jones
Industrial Average, now around 3000, plummeting to 553 by
1993, accompanied by $4-a-barrel oil.
   Don't sell all your stocks yet, though. The majority of
academics and investment professionals question the
underpinnings of K-wave theory. "There are very few ideas in
macroeconomics that serious economists agree on, but doubting
the existence of the K-wave is one of them," says Allan
Meltzer, professor of political economy and public policy at
Carnegie-Mellon University in Pittsburgh.
   As the accompanying chart shows, the wave does seem to
roughly fit some data on the U.S. economy from 1720 to the
present. As it happens, data on stock prices and gross
national product don't go back that far. But the Commerce
Department does have more than two centuries of estimates for
wholesale prices. Periods when the prices were rising were
generally (though not always) times of economic expansion.
Periods when prices were falling were often times of
recession or depression.
   It might be easy to dismiss Mr. Wall as a kook, but he has
a fair-sized following among technical analysts. And he has
made at least two pinpoint forecasts. In January 1982 he
predicted the onset of the "biggest bull market in history
starting in mid-1982, carrying the Dow to 3000 by the late
1980s." In the fall of 1983 he stated that oil would fall
from $36 a barrel to $9 by 1986. It dropped to as low as
$10.40 in 1986.
   Not all believers in the K-wave read the evidence the same
way. John Dessauer, a Boston newsletter publisher and money
manager, thinks the trough in the wave has already passed.
"In 1982, 50 years after the depression-low of 1932, we had
the worst recession since that trough," he says. Also, he
says, there were stock-market crashes in both 1937 and 1987,
exactly 50 years apart.
   Among academics, one proponent of K-wave theory is Jay
Forrester, professor emeritus at the Sloan School of
Management at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Mr.
Forrester has developed a computer simulation of the economy
that he says predicts an economic output that moves up and
down with a period of between 45 and 60 years. He says that
the 1990s are going to witness a major bottom in the wave.
   But this is not the first time Mr. Forrester has talked
about a major bottom in the long wave. In a January 1978
article in Fortune magazine entitled, "We're Headed for
Another Depression," he argued that overcapacity existed
everywhere in the U.S. economy. That was two years before the
1980s decade began, ushering in average annual increases in
GNP of 2.5%.
   Walter Williams, president of American Business
Econometrics Inc., a Ridgewood, N.J.-based economic
consulting firm, is also a believer. Though he is quick to
point out that forecasts for his Fortune 500 clients are
based on econometric models, he says they currently confirm
what Kondratieff-wave theory predicts -- a decline for both
the economy and the stock market. "I expect this downturn to
last pretty much through the end of the decade and be as deep
as anything seen this century."
   The vast majority of contemporary economists, however,
place little stock in Kondratieff's theory. They point out
that he based his wave theory on agricultural prices,
interest rates and money wages that covered about 130 years,
or less than three cycles. Mr. Kondratieff himself
acknowledged the paucity of long-term data and termed his own
long-cycle theory "only probable."
   "K-wave theory smacks of economic determinism and borders
on mysticism," according to Alan Blinder, professor of
economics at Princeton University. He points out that
believers in the K-wave justify their stand, in part, because
of weaknesses in the economy in the 1870s and the 1930s. But
he notes, "If you only ask me to fit a few data points, I can
show you a cycle any length you want."
   Walter Rostow, professor emeritus at the University of
Texas at Austin, has spent many years studying long-term
waves in the economy. He says there are at least two long
waves, but neither is precisely the K-wave. Rather, there is
a 60-year cycle that shows a periodic increase in
technological innovation, and a 40-to-50-year cycle that
reflects a scarcity of commodities. The two, he says, almost
never coincide.
   Robert Barro, professor of economics at Harvard
University, chuckles when asked about the Kondratieff wave.
"There is just not enough data to make any claim for a wave
of 50 to 60 years in length," he says. When told that there
are people who take it seriously he answers, "You can find
people who are willing to say almost anything. And sometimes
they are even right."
   Mr. Wall replies that academics, like most people, prefer
not to see the long-term cycles that affect them. "No one
likes to think they are being pushed around like chess
pieces."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
