ID: 261	RANK: 66	SCORE: 7.441370
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920114-0068
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920114-0068.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
   The Aristocratic Economist
   ----
   By Todd G. Buchholz
</HL>
<DATE>
01/14/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   Economists share a reputation for drone-like
personalities, which inspired one wag to say that economists
lack the necessary charisma to be accountants. But what about
Joseph Schumpeter?
   Would a drone challenge a librarian to a duel over the
right of his students to get better access to books? Would a
drone brag that he had three great ambitions in life: "to be
the greatest economist in the world, the greatest horseman in
Austria, and the best lover in Vienna. Well, in one of those
goals I have failed."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Richard Swedberg's new book, "Schumpeter: A Biography"
(Princeton University Press, 285 pages, $24.95), describes
Schumpeter strolling into faculty meetings wearing riding
boots. With his capes, spats and silk shirts, he could have
stepped out of an old Hollywood movie as Douglas Fairbanks's
aristocratic Austrian sidekick.
   But Schumpeter was not just a dandy. He was also the most
learned economist of this century. Even Keynes, whose
accomplishments drove Schumpeter to jealous depressions,
could not compete with Schumpeter's erudition, which included
a command of the economics literature in German, French,
English, Italian, Latin and ancient Greek. I don't know of
any economist today who thinks Schumpeter's opinionated and
exhaustive "History of Economic Analysis" will ever be
matched.
   While Mr. Swedberg correctly conveys Schumpeter's moody
disposition, he provides only a sketch of his fascinating
successes and failures in academics and politics. The main
text is less than 200 pages -- not nearly enough space to
discuss the life, times and ideas of such a man. The book
gives the impression that Mr. Swedberg is a fine sociologist
who was not committed to a comprehensive biography.
   At several points, Mr. Swedberg explains that Schumpeter
brought few of his writings and memories with him when he
emigrated to the U.S. in 1932. No surprise, since his
memories included being ousted from two notable jobs:
Austrian finance minister and chairman of Biedermann Bank.
But just because Schumpeter may have fled from his tarnished
resume does not mean that his biographer cannot track down
his footprints back in the old country. Schumpeter was not
some elusive, medieval monk, after all.
   At least Mr. Swedberg clearly and faithfully surveys his
subject's greatest ideas. For Schumpeter, the entrepreneur
was the prime mover for economic growth, and though Mr.
Swedberg does not throw him on the analyst's sofa, he deftly
points out that Schumpeter's ideal entrepreneur closely
resembled his grandfather and great-grandfather, who owned
textile mills.
   Schumpeter encouraged the development of pure economic
theory and helped found the Econometric Society. Nonetheless,
he knew too much about human society to hide behind arid
mathematical symbols. Indeed, his depiction of the
entrepreneur in his "Theory of Economic Development" appears
to stem more from Max Weber and Friedrich Nietzsche than from
Adam Smith and David Ricardo:
   "First of all, there is the dream and the will to found a
private kingdom," he wrote. "Then there is the will to
conquer: the impulse to fight, to prove oneself superior to
others . . . Finally, there is the joy of creating . . ."
   Despite his respect for Weber, Schumpeter publicly
quarreled with his elder. Mr. Swedberg retells one
altercation in a coffeehouse, where Weber denounced the
Russian Revolution while Schumpeter praised it as a "fine
laboratory" experiment. Finally, Weber stormed out,
screaming, "I can't take any more of this]" leaving
Schumpeter calmly asking for another drink with a bemused
expression on his face.
   Though few college students have seen "The Theory of
Economic Development," thousands continue to study his
"Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy," usually in sociology
classes. Schumpeter's most famous forecast is found in that
book: "Can capitalism survive? No. I don't think it can." As
Mr. Swedberg explains, Schumpeter's reasoning sharply
differed with Marx's, which predicted that capitalism would
collapse from plummeting profits and incomes. Instead,
Schumpeter predicted that capitalism would produce too many
riches and too many idle intellectuals, who would question
its moral foundations. Though his view seemed compelling in
the late 1960s, when tie-dyed shirts and bandannas apparently
menaced the control of blue business suits and silk ties,
recent history seems to give both Marx and Schumpeter a
failing grade.
   Many Schumpeter admirers wonder why he did not inspire a
distinct school of thought, as did Keynes. First, Schumpeter
discouraged it. More important, though, Schumpeter did not
offer an appealing response to the Great Depression. Rather
than faulting fiscal policy, like Keynes, or Federal Reserve
policy, like some monetarists, Schumpeter told the world to
relax. Politicians and graduate students did not appreciate
an aristocratic fop telling them that capitalist economies
periodically need a depression, "like a good cold shower."
   Schumpeter did not mind piquing his audience. He once said
that "an economist who is not unpopular like hell is not
worth his salt." Unfortunately, too many economists today are
unpopular as hell and still not worth a gram.
   ---
   Mr. Buchholz is associate director of the White House
Economic Policy Council and the author of "New Ideas From
Dead Economists."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
