ID: 261	RANK: 75	SCORE: 7.262220
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910530-0065
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910530-0065.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Counterpoint:
   '80s Debt Caused the Recession;
   '80s Debt Is Prolonging It
   ----
   By Harold van B. Cleveland
</HL>
<DATE>
05/30/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A15
</SO>
<MS>
FINANCIAL (FIN)
</MS>
<IN>
ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
FORECASTS &amp; ANALYSIS OF U.S. ECONOMIC INDICATORS (EMJ)
CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)
FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)
</IN>
<NS>
ECONOMIC NEWS, TRENDS, INDEXES, PROJECTIONS, ANALYSES (ECO)
FOREIGN EXCHANGE (FRX)
</NS>
<GV>
FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)
</GV>
<RE>
GERMANY (GE)
JAPAN (JA)
</RE>
<LP>
   To judge from the unemployment figures, the recession is
still deepening. This is unsurprising: Recessions have
normally been precipitated by a tightening of monetary
policy, and growth in the money supply has indeed slowed.
What's different about this recession is that the money and
credit slowdown has not been due to a tight monetary policy.
Quite the contrary.
   The low federal-funds rate and the sharply accelerated
growth of commercial banks' reserves since last summer show
that monetary policy has been easy, not tight. Late last
year, the Federal Reserve reduced the banks' reserve
requirements, freeing more reserves. The slope of the U.S.
yield curve has been consistently positive, which also
suggests monetary ease.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The money and credit slowdown reflects not a restrictive
monetary policy, but the abnormal weakness of the balance
sheets of borrowers (households and companies) and lenders
(banks and non-bank intermediaries). It is a reflection of a
financial phenomenon that Irving Fisher, looking back on the
condition of the U.S. economy just before the Great
Depression, called "overindebtedness."
   The overindebtedness of the 1920s was due to the
then-unprecedented inflation of credit of 1925-1929. Today's
reflects the credit inflation of the 1980s. The ratio of
private nonfinancial debt outstanding to GNP in the U.S.
economy is now more than 1.4 to 1, much the highest of the
postwar period, though mercifully lower than in 1929, when it
was 1.58 to 1.
   Normally during a recession, the conditions for recovery
are established by several developments:
   (1) the easing of monetary policy and a more rapid growth
of bank reserves, which increase bank lending and money
growth relative to the demand for money;
   (2) the liquidation of excess business inventories, which
increases companies' liquid assets relative to their
liabilities, "reliquifying" their balance sheets; and
   (3) the repayment of household debt and a rise in the
savings-to-income ratio, which does the same for households.
   At the same time, (4) falling interest rates encourage
borrowing and spending in the most interest-sensitive sectors
of the economy (housing and consumer durables) and lift asset
prices relative to debt, with positive wealth effects, which
encourage spending for consumption and investment. Rising
securities prices also allow companies to pay off short-term
debt by issuing long-term bonds and stocks, thereby improving
their liquidity.
   What's different about this recession -- what is retarding
or blocking these normal financial responses to recession --
is the abnormally heavy burden of business and household
debt.
   This is why market interest rates, including the banks'
prime lending rates, are abnormally high relative to the
federal-funds rate. Banks are keeping their interest rates up
to try to rebuild profits and capital ratios that have been
severely impaired by heavy write-offs and additions to
loan-loss reserves. And banks are not competing hard for new
business, because credit risks appear abnormally high.
   In these circumstances, the money supply doesn't respond
normally to the Fed's monetary ease. The supply of money and
credit will not grow unless banks lend or invest. Normally
when the Fed supplies more reserves, banks do not let them
stand idle and unproductive: They lend them or, if the demand
for loans is weak, they invest them in government securities.
But since last summer, banks have done very little of either.
Instead, they have accumulated reserves in excess of legal
reserve requirements to a degree unprecedented since the
1930s.
   Of course, the situation now in this respect is not nearly
as bad as it was then. Then, the banks had been severely
traumatized by a series of banking panics, beginning in
December 1930, and banks were naturally anxious to build up
excess reserves to protect against the risk of further runs
by their depositors. Also, there was no deposit insurance.
The supply of government securities suitable for bank
investments was also quite limited. So, when the Federal
Reserve added to the banks' reserves, the additional funds
were mostly hoarded. As it was said at the time, the Fed in
its efforts to get a recovery started was "pushing on a
string."
   Banks are also acting in this way because there are
abnormal "real" factors threatening to prolong the recession
-- in particular, weak profits and high real interest rates.
Profits are depressed by the high level of interest payments
relative to cash flow. This condition is a consequence of the
enormous volume of borrowing in the 1980s to finance
leveraged buy-outs and stock-repurchase programs. Real
interest rates are abnormally high for this stage of the
business cycle, in part because of the huge volume of
unproductive federal borrowing, past and present, and the
resulting deadweight public debt.
   Profits are also suffering from the stagnation of
productivity during the 1982-1988 recovery. Unit labor costs
are now high relative to product prices, despite the moderate
pace of wage advances. The leading cause of this historically
poor productivity performance during a recovery was the
virtual absence of net fixed capital formation in U.S.
manufacturing. That was the consequence of high real interest
rates in combination with the overvalued dollar of 1983-1986,
which crowded out investment in sectors exposed to foreign
competition, including manufacturing.
   The consensus U.S. forecast still expects an upturn before
the end of the year. That could happen, but only if the
Federal Reserve succeeds in getting bank credit and the real
money supply growing again. However, with credit demand weak
and the economy in recession, an easier monetary policy tends
to drive the dollar down. And a weak dollar makes it more
difficult for the Fed to ease aggressively.
   Fortunately, the dollar has been strong of late. But if it
weakens, the Fed will face a dilemma. If it fails to ease
more, there may be a growing wave of bankruptcies and bank
failures as the U.S. recession deepens, which would weaken
the dollar. But if it does ease more, the dollar may still
plunge.
   Could it be, then, that the situation is not under the
Fed's control? If that should prove to be the case, massive
intervention by foreign monetary authorities might be the
only way to prevent a financial crisis and a prolonged
recession in the U.S. To prevent the crisis or to arrest it
if it starts, foreign central banks -- the Bundesbank and the
Bank of Japan particularly -- would have to come to the
dollar's rescue. There is a recent precedent; this is what
happened in the dollar and bond-market crisis of 1987, when
net foreign private capital flows into dollar assets fell
below zero.
   Germany and Japan would have to relax their present,
restrictive monetary stance, intervene in the exchange
markets to support the dollar and encourage their banks to
come back into the New York and Eurodollar bond markets. In
such a moment of truth, the German and Japanese authorities
would probably act in this way. It would surely be to their
advantage to do so. Let us hope that a contingency plan along
these lines is on the G-7's confidential agenda.
   ---
   Mr. Cleveland, a former vice president of Citibank, is a
consulting economist based in Paris and New York.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
