ID: 200	RANK: 33	SCORE: 9.630008
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910711-0058
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910711-0058.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   America West Airlines June Traffic
   Rose 30% on Half-Price Ticket Sales
   ----
   By Bridget O'Brian
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
07/11/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A2
</SO>
<CO>
   AWALQ
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
AIRLINES (AIR)
BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)
</IN>
<NS>
BANKRUPTCY DECLARATIONS AND PROCEEDINGS (BCY)
</NS>
<RE>
ARIZONA (AZ)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   America West Airlines said its June traffic soared 30%,
but the financially troubled airline attributed the increase
largely to half-price ticket promotions earlier in the year.
   Those 50% fares will end up costing the carrier money
because so many of them are being redeemed during the
industry's busy summer travel season. America West filed for
Chapter 11 protection two weeks ago because of a massive cash
drain.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The Phoenix, Ariz., carrier is widely expected to report a
loss for the second quarter, even though traffic for the
quarter was also up by about 30%. The consensus of Wall
Street analysts as of Monday put the airline's second-quarter
loss at 50 cents a share, versus last year's profit of 29
cents a share.
   America West said June traffic rose to 1.22 billion
revenue passenger miles from 936.3 million last year. A
revenue passenger mile is one paying passenger flown one
mile, the principal measure of airline business. Load factor,
or the percentage of seats filled, jumped to 70.4% from 63.7%
a year ago.
   Cut-rate fares offered throughout the industry have lured
fliers back into airplane seats, but not in enough numbers to
offset the cost of the heavy discounts. America West's
promotional fares, which generated $140 million in cash
according to the carrier's bankruptcy filing, were more
heavily discounted and had fewer restrictions than those
offered by other airlines.
   The carrier said it expects similarly high traffic levels
for the rest of the summer. In the days immediately after
America West filed for Chapter 11 last month, the airline
said its load factor exceeded 75%, a particularly high
number. "We are seeing similar patterns in early July," said
Mark Coleman, the airline's senior vice president of market
planning.
   That's good and bad news for the airline. In an affidavit
filed along with its bankruptcy filing, America West
President Michael Conway complained that the 50% passengers
"are not generating any fresh revenues for America West." The
airline anticipates that substantially all those passengers
will have used their tickets by this fall.
   Although America West has said it plans to cut costs and
has announced new routes and a pay freeze, it hasn't yet made
public the kind of deep cost-cutting plans it will need once
summer travel drops off after Labor Day.
   The airline is apparently stepping up its efforts to
conserve cash. America West has been negotiating with
representatives of its two hub airports to string out July
rent payments.
   A spokesman for McCarran International Airport in Las
Vegas said America West is in default of a $1.5 million lease
payment due July 1, and is likely to default on a separate
$500,000 payment due July 15. The airport board intends to
meet July 16 to consider America West's request for a 30-day
extension on the payments. At Phoenix Sky Harbor airport,
America West and airport officials said the company made a
$500,000 payment and is in negotiations for the remainder of
the $1.8 million July rent, which was due yesterday.
   America West said the negotiations are moving along
satisfactorily.
   In a statement, America West said the airline is
negotiating to "reaffirm its airport obligations." The
negotiations are moving along satisfactorily, the statement
said.
   For the first six months of 1991, America West's traffic
was up 25.5%, to 6.64 billion revenue passenger miles from
5.29 billion. The year-to-date load factor rose to 66% from
62.2%.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
