ID: 200	RANK: 93	SCORE: 6.847534
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880406-0071 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-04-06-88 0625EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a PM-WeatherpageWeather     04-06 0710</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Weatherpage Weather,0732</SECOND>
<HEAD>Thunderstorms Pound Nation's Midsection, Record Temperatures in 41
Cities</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Thunderstorms fell from the Great Lakes to the Gulf Coast today
after unleashing tornadoes, winds up to nearly 100 mph and hail as
big as baseballs that did widespread damage and cut power to
thousands of people.
   High temperature records up to 115 years old were broken or tied
Tuesday in 41 cities from the Great Lakes to the Southeast.
   Showers and thunderstorms extended along and ahead of a cold
front from the upper Great Lakes to Illinois, Indiana, the lower
Mississippi Valley and southeast Texas. There were around 100
reports of large hail or damaging winds Tuesday afternoon and
evening.
   In Chicago, a windsurfer saved one of two children on a raft
that had been pulled away from Lake Michigan's shore by high winds
and choppy water late Tuesday, but the second child was missing,
police said.
   Elsewhere in Illinois, winds gusting to 75 mph did considerable
damage to hangars and aircraft at the Bloomington airport. Six
people suffered minor injuries. High winds toppled trees and
destroyed mobile homes in Will County.
   Thousands of people in northeastern Illinois remained without
power today, said Commonwealth Edison Co. spokesman Bill Cormack.
Suburbs south of Chicago were the hardest hit and power lines also
were downed in Taylorville, Moweaqua and Kankakee.
   Tornadoes touched down Tuesday afternoon in Ottawa County in
northeast Oklahoma and 3 miles southeast of Honey Grove in East
Texas, but no damage or injuries were reported.
   In Missouri, winds gusting to 65 mph blew a roof off a house 6
miles south of Rolla, downed power lines and trees 21 miles
southwest of St. Louis and did damage in other areas south of that
city.
   Jenison, Mich., just west of Grand Rapids reported a gust of
nearly 100 mph.
   Baseball-size hail pounded San Diego in southern Texas. Hail the
size of golf balls or smaller was reported in Texas, Arkansas,
Missouri, Illinois and Wisconsin.
   Rain fell across the Northwest, light drizzle dampened the New
England coast and skies were cloudy in much of New England. Dry
weather prevailed elsewhere.
   High temperature records were broken or tied Tuesday in
Michigan, Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, Missouri, Kentucky, Tennessee,
North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, Florida, Alabama,
Mississippi and California.
   It was 85 degrees in Chicago, where the old mark of 83 degrees
was set in 1873, and 87 degrees in Louisville, Ky., 2 degrees
higher than the record set 115 years ago.
   Records of 91 degrees were set in St Louis; Macon, Ga.;
Lakeland, Fla.; and Montgomery and Meridian, Miss.
   Today's forecast called for showers and thunderstorms from the
lower Great Lakes and Michigan to the Ohio and Tennessee valleys,
the southern and central Appalachians, Georgia, Alabama, northern
Florida and the central Gulf Coast; showers from Michigan to
western Kentucky and the Texas coast; scattered showers in the
Northwest and generally sunny skies in the rest of the nation Gusty
winds were predicted for Wisconsin, Illinois and Indiana.
   High temperatures were expected to be in the 60s or 70s in much
of the nation; 40s and 50s from the upper Mississippi Valley to the
upper Great Lakes; 50s in New England, Washington state and
northwest Oregon; 80s in much of the southern Atlantic Coast states
and southwest Texas and 80s and 90s across the desert Southwest.
   Temperatures around the nation at 3 a.m. EDT ranged from 18
degrees at Yellowstone National Park, Wyo., to 78 degrees at Yuma,
Ariz.
   Other reports:
   _East: Atlanta 67 partly cloudy; Boston 41 cloudy; Buffalo 57
cloudy; Charleston, SC 59 fair; Cincinnati 70 cloudy; Cleveland 67
cloudy; Detroit 62 partly cloudy; Miami 71 fair; New York 49 fair;
Philadelphia 49 fair; Pittsburgh 60 partly cloudy; Portland, Maine
39 drizzle; Washington 58 fair.
   _Central: Bismarck 25 fair; Chicago 59 cloudy; Dallas-Fort Worth
54 fair; Denver 41 fair; Des Moines 43 fair; Indianapolis 60
thunderstorms; Kansas City 45 windy; Minneapolis-St Paul 44 fair;
New Orleans 73 cloudy; St. Louis 48 showers.
   _West: Albuquerque 53 fair; Anchorage 30 fair; Las Vegas 60
fair; Los Angeles 61 fair; Phoenix 72 fair; Salt Lake City 39 fair;
San Diego 61 fair; San Francisco 52 partly cloudy; Seattle 50 rain
   _Canada: Montreal 37 cloudy; Toronto 46 foggy
</TEXT>
</DOC>
