ID: 99	RANK: 15	SCORE: 7.830351
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910725-0104
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910725-0104.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
   Virgil in Prose and Fine Fettle
   ----
   By Donald Lyons
</HL>
<DATE>
07/25/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A6
</SO>
<LP>
   Talk about New World Order. In 27 B.C., Augustus, having
defeated Antony and Cleopatra and pacified much of the known
world, was busily consolidating the new Roman emperorship.
   This new Rome needed an arts policy to match its grand
self-image. Augustus, therefore, set up a virtual Imperial
Endowment for the Arts under the suave Etruscan magnate
Maecenas. It was Maecenas' luck to hire some of history's
greatest poets -- Virgil and Horace -- as enthusiastic
propagandists for the First Citizen. Virgil had already
celebrated Augustus as a restorer of peace and fertility to
the Italian countryside in "The Georgics." Now he had to
write the epic of Rome. "Epic" meant, since the Romans were
earnest followers of the Greeks, a long saga with gods and
battles. Just like Homer. He wrote "The Aeneid," a wonderful
new translation of which is recently out (Penguin Classics,
288 pages $6.95).
</LP>
<TEXT>
   This new Rome needed an arts policy to match its grand
self-image. Augustus, therefore, set up a virtual Imperial
Endowment for the Arts under the suave Etruscan magnate
Maecenas. It was Maecenas' luck to hire some of history's
greatest poets as enthusiastic propagandists for the First
Citizen -- Virgil and Horace. Virgil had already celebrated
Augustus as a restorer of peace and fertility to the Italian
countryside in "The Georgics." Now he had to write the epic
of Rome. "Epic" meant, since the Romans were earnest
followers of the Greeks, a long saga with gods and battles.
Just like Homer. He wrote "The Aeneid," a wonderful new
translation of which is recently out (Penguin Classics,
$5.95).
   Substantially complete, save for a few loose ends left
behind at Virgil's death in 19 B.C., "The Aeneid" is the
story of the Trojan Prince Aeneas escaping the Greek sack of
his town and bringing a Trojan remnant to Italy as the
nucleus of the future Rome. This was a new job for an epic --
to tell a high-minded national foundation myth in archaic
drag. Homer's heroes had not been concerned with any sweep of
imperial history: Odysseus, for example, had enough problems
getting back to his small island of Ithaca.
   But what turns out to give electricity and life and anger
and tension to "The Aeneid" is not dull, worthy Aeneas'
imperial crusade, but the victims he crushes under those
implacably rolling chariot wheels. In the poem's second half,
Aeneas embroils sundry unoffending indigenous Italians in a
messy war to make room for him and his band. But it is in the
poem's first half that he accomplishes his most notorious
mischief -- the destruction of Dido.
   Driven from her homeland in Phoenicia by a cruel
brother-in-law, the adventurous and creative Dido had led an
elite of her people to the barren North African shore and was
in the process of founding the bustling utopian city of
Carthage when, deflected by Venus (Aeneas' mother), she
rescued the shipwrecked Trojans and fell in love with their
chieftain.
   Soon she was forgetting about the blueprints for the
Senate House and concentrating on reading entrails instead:
"But priests, as we know, are ignorant. What use are prayers
and shrines to a passionate woman? The flame was eating the
soft marrow of her bones, and the wound lived under her
breast. Dido was on fire with love and wandered all over the
city in her misery and madness like a wounded deer . . ."
This romantic internalizing is a new note in Latin epic;
Virgil had been impressed by such Greek heroines of erotic
tragedy as Medea and Phaedra.
   Dido's reward for preferring private passion to public
glory was to see her lover sail away. But not before she gave
him a piece of her mind: "Look for your kingdom over the
waves . . . I shall follow you not in the flesh but in the
black fires of death . . . You will receive the punishment
you deserve and the news of it will reach me deep among the
dead." The mood music swells for the queen's last evening:
"It was night and weary living things were peacefully taking
their rest upon the earth . . . But not Dido . . . Her eyes
and mind would not accept the night."
   The queen rejects any notion of accompanying Aeneas and
regrets not having dealt differently with him at the start
("Could I not have taken him and torn him limb from limb and
scattered the pieces in the sea? . . . or served {Aeneas'
little son's} flesh at his father's table?") She decides on
suicide, leaving vengeance to some future Carthaginian (that
is, to Hannibal). The queen falls on her sword, and "All
warmth went out of Dido's body and her life passed into the
winds."
   David West's new prose translation proves two things about
"The Aeneid." The first we knew: It is the victims' poem.
They -- the Italians and young Trojans like Nisus and
Euryalus, and above all Dido -- steal the story from the
rigid Roman robots backed by head god Jupiter. Flesh beats
marble. Secondly, and surprisingly, prose can work superbly
to capture the sad, conflicted music of Virgil. Not
rollicking, whale-of-a-story prose, but sweet prose, clear
and clean and dancing like a mountain stream, as here.
   To gauge the nature and extent of Mr. West's triumph,
compare his version of Dido and the entrails with the 1956
Penguin prose of Jackson Knight: "But how pitifully weak is
the prescience of seers] There lay no help for her
infatuation in temples or in prayers." Compare it, too, with
the rapturously received 1983 verse translation of Robert
Fitzgerald: "Alas, what darkened minds have soothsayers]/
What good are shrines and vows to maddened lovers?" And here
is Mr. Fitzgerald's version of Dido haranguing Aeneas: "You
will pay for this,/Unconscionable] I shall hear] The news
will reach me/Even among the lowest of the dead." And here is
Fitzgerald on Dido dead: "Her body's warmth fell into
dissolution,/And out into the winds her life withdrew."
   Prescience? Infatuation? Soothsayers? Unconscionable?
Dissolution? Dry polysyllables settle on those translations
like chalk dust. It's language like theirs that has kept
potential readers from "the classics." Preferring simplicity
to archaic locutions, Mr. West remains closer to the Latin
sense and quietly achieves many an iambic beat more naturally
than Mr. Fitzgerald. He opens the window and the winds bring
life into Virgil's body.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
