ID: 99	RANK: 59	SCORE: 6.321738
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP881224-0088 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-12-24-88 1444EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r i AM-Pope-Text     12-24 1032</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Pope-Text,1066</SECOND>
<HEAD>With AM-Pope-Christmas</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Embargoed by Vatican until delivered after 6 p.m. EST.</NOTE>
<DATELINE>VATICAN CITY (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The following is a text of Pope John Paul
II's homily for Christmas Eve midnight Mass in St. Peter's Basilica.
The original was to be given in Italian. The following is the
Vatican's official English-language version:
   ``I bring you good news of a great joy for to you is born ... a
savior'' (Luke 2:10-11).
   We hear this voice which emanates from the depths of the night of
Bethlehem. The shepherds ``keeping watch over their flock by night''
(Luke 2:8) were the first to hear it. For this reason the Midnight
Liturgy is sometimes called the ``Shepherds' Mass.''
   We are gathered in St. Peter's Basilica to hear once more these
same words: ``I bring you good news of a great joy.''
   By means of radio and television, peoples of different languages,
nations, countries and continents are listening with us to this
message. Thus, again in the different parts of the world.
   And even if the words which we hear on Christmas night are the
same every year, yet they are always eagerly awaited by us and are
for us always new.
   ``Today ... is born ... a savior, who is Christ the Lord.'' He is
born once more. Once more he has come into the world, on the night
of Bethlehem. For we relive as ours that distant ``today'' of almost
2,000 years ago.
   ``A Savior is born to you.'' It may seem that people have
achieved a great deal, and continue to do so, in ``saving''
themselves with their own resources, so that they may be
self-sufficient, that all the things that are termed
``civilization,'' ``progress'' and ``development'' do not reach the
roots of the evil which still persists in human history and even, in
a sense, is becoming deeper and more widespread. And, on the other
hand, all the things that help to ``raise'' the level of human
existence, that make it ``better,'' do not reach the perfection of
that good to which the human being is directed.
   Meanwhile the words: ``A savior is born to you'' continue to
touch what is permanent and real in man, what is profoundly true.
And every year these words are awaited with the same basic
motivations in our humanity, even if we are very often unaware of
them.
   On that night, the shepherds in Bethlehem experienced deep
amazement. What they heard at first filled them with fear. But, ``do
not be afraid'' the Messenger says, ``I bring you good news of great
joy.''
   At the moment in which God the Son, of the same substance as the
Father is born as man, comes into the world as a son of man, as the
son of Mary, we cannot but be overcome by deep amazement. The whole
Gospel is the book of great amazement.
   For God is eternal and invisible. He is all-embracing. ``In him
we live and move and have our being'' (Acts 17:28). God is
omnipotent. He is totally other: different from the whole of
creation. He is absolute Transcendence.
   Is it possible that he becomes man? That he is born in an
abandoned stable, as a child of homeless parents?
   Why? Cur Deus homo (Why did God become Man)?
   The night of Bethlehem is the wellspring of this amazement. The
first to experience it were these shepherds. And in this amazement
there was first fear, and then joy. It is not something transitory.
It is preserved by the human consciousness for the whole of life.
   Every individual must constantly ask the question: cur Deus Homo?
He must constantly seek the answer and find it gradually. He must
embrace the mystery revealed this night and enter into it ever more
deeply.
   Yes. The mystery.
   It is good when one experiences fear, an interior tremor. And it
is also good when one finds joy. But it is not good when one or the
other is missing. It is not good. Man cannot remain indifferent to
the mystery of the night of Bethlehem. He cannot reject the question
cur Deus homo?
   This would constitute a deep ``wound'' in his humanity.
   Thus all people are called to share in this night... ``Declare
his glory among the nations, his marvelous works among all the
peoples.'' ( See also Psalms 95@96:3).
   In the context of the Christmas mystery, human history, the
history of each and every individual _ is called to overcome that
limit which can interiorly obstruct the journey towards the
salvation offered by God. People can ignore this call. They can even
refuse to accept it. But ``salvation'' cannot come to them except
from God. And it has come! On this very night.
   God is born as man, who is a creature. Does not the whole of
creation find its place in this mystery?
   What significance has the fact that we invite earth and sea to
share in the joy of Christmas?
   ``Let the heavens be glad and let the earth rejoice, Let the sea
roar, and all that fills, let the field exult and everything in it.
Then shall all the trees of the wood sing for joy.'' (Psalms
95@96:11-12.)
   Bethlehem _ it literally means the ``house of bread.''
   Christ, who was born there, without a roof, will construct in the
history of the world a dwelling which corresponds to the meaning of
this place: Bethlehem.
   The House of Bread: The Eucharist.
   He himself, the savior, will live in this house in a sacramental
manner. Indeed, he will actually be this house: His Body and his
Blood. The whole of humanity, in which the divine transformation of
man has its origin.
   In this way, man will constantly be able to overcome the limit
placed in the way of salvation _ eternal salvation _ which God
himself has opened up with the human birth of the Word, his Eternal
Son. With the human birth of God.
   Truly.
   ``The people who walked in darkness have seen a great light;
those who dwelt in a land of deep darkness, on them has light
shined'' (Isiah 9:1).
   Truly.
   ``Fear not, behold I bring you good news of great joy.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
