ID: 99	RANK: 65	SCORE: 6.225439
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP901008-0182 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NY-10-08-90 1426EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>a i BC-APN--LafcadioHearn ADV21   10-08 0987</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-APN--Lafcadio Hearn, ADV 21,1214</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv21</NOTE>
<HEAD>AGENCIES AND RADIO OUT</HEAD>
<NOTE>For Release Sunday, Oct. 21</NOTE>
<HEAD>From AP Newsfeatures</HEAD>
<NOTE>(APN SUNDAY ILLUSTRATIONS: Mailed print subscribers get 1 b&amp;w
photo.)</NOTE>
<TEXT>
   
   EDITOR'S NOTE - He was an American newspaperman who went to
Japan 100 years ago to teach English and fell in love, with the
country. In the following years Lafcadio Hearn wrote extensively
about Japan and its people and admirers say he was one of the few
Westerners who truly understood the culture. While his work is
little known in the West today, the Japanese have never forgotten
him.
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
</TEXT>
<BYLINE>By TOM MINEHART</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>MATSUE, Japan (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Lafcadio Hearn gazed out through his
cedar-framed window, contemplated a lotus pond surrounded by irises
and moss-covered rocks and listened to the cicadas buzzing on a
plum branch.
   He turned to his waist-high desk and put pen to paper. He wrote
a melancholy prophecy that is still valid 100 years after he
arrived in this small lakeside city in Izumo, the mythical Province
of the Gods.
   ``Already a multitude of gardens, more spacious and more
beautiful than mine, have been converted into rice fields or bamboo
groves,'' he wrote. ``And the quaint Izumo city, touched at last by
some long-projected railway line ... will swell, and change, and
grow commonplace, and demand these grounds for the building of
factories and mills.
   ``Not from here alone, but from all the land the ancient peace
and the ancient charm seem doomed to pass away. For impermanency is
the nature of all things, more particularly in Japan.''
   The Greek-Irish journalist from the United States had fallen in
love with Japan, although he became increasingly ambivalent as it
modernized. And while Hearn has largely slipped into obscurity in
the West, the Japanese have never forgotten him, particularly in
this centennial year.
   Admirers say he was one of the few Westerners who truly
understood Japanese culture, possibly because he considered it
superior in many ways to the industrialized West.
   ``He loved the ordinary life, the daily life of the Japanese
people,'' says Kenji Zenimoto, professor of intercultural studies
at Shimane University in Matsue and president of the national
Lafcadio Hearn Society.
   Elementary school pupils around the country still read Hearn's
Japanese ghost stories, and high-school students practice English
with his evocative travel writings. University students study his
philosophical essays, and scholars argue passionately over his 12
major books and hundreds of articles and letters.
   The largest celebration of his centennial began in Matsue on
Aug. 30, exactly 100 years after Hearn arrived at age 40 to teach
English in the city's middle school.
   Hearn wrote about the town in ``The Chief City of the Province
of the Gods,'' part of ``Glimpses of an Unfamiliar Japan,''
published in 1894.
   Here, between a lake and lagoon near the Japan Sea about 390
miles west of Tokyo, one can see that much about Japan has changed
and much remains eternal.
   Part of Hearn's garden remains, including the pond and ancient
pines. But other houses now encroach upon the northern portion,
where wild flowers and grasses once extended to the wooded hills
far beyond.
   The Lafcadio Hearn Memorial Museum displays Hearn's desk, the
shell he blew when he wanted his pipe lit, his glasses and socks
and even a lock of his hair preserved in a stone monument.
   There are displays which tell of Hearn's Japanese wife, their
four children, and his teaching posts elsewhere in Japan, including
Imperial University in Tokyo.
   Next door is the lotus-pond garden and the house where Hearn
lived after his romance with Japan turned into marriage. Although
he left Matsue in November 1891, he was to stay in Japan until he
died in 1904.
   He wed Setsu Koizumi, the daughter of an impoverished samurai
family, became a Japanese citizen and a Buddhist and adopted the
name by which he is known to most Japanese today: Yakumo Koizumi.
Yakumo, which means ``eight clouds,'' is a poetic version of Izumo.
   As a child, Hearn had been virtually abandoned by his Irish
father and Greek mother. After working as a reporter in Cincinnati,
New Orleans, New York and the West Indies, he thought he had
finally found a peaceful home in old Japan.
   But Japan was in the throes of modernization begun in the 1868
Meiji revolution. And just as marriages occasionally succumb to
disenchantment, Hearn increasingly found fault with Japan.
   Historian Kaoru Sekita, a Hearn scholar at Waseda University in
Tokyo, says Hearn predicted that Japan could never successfully
adopt some Western ideas, particularly democratic political
processes. Hearn thought ``the modes of Japanese human relations
had not fundamentally changed since mythological times,'' Sekita
says.
   Hearn's collection of essays, written shortly before he died,
also discusses the problems that arise from Japan's emphasis on
group loyalty over individual enterprise. Hearn warned of a ``rise
of new power'' in Japan - an ``oligarchy of wealth'' that would
enslave the people.
   Hearn is not universally admired in Japan. Some critics say his
romantic portrayal of old Japan perpetuates the myth that Japan is
unique, a misconception they say still keeps Japan from
participating fully in the international community. Others condemn
his work as a defense of ultra-conservatism.
   ``Lots of people who love Hearn today are nostalgic about the
old Japan,'' says Yuzo Ota, associate professor of history at
McGill University in Montreal. ``They are modernized intellectuals
who like his romanticized picture of Japan. They feel threatened by
their own mixed identity.''
   Hearn didn't have a simple love affair with Japan but a
complicated love-hate relationship, Ota says.
   The accepted view that Hearn loved Japan ``is based on
suppression of evidence'' in Hearn's letters to friends and other
scholars, he says.
   Zenimoto says some of Hearn's letters were cut for publication
to remove passages critical of Japan, including some that
castigated its rigid bureaucratic, military and educational
systems. Also cut were some of Hearn's wry observations about sex
in Japan, which was more open in the late 1800s than it is now, he
says.
   Zenimoto has written to about 10 U.S. libraries with extensive
holdings of Hearn letters in an attempt to compile a definitive
collection. He and his assistant, Yuko Kawauchi, also are working
on a Hearn catalog that will list everything written by and about
him. So far they have listed 1,900 items and have an estimated
7,000 to go.
   Hearn's 28-year-old great-grandson, Bon Koizumi, curator of the
Hearn Memorial Museum, prepared a special collection for the
festival. It includes manuscripts, classroom notes of Hearn's
students and English-language textbooks he prepared for his wife
and children.
   Zenimoto, Ota and Koizumi were among a dozen scholars
participating in the five-day festival, which included
presentations on Hearn's newspaper stories on macabre events in
Cincinnati, the effect of Hearn's Irish roots on his work, Hearn's
and other Westerners' interpretations of Shinto, Japan's indigenous
religion, and Hearn's ghost stories.
   ``Lafcadio Hearn was an ideal foreigner to understand Japan, but
he also understood cultural shock and the culture gap,'' Zenimoto
says. ``We must understand more minutely his life, but we must not
idolize him.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>END ADV</NOTE>
<TEXT>
</TEXT>
</DOC>
