ID: 99	RANK: 9	SCORE: 9.429542
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910305-0125
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910305-0125.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   The Gallery: An Intimate Look at Ancient Greece
   ----
   By Pamela Macleod Daigle
</HL>
<DATE>
03/05/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14
</SO>
<LP>
   New Paltz, N.Y. -- They are the denizens of ancient Greece
in the years following the death of Alexander the Great:
elegantly draped and coiffed women, a staid young soldier in
short tunic and thick-rimmed hat, a pair of young women
playing a jacks-like game of "knucklebones," two cherubic
boys gleefully staging a cockfight, a sagging old nurse
cradling her infant charge, a dancing dwarf.
   Meet these people -- or rather miniature clay depictions
of them -- in an exquisite exhibition mounted by the College
Art Gallery at the State University of New York campus here.
It's up until March 15, and then at Harvard's Arthur M.
Sackler Museum from May 26 through July 28.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The 52 works in this small but ambitious show, titled "The
Coroplast's Art: Greek Terracottas of the Hellenistic World,"
show ancient Greece in a more intimate light than those
familiar monumental sculptures of Zeus and Aphrodite in
marble. The terracottas give us a glimpse of the life of the
common people -- their clothing, religious beliefs,
amusements, and even the diseases they fell prey to.
   During the Hellenistic period (323 B.C. to 31 B.C.), Greek
civilization dominated the Mediterranean basin north and
south. Trade boomed, as did royal and private patronage of
the arts. But the vastness of Alexander's empire, and then
its collapse after his death, "fostered a feeling of
smallness and inconsequence for individuals," curator Jaimee
P. Uhlenbrock writes in the introduction to the show's
catalog.
   Sculptors responded, she explains, by emphasizing everyday
human experiences and emotions, "in contrast to the
extraordinary behavior of gods and heroes." The resulting
figurines, from a few inches to a couple of feet in height,
became extremely popular. They were offered to the deities at
temples and in home sanctuaries and were placed in graves to
scare away evil spirits, pay tribute to a particular god or
maybe just to keep the deceased company on his or her trip
into the afterlife. They also may have been used for purely
decorative purposes in the home, says Ms. Uhlenbrock, an
associate professor of classical art and archaeology here.
She organized the show in honor of the 90th birthday of
Dorothy Burr Thompson, who pioneered the study of these
sculptures.
   The figurines were mass-produced by artists called
coroplasts, who were influenced by the talented bronze and
silver craftsmen and potters they worked alongside. To make a
figurine, the coroplast pressed moist clay into a pair of
molds, one for the front of the figurine, one for the back.
He used as many as 14 accessory molds depending on the
complexity of the statue. After the various pieces were
assembled, the statue was fired in a kiln, coated with gypsum
and painted.
   Variations in texture and clay color (cream to peach to
grayish brown) help pinpoint where the figurines were made.
The show focuses on six centers: Athens, Tanagra and Corinth
on the Greek mainland; Myrina and Smyrna on the coast of Asia
Minor (now Turkey); and Taras in southern Italy.
   The most well-known figurines are those in the Tanagra
style (which actually originated in Athens), heavily draped
women in serene standing or seated positions. Some can be
identified as women of means by their "melon" hairdo, a
series of twists or braids brought into a large bun at the
back of the head.
   Also typical of the Greek mainland are "personality
figures" -- dwarfs, aged nurses and contemplative old men.
Theatrical motifs were common as well: One statue of a boy
carrying a mask probably is a participant in a dramatic
festival in honor of the god Dionysus. Though the mask is
broken off at the bottom, we can still see that one eyebrow
is raised, the other relaxed. Ms. Uhlenbrock points out that
this was a common stage convention: The actor evinced a
particular mood by turning the appropriate side of the mask
toward the audience.
   Another delightful theatrical figurine from this region
shows an actor wearing the mask of a courtesan, so identified
by its flamelike "lampadion" (little torch) hairstyle. The
mouth of the mask is open and the tongue sticks out, possibly
indicating that this was a speaking part. A similar miniature
mask comes from Myrina, across the Aegean Sea in Asia Minor.
It was probably sold at souvenir stalls near the theater; a
large loop at the top would allow it to be worn as a pendant.
   In the figurines from Asia Minor, Ms. Uhlenbrock sees "a
culmination of fantasy and sensuality." Witness a beautiful
flying Nike from Myrina, circa 180 B.C. This winged goddess
of victory wears a transparent, high-belted gown, her right
breast and left leg exposed. She is attributed to ananonymous
crafts man known as the coroplast of the victories, and was
meant to be suspended from the ceiling. "Notice the delicacy
of the work," says Ms. Thompson. "The Greeks had a wonderful
sense of restraint. They didn't overdo. Every little detail
was thoughtfully and delicately worked out."
   Not only did the coroplasts of Myrina give us
less-inhibited depictions of the female body, their
counterparts in nearby Smyrna began to sculpt -- often with
amazing clinical accuracy -- images of the physically
deformed. Some scholars hypothesize such people may have
journeyed to a medical college at Smyrna for treatment, where
the coroplasts could have seen them in the streets begging or
performing. Ms. Uhlenbrock's favorite work falls in this cate
</TEXT>
</DOC>
