ID: 99	RANK: 91	SCORE: 5.976952
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910122-0035
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910122-0035.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   International:
   Ozal's Decision to Let U.S. Use Bases in Turkey
   Brings Criticism at Home, Concern from Greece
   ----
   A Wall Street Journal News Roundup
</HL>
<DATE>
01/22/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10
</SO>
<CO>
   EUROP MDEST
</CO>
<LP>
   Turkish President Turgut Ozal's goal to make his country a
U.S.-backed regional power lies behind his controversial
decision to allow U.S. warplanes to make increasing use of
Turkey as a second front in their attack against Iraq,
diplomats and Turkish officials say.
   But the U.S. air attacks on Iraq, launched from a North
Atlantic Treaty Organization air base in Turkey, have brought
criticism of President Ozal from newspapers, bureaucrats and
opposition politicians, many of whom assert that his pro-U.S.
stand may provoke a counterattack from Saddam Hussein. And in
neighboring Greece, a fellow NATO member but traditional
antagonist of Turkey, anxiety has been aroused by Turkey's
attempt to gain special favor with the U.S.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   As of yesterday, U.S. aircraft had made about 300 sorties
into Iraq since Friday from the sprawling Incirlik base near
the southern Turkish city of Adana, the Associated Press
reported. (The bulk of allied air strikes against Iraq are
still coming from bases in Saudi Arabia and from aircraft
carriers.) The newspaper Cumhuriyet said Monday that Turkey
is considering letting the U.S. planes also use bases in
Diyarbakir and Malatya, closer to Iraq than Incirlik, for
raids.
   The number of U.S. warplanes based in Turkey has now
doubled to 96. In addition, two batteries of U.S. Patriot
missiles have been positioned to defend Incirlik from Iraqi
missile attacks.
   Turkish leaders from Mr. Ozal on down continue to insist
that Turkey itself still has no intention of going to war
against Iraq unless it is first attacked, and that it has no
designs on Mosul and Kirkuk, oil-rich Ottoman provinces that
most Turks believe were unfairly ceded to British-mandated
Iraq in 1926.
   Even before the news of the use of Incirlik, Turkey showed
Washington it is a solid ally by closing an Iraqi oil
pipeline that traverses Turkey. And last week's vote by
Turkey's Parliament permitting U.S. fighter aircraft to
launch such strikes from inside Turkey added a new offensive
punch against Saddam Hussein.
   However there are fears of a backlash in Turkey, NATO's
only Muslim member, whose participation in the conflict is
deeply divisive for the Parliament and opposed by Islamic
fundamentalists. On Monday night in Istanbul, gunmen
overpowered guards at a NATO maintenance facility, and then
set bombs that caused extensive damage but no injuries. A
communist anti-government group claimed responsibility.
   To curtail domestic opposition, Turkey has censored
information about U.S. military activities against Iraq.
Journalists aren't allowed to travel east from the border
city of Cizra. And state-run Turkish television, which
transmits Cable News Network reports on the war, cuts them
off when news from Turkey is shown, the AP reported. Turkish
Television and the semiofficial Anatolia news agency are also
forbidden to report on activities at Incirlik, though
newspapers have reported the censored CNN reports.
   "Turkey is an island of stability in a rough sea," Mr.
Ozal told Turkish television recently. "Turkey is a power
that can bring stability to the region. We must play this
role. {Regional} countries want us to play this role."
   One regional country that doesn't is Greece. Greece is a
partner in the allied coalition against Iraq. But the Greeks
express concern that Turkey, by allowing use of its territory
for attacks on Iraq, will be able to cash in on the West's
gratitude for its role -- at Greek expense.
   "We're going to have a regional great power playing the
role of policeman around here," laments one Greek foreign
affairs analyst, echoing widespread press commentary.
   Greece and Turkey have been at odds for a long time and
most recently over what Greece sees as an act of aggression
that went unpunished -- the 1974 Turkish invasion of Cyprus.
Disputes over Aegean Sea sovereignty and ethnic minorities
have compounded the tensions.
   In a televised weekend address, Greek Prime Minister
Constantine Mitsotakis came close to admitting that fear of
Turkey determines Greece's policy on the Gulf war. "At a time
when Turkey is offering support and bases . . . it would be
irresponsible, silly and dangerous for Greece to be a mere
observer," he said.
   Greece's contribution to the allied military effort is in
the form of a frigate doing escort duty for U.S. aircraft
carriers in the Red Sea. Officials say privately that there
is talk about sending a more substantial Greek contribution
to the Gulf in the form of fighter squadrons.
   Greek suspicion surfaced just before hostilities began,
when President Bush said he would grant an additional $82
million in military aid to Turkey above the normal amount for
1991. Greek officials said the gesture violated the
president's pledge to Congress that his administration give
seven units of aid to Greece for every 10 given to Turkey.
Although Mr. Bush telephoned Mr. Mitsotakis to ask for his
"understanding," the Greeks remain wary.
   On the day the first bombs fell on Baghdad, the Greek
press accused the Turks of harboring expansionist desires. "A
Fresh Recital Of Expansionism and Greed," blared the
pro-government Eleftheros Typos, the country's
biggest-selling tabloid, in commenting on Turkish President
Ozal's call for postwar talks to determine the region's
future.
   Turkish diplomats in Athens reject the Greek scenarios.
"We have troubles enough on our eastern border without
worrying about the Aegean," said one.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
