ID: 207	RANK: 2	SCORE: 12.843080
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920131-0004
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920131-0004.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Campaign '92 -- Hear Her Roar:
   Hillary Clinton Drafts
   A New Role for Wives
   In Presidential Politics
   ---
   A Blunt-Spoken Lawyer, She
   Is Publicly Prosecuting
   Her Husband's Enemies
   ---
   So Long, Ms. Hillary Rodham
   ----
   By David Shribman
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/31/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<IN>
BIOGRAPHY (BIO)
</IN>
<NS>
POLITICS (PLT)
</NS>
<RE>
ARKANSAS (AR)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Two weeks ago, Hillary Clinton and her 11-year-old
daughter, Chelsea, wheeled their grocery cart into the
checkout line at a Little Rock, Ark., supermarket. As the
conveyor belt whirred, Mrs. Clinton pointed to a display of
sensationalistic tabloids and warned her daughter that before
long she could be seeing her family on the cover of one of
them.
   "We have tried to prepare her for the mean things people
say," Mrs. Clinton said breezily, almost inconsequentially,
in a conversation over lunch one recent afternoon. Her
husband's presidential campaign was going surprisingly well,
she was saying, and no matter how weary she felt, the crowds
always seemed to buck her up.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The next day, a sometime cabaret singer named Gennifer
Flowers appeared on the cover of the Star, claiming that she
and Arkansas Gov. Bill Clinton had carried on a 12-year
affair.
   Since then, Gov. Clinton's presidential campaign has
become mired in political quicksand. And it is his wife,
Hillary, who has taken up the crusade -- defending their
marriage last Sunday on "60 Minutes," making a grueling set
of campaign appearances, appearing in a taped segment last
night on ABC's "Prime Time Live" and even preparing a
30-second commercial for New Hampshire television.
   Hillary Clinton -- who has become a household name as her
own household is relentlessly scrutinized -- is stepping
forward as the major weapon in her husband's presidential
campaign. To a large degree, the fate of Mr. Clinton's
political ambition rests in the hands of his blunt,
strong-willed and, critics say, strident wife. "I don't feel
like I'm standing up for my husband," Mrs. Clinton, 44 years
old, said in a telephone conversation this week. "I'm
fighting for the right of people to have a decent, informed
debate and not to have it subordinated to sleaze."
   Mrs. Clinton represents a new breed of political running
mate, strong and intellectual women like Marilyn Quayle and
Ruth Harkin. A high-powered, Yale University-educated
litigator who sits on half-dozen corporate boards and a score
of public-interest boards, Mrs. Clinton had her own name and
her own career before she became part of her husband's
presidential campaign. In a series of interviews in Arkansas,
Florida, Washington and New Hampshire over nearly five
months, Mrs. Clinton shared moments of exhilaration and
despair as her family's story unfolded.
   As long ago as last September, before Mr. Clinton formally
entered the race, Hillary Clinton was expressing concern
about the toll politics might take on her family. "I worry
about the intrusions in our own lives," she said moments
before rushing off to catch a plane home for Chelsea's school
open house. "Our families didn't sign up for this. And an
11-year-old can't really understand all this."
   Since then, she has seen firsthand the price of political
life. A partner in the Rose Law Firm, one of the South's most
prestigious firms, and a nationally known advocate on
children's and education issues, Hillary Clinton has
struggled, sometimes uncomfortably, with the "wife of" role.
She has fought for her own voice in the campaign, and for her
own schedule and staff.
   She has worked to shield her only child from the
unforgiving klieg lights of publicity. She upbraided a member
of Gov. Clinton's staff when she was caught unprepared for a
reporter's question about a Penthouse magazine memoir of a
rock-and-roll groupie that included suggestive, and
unsubstantiated, recollections of her husband. And in
conversations with friends, she has vowed not to emerge from
her family's gravest political and personal crisis as a
latter-day Lee Hart, caricatured as the long-suffering wife
in the adultery scandal that ended Gary Hart's presidential
hopes in 1987.
   "The meaner it gets," says Richard Mintz, the deputy
campaign manager, "the more determined she is to fight."
   One target is the Republicans, whom she suggested in the
"Prime Time Live" interview have been deeply involved in
spreading Ms. Flowers' story. "We know that the Republicans
offered her money to change her story and implicate my
husband, after having denied it repeatedly," she charged.
   Another target is Ms. Flowers herself, whom Mrs. Clinton
described as "some failed cabaret singer who doesn't even
have much of a resume to fall back on, and what's there she
lied about."
   Mrs. Clinton's critics, both inside the campaign and in
Arkansas political circles, say that she is calculating and
coldblooded, a woman driven by ambition. They say her
performance in defending her husband has been glib and
choreographed, and that it's sometimes hard to discern where
her political persona ends and her personality begins.
   By accident of history and temperament, there are few role
models for Hillary Clinton as a political spouse. Bess
Truman, Mamie Eisenhower and Pat Nixon milled around the
background of politics, seldom venturing into view except on
formal occasions. Rosalyn Carter, Nancy Reagan and Kitty
Dukakis were more independent, but still subordinate to their
husbands. Mrs. Clinton, by contrast, came to politics with
her own bona fides -- she first campaigned in New Hampshire
for Sen. Eugene McCarthy in 1968, seven years before she
married Bill Clinton. Gov. Clinton frequently remarks that if
the voters choose him, they get Hillary, too.
   Hillary Clinton grew up in the Chicago suburbs, the
daughter of a fabric store owner and a homemaker. She
graduated with honors from Wellesley College in 1969, where
she spoke at her graduation.
   Now Mrs. Clinton, a former law professor and member of the
Nixon impeachment inquiry staff, is as angry and as worried
as she has ever been. "I see this as a slippery slope," says
Mrs. Clinton, who is packaging her counteroffensive as an
assault on tabloid terrorism. "This is a second stage, beyond
negative advertising. We are moving into a whole new thing.
It will not just be attacks against politicians. It could be
everyone: high-stakes corporate executives, people in
commercial disputes, even people who just have a grudge
against someone else."
   From the start, Mr. Clinton's campaign strategists
regarded Hillary Clinton as something of a secret political
weapon -- a lawyer so accomplished and an advocate so
polished that she sometimes left audiences wishing that she,
not her husband, were the candidate. "She has her own
leadership role in the country," says Frank Greer, the
campaign's media consultant. "We have a lot of people who
support Bill Clinton because of Hillary Clinton."
   She demands, and plays, a role both in policy and
politics. As a policy maker, she headed Arkansas's
educational reform effort. As a political strategist during
her husband's most recent gubernatorial campaign, she picked
up on Arkansans' concern about the slow rate of progress in
their state. That prompted the campaign to adjust its message
from a point-by-point defense of Mr. Clinton's four terms to
the more effective theme of "don't turn back the clock."
   But now Hillary Clinton is also trying to behave a little
more like the traditional wife. Although she had long clung
to her maiden name, she changed it when it became apparent
that some people voted against her husband's re-election
because they resented her calling herself Hillary Rodham. In
recent months, she has beamed at her husband from the stage
as he spoke -- but only recently has she seemed remotely
comfortable doing so. At one point, in Manchester, N.H., she
referred to her husband as "such a forceful person" and then
interrupted herself, slightly embarrassed. "I sound like the
candidate's wife," she said. Last night, she stood in for her
husband at a black-tie Democratic event in Washington while
he attended the Father-Daughter Dance at the Little Rock Y.
   "I have worked very hard to redefine the role I've
inherited," she said in September. "There are two careers in
the family."
   She hasn't abandoned her own. Mrs. Clinton, chairman of
the board of directors of the Children's Defense Fund, spends
a lot of time on the telephone with clients and with her law
firm associates. She is preparing for two court trials, one
in March and another in April. She is reviewing trial
documents and court papers on planes, in campaign vans and in
hotel rooms.
   But as much as Mrs. Clinton is now also acting as
prosecutor against her husband's enemies, she is still acting
as protector of her child.
   "We've talked a lot about it," she says. "We've answered
all her questions."
   Chelsea Clinton isn't unfamiliar with the rigors of
politics, but she still worries about whether she will be
able to get her father on the telephone to help with her
algebra homework. And, more like her mother than her father,
Chelsea is blunt: Last month, she told Hillary Clinton that
she didn't mind her mom being away for the campaign, but
could Mrs. Clinton please sleep a little less when at home.
   Mrs. Clinton, meanwhile, is on the front lines. "I feel
like I'm fighting -- this sounds corny -- for a process," she
says. "My husband is a candidate, and I love and support him,
but I would be just as outraged if this were happening to
someone else." It is happening to her and to her family,
though, and even she admits it is hard.
   "There's a steady drumbeat out there and a constant effort
to discredit Bill," she says. "After a certain time, it just
wears {you} down. How long can you fight against sleaze
merchants?"
   Right now, however, she has her case ready. In a "Prime
Time" segment she taped in Denver this week, she told Sam
Donaldson of ABC that her husband's accuser was the "daughter
of Willie Horton," an allusion to the Massachusetts murderer
used in George Bush's 1988 campaign and now a symbol of
negative political ads. She expects more dirt to fly; she is
arguing that the tabloids are spreading "a lot of money"
around in an effort to drum up new, sensationalistic stories,
some even about herself.
   "I want to get in a position where we don't have to deal
with this," says Mrs. Clinton, who, with her husband, has
publicly acknowledged their marriage has been rocky at times.
"Bill has tried to be honest, and what he gets for it is
opening himself up to this sort of thing. I get enraged and I
get scared."
   Back in November, in Manchester, N.H., Mrs. Clinton said
she was astonished at the rigors of a presidential effort.
"We've been in so many campaigns that we thought we knew what
it would be like," she said then. "But the others were
nothing like this -- and the demands are going to increase
geometrically."
   They have. A month later, Mrs. Clinton accompanied her
husband to the Florida Democratic State Convention, and she
worked the crowd as the governor huddled with strategists.
She stood in the hall of the Buena Vista Palace Hotel, just
outside the gates of Walt Disney World, and told a clutch of
delegates from Panama City that "we have to have new ideas."
She told others that she and Bill Clinton were fighting "all
of the people {who} voted for the stupid tax cuts and the
stupid Reagan {economic} plan." She told another group that
Sen. Tom Harkin of Iowa, one of Mr. Clinton's rivals for the
nomination, was "for protectionism," adding, "I think that
would be terrible for our country."
   A moment later James Kelly, a convention delegate,
introduced himself to her as a longtime Clinton admirer,
joking that he was "one of the people who pushed your husband
into the race."
   Mrs. Clinton looked at Mr. Kelly, let a moment pass and
then another, and finally said, somewhat wistfully, "I guess
I'm grateful to you."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
