ID: 207	RANK: 21	SCORE: 9.059437
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920129-0070
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920129-0070.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Hillary Clinton Plans Media Campaign
   To Bolster Husband's Presidential Bid
   ----
   By James M. Perry and Jill Abramson
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/29/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C10
</SO>
<IN>
ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)
</IN>
<NS>
POLITICS (PLT)
</NS>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas hopes to
bolster his embattled Democratic presidential campaign with a
major weapon: his wife, Hillary.
   The Clinton campaign is preparing a 30-second TV
commercial featuring Mrs. Clinton, which probably will be
aired in New Hampshire within the next few days. In addition,
Mrs. Clinton is also scheduled to appear Thursday night with
Sam Donaldson on ABC's "Prime Time Live."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   In the commercial, filmed at a rally in New Hampshire,
Mrs. Clinton is expected to defend her marriage and call upon
voters to reject cabaret singer Gennifer Flowers's story of a
12-year-long affair with Mr. Clinton. The story was paid for
by, and published in a supermarket tabloid. Mr. Clinton
remains the front-runner for the Democratic presidential
nomination.
   The commercial is expected to make the argument that too
much attention has already been paid to the story, and that
it's time "to take the election back from the sleazy
tabloids."
   The Clinton campaign had hoped to put the unseemly story
to rest Sunday night, when the governor and Mrs. Clinton
appeared on CBS TV's "60 Minutes" program following the Super
Bowl. Mr. Clinton denied then that he had had an affair with
Ms. Flowers, though he admitted "wrongdoing" during times
when his marriage was in trouble.
   The campaign thought, in the words of one Clinton
strategist, that the "60 Minutes" appearance had "beaten the
story flat." Polls by both the Boston Globe and the campaign
showed voters reacting sympathetically to the Clintons'
appearance.
   But then, on Monday, Ms. Flowers held a rambunctious news
conference in New York, set up by the tabloid. The session
was carried live by Cable News Network and led the nightly
news shows of all three commercial network news shows. Ms.
Flowers has played edited excerpts from purported taped
conversations she says she had with Gov. Clinton.
   Stanley Greenberg, the Clinton pollster, says his polling
doesn't indicate any dropoff in Clinton support in New
Hampshire, scene of the crucial first-in-the-nation primary
on Feb. 18, following Ms. Flowers's public appearances. But
the Boston Globe poll indicates that people who saw Ms.
Flowers on Monday began once again to have doubts about Gov.
Clinton's truthfulness.
   "Clinton had taken care of this Sunday night on `60
Minutes,'" says Globe pollster Jerry Chervinsky, but slippage
set in Monday night. He says, "The key is that the more
people were exposed to Gennifer Flowers and the tapes on
Monday, the more apt they were to turn against Clinton."
   The Clinton strategy had been to stop talking about the
allegations and move on to more serious questions. But the
extraordinary attention given to Ms. Flowers's story, for
which she was paid more than $100,000, changed all that. The
strategists hope the articulate Mrs. Clinton, a successful
lawyer, will be able to shore up support for Mr. Clinton.
   The Clinton strategists were frustrated by their inability
to move to higher ground. Otherwise, they insist, the
campaign remains on course. Mr. Clinton's fund-raising hasn't
slipped at all. On Monday, for example, the campaign raised
$134,000 in Mississippi and Louisiana. Yesterday, the
campaign raised close to $200,000 in Texas. And today, the
campaign expects to pick up $150,000 in New Jersey.
   In New Hampshire, Mr. Clinton is still running ahead of
the field, with former Sen. Paul Tsongas of Massachusetts
still his main competitor.
   In his personal appearances this week in the south, Mr.
Clinton has won thunderous ovations denouncing "trash for
cash" journalism. His backers generally voiced support: "If
his wife can forgive him, I certainly can," says Lea Morgan,
manager of the Wills Point, Texas, Chamber of Commerce.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
