ID: 207	RANK: 33	SCORE: 8.695315
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920224-0050
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920224-0050.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Politics &amp; Policy -- Campaign '92:
   South Holds Rough Terrain for Buchanan;
   Clinton Heads Home, Head Bowed a Bit
   ---
   Arkansas Governor Arrives
   Loaded With Baggage
   From New Hampshire
   ----
   By David Rogers
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/24/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16
</SO>
<NS>
POLITICS (PLT)
</NS>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   ATLANTA -- Against the backdrop of Georgia's red hills,
Bill Clinton has come looking for solace and soul in his
native South.
   Battered but standing after New Hampshire's primary, the
Arkansas governor has become a traveling minister preaching
redemption for his congregation, and himself. After weeks on
the defensive regarding his private life and draft status
during the Vietnam War, his biracial gospel invokes God and a
populist kinship in an effort both to heal these wounds and
to paint his chief rival, Paul Tsongas, as a cold, corporate
intruder from the North.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "We have to admit that we are one nation under God. That
we are all in this together," he tells Georgia's
predominately white Legislature. Minutes later, he tells
black college students about two boys being attacked in a
northern city "because God had made them black," proclaiming:
"We are all going downhill, and if we are going to turn . . .
and go uphill, we are going to have to go there together."
   The plea for unity dovetails with a concerted effort to
drive a wedge between Mr. Tsongas and working-class families
across the region. Even as he won in New Hampshire, the
former Massachusetts senator ran behind his Southern rival
among these core Democratic voters, and Mr. Clinton seeks to
widen this gap both in the Georgia primary March 3 and the
rich Super Tuesday contests a week later.
   The soft underbelly of his campaign is the conflict
between his appeal for a sense of "common purpose" and his
own successful avoidance of the draft in the late 1960s,
while others were sent to the war in Asia. "I'm not
completely comfortable with all of it," acknowledges
Democratic Sen. Sam Nunn of Georgia, a Clinton supporter. And
though he is scarcely a presence here yet, a second rival,
Vietnam war hero Sen. Bob Kerrey, could still come to haunt
Mr. Clinton's candidacy.
   "There is an old Southern expression that people would
rather see a sermon than hear one," says Max Cleland, a
Vietnam veteran and Georgia's secretary of state. "In Bob
Kerrey, I see a sermon."
   For now, though, the main battle is with Mr. Tsongas, the
former Massachusetts senator, and the weapons include
economic philosophies as well as such hot-button issues as
crime and the death penalty.
   The toughest words are left to proxies like Gov. Zell
Miller, who last week likened Mr. Tsongas's economic policies
to those of the early railroad baron and financier J.P.
Morgan. But in rhetorical flourishes and television ads, Mr.
Clinton himself has become more aggressive in casting himself
as a Democrat for "people" and for an "American dream" beyond
the economy alone.
   "People don't need Santa Claus," he responds to his rival.
"But they do need a president who understands the pain." At a
state Democratic dinner here Friday, Mr. Tsongas disarmed his
critics with wit but left an opening by describing himself a
lawyer and businessman from "the corporate world." Minutes
later, Mr. Clinton spoke to the same audience of "those of us
who live in the world where people's real needs are felt by
us."
   As he stumps the region, Mr. Clinton makes the most of
being from outside Washington. The campaign took a swipe at
Mr. Tsongas last week for supporting a tax deduction for
lawmakers' living expenses while in the Senate a decade ago.
And in vowing to find $5 billion to fully fund the Head Start
education program, the governor unfailingly chastises
Washington for spending hundreds of billions to bail out
savings and loans. What isn't mentioned is that depositors in
his own Arkansas are among the leading beneficiaries of the
S&amp;L bailout, or that Mr. Clinton's lifelong political
ambition and ties to the Southern establishment make him a
consummate insider in his own right.
   Beyond this maneuvering is a genuine debate of economic
priorities. Both campaigns are shy of details, but Mr.
Tsongas proposes a richer cut in capital gains taxes and more
generous, albeit temporary, tax credits for investment. Mr.
Clinton's approach nods in the same direction, but what sets
him apart more is his greater emphasis on education and
training labor rather than freeing up capital.
   His proposed capital-gains tax cut, for example, is far
smaller than the cost of his apprenticeship program, as much
as $1 billion a year, to train high-school graduates. And
though most attention has been paid to the "middle class" tax
cuts that Mr. Clinton supports and Mr. Tsongas opposes, Mr.
Clinton, unlike his rival, also proposes to expand the
earned-income tax credit for the working poor.
   The earned-income credit and apprenticeship proposals are
part and parcel of the Clinton campaign's effort to meld his
economic approach with an appeal to the same black voters who
helped Jesse Jackson win the Democratic primary here four
years ago. "Only America throws people in the trash heap,"
Mr. Clinton tells a black audience, and the same theme is
echoed in the endorsement he receives from John Lewis, a hero
of the civil rights movement. "He will move us forward
again," says Mr. Lewis, now a Democratic congressman from
Atlanta. "With this man, no one, absolutely no one, will be
left behind."
   In his endorsement, Mr. Lewis praised the governor as a
"witness" to the great social upheaval of the civil rights
movement. That is apt. Although he opposed segregation, Mr.
Clinton wasn't personally involved in the struggle, and his
early political benefactor, former Sen. William Fulbright,
was himself slow to oppose segregation in the South. But Mr.
Clinton has a strong record in office of bringing blacks into
government, and black voters sense empathy in him. "When
you're exposed a little bit more, it makes you more aware,"
says Cecil Houston, 47, a college administrator who grew up
in the South.
   At the same time, such things as the heavy-handed rhetoric
of Gov. Miller, himself a product of Georgia's northern hill
region, betray a certain skittishness about how rural whites
will judge Mr. Clinton, not just on the draft issue, but also
on the allegations of marital infidelity. "There's country
Georgia and urban Georgia, and he may not be able to carry
the country Georgia. The values are different," says James
Darby, 45 years old, a civilian employee of the Army.
   Mr. Darby himself is unfazed by the controversies
surrounding Mr. Clinton. But there is evidence of what he is
talking about. At a Savannah stop, a 72-year-old American
Legion member who hails from a town near Fort Stewart greets
Mr. Clinton with a sign reading, "Go Home Cowboy, This is
Dixie." And an airport clerk in neighboring North Carolina
snaps at the mere mention of Mr. Clinton's name: "He'll need
an angel in the South. He's not an honest man."
   Matched against these doubts about his character is a
genuine respect for his personality and political skills. "I
have mixed emotions," says William Rimes, a 52-year-old
retired Air Force officer from Florida. "I just wish Tsongas
had the same presence as Clinton, or Clinton had Tsongas's
beliefs."
   (See related story: "Republican Challenger Faces Daunting
Task in Region Of Loyal Bush Support" -- WSJ Feb. 24, 1992)
</TEXT>
</DOC>
