ID: 207	RANK: 92	SCORE: 7.593284
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920220-0166
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920220-0166.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   REVIEW &amp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):
   The Tsongas Difference
</HL>
<DATE>
02/20/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14
</SO>
<CO>
   LABOR TAXES
</CO>
<IN>
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
</IN>
<NS>
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
EDUCATION ISSUES (EDU)
LABOR, UNIONS, STRIKES, WAGES, RECRUITMENT (LAB)
POLITICS (PLT)
TAXES (TAX)
</NS>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   As Democrats we must realize Americans do not trust us
with the economy. . . . We must change our rhetoric. No more
corporate-bashing. No more protectionism. No more
Japan-bashing. No more class warfare.
   -- Paul Tsongas after his New Hampshire primary victory.
                                                                                                       

</LP>
<TEXT>
   Perhaps Mr. Tsongas wasn't exaggerating when he said the
old Democratic Party died in New Hampshire this week. If you
add his votes to those of Bill Clinton and Jerry Brown, some
70% of Democratic-primary voters went for candidates
challenging the party's Washington establishment. Bob Kerrey,
who made his campaign a crusade for government health care,
and Tom Harkin, the New Deal Democrat, together won 21%.
Write-ins for liberalism's last best hope, Mario Cuomo,
totaled only 3%. It is difficult to overstate how much all
this disrupts the entrenched network of Democratic interests.
   The congressional Democratic leadership is especially
upset that Messrs. Tsongas and Clinton are contending for the
nomination. They don't like Mr. Clinton's anti-Washington
rhetoric, but can take some comfort in the formidable Hillary
Clinton's more progressive liberalism. They could do business
with a Clinton presidency. Their main fear is that he's
unelectable in November.
   They say the same about Paul Tsongas's electability, but
what really scares them is his stated determination to cure
the party of its addiction to class-warfare politics and its
slavish devotion to narrow interest groups. Of course,
Washington's House of Lords isn't too popular with the voters
these days, so the party barons have to guard against fueling
Mr. Tsongas's outsider appeal.
   The unions are apoplectic over his support for free trade
and his opposition to a ban on hiring permanent replacements
for striking workers. For the party's tax demagogues in
Congress, his emphasis on economic growth over "fairness"
just doesn't compute. "Tax equity is not an ornament for
Democrats," says Rep. David Obey of Wisconsin. "It's at the
core of what we offer." Even Jerry Brown claims Mr. Tsongas
"would be more comfortable as a Republican." So goes the
murmuring amid the lengthening shadows of the Democratic
sanctum.
   Mr. Tsongas is a Democrat. He opposed the Persian Gulf War
and supports deep defense cuts. He has long supported trendy
environmentalism, abortion and gay rights. He wants much
higher taxes on gasoline. His views on regulation are
unclear.
   Mr. Tsongas is liberal, but unlike all the others, he is
also his own man. During and after his brush with death from
cancer, he spent seven years in private life, rarely visiting
Washington. He is largely disconnected from the
special-interest groups and boutique intellectuals who work
the symposium circuit. One Democratic Congressman told us,
"What worries the establishment most is that they can't find
the guy's strings."
   Mr. Tsongas now takes his heretical campaign nationwide.
Now that he's the front-runner he may be tempted to follow
Bill Clinton's example and waffle. If you want to track Mr.
Tsongas's course, pay attention to his views on education;
that's the real threat to the party establishment.
   Mr. Tsongas supports pilot programs to allow the use of
vouchers in private schools. He also wants to try out such
ideas as uniforms for public-school students, magnet schools
for black males and limits on the use of bilingual education.
   Now, the Democratic establishment can probably learn to
live with most of Mr. Tsongas's other heresies. Nuclear power
isn't a cutting-edge issue. Term limits are a threat, but a
distant one. A quarter of House Democrats supported a cut in
the capital-gains tax in 1989. But school choice is another
matter.
   Democratic activists -- especially the third of convention
delegates who are likely to be either teachers or spouses of
teachers -- have a visceral hatred of school choice. If
choice in education spreads, it could begin a wholesale
debureaucratization of American government. For the
leadership, that's the gravy train.
   The quality of this country's politics would improve
immeasurably if the Democratic Party moved in the direction
of Paul Tsongas. But given the stakes, don't expect anyone to
move quietly, or without a fight.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
