ID: 207	RANK: 95	SCORE: 7.545416
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920127-0149
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920127-0149.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Politics &amp; Policy -- Campaign '92:
   Clinton, Mounting a Counteroffensive,
   Fights to Save Damaged Candidacy
   ----
   By James M. Perry and David Shribman
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/27/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
PUBLISHING, INFORMATION SERVICES COMPANIES (PUB)
</IN>
<NS>
POLITICS (PLT)
</NS>
<RE>
NEW HAMPSHIRE (NH)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   MANCHESTER, N.H. -- Just four days ago, Gov. Bill Clinton
of Arkansas seemed to be putting together a winning campaign
for the Democratic presidential nomination. Now he's fighting
for his political life.
   Mr. Clinton's plans came unstuck when a supermarket
tabloid quoted former cabaret singer and television reporter
Gennifer Flowers as saying she had engaged in a 12-year
romance with him. The tabloid, the Star, acknowledged it paid
Ms. Flowers for her story.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Mr. Clinton, his wife Hillary at his side, denounced the
story as "not true" and, in a high-stakes gamble, mounted a
counteroffensive by agreeing to tape an interview with CBS's
popular "60 Minutes" program to be broadcast after the Super
Bowl.
   In the interview with CBS, Gov. Clinton again denied he
had an affair with Miss Flowers. "That allegation is false,"
he told "60 Minutes" correspondent Steve Kroft.
   But the governor, conceding his marriage has gone through
troubled times, unmistakably suggested there had been
infidelity. "I think most Americans who are watching this
tonight, they'll know what we're saying, they'll get it, and
they'll feel that we have been more candid. And I think what
the press has to decide is: Are we going to engage in a game
of `gotcha?'"
   "You know," Mr. Clinton said, "I can remember a time when
a divorced person couldn't run for president and that time,
thank goodness, has passed. . . . Are we going to take the
reverse position now that if people have problems in their
marriage and there are things in their past which they don't
want to discuss which are painful to them, that they can't
run?"
   Mrs. Clinton, a lawyer, said she didn't want to discuss
details of their marriage problems. "I don't think being any
more specific about what's happened in the privacy of our
life together is relevant to anybody besides us."
   Mr. Clinton's nervous strategists hoped weekend
appearances by Mr. and Mrs. Clinton on television and here in
New Hampshire would mark the end of the unseemly controversy.
More than that, they hoped he could win sympathy for being
forced to defend himself against attacks in a newspaper that
specializes in checkbook journalism and bizarre stories.
   "This story is over," said George Stephanapoulos, Mr.
Clinton's deputy campaign manager. "But," he added, voicing
some uncertainty, "is the issue completely put away? That's
up to the press."
   The campaign came to a dead halt late Thursday in remote
Claremont, N.H., an old mill town on the state's western
border, when Mr. Clinton and reporters covering his campaign
first became aware of the Star's new charges. He denied the
story in a crowded, shouting interview in the lobby of a
paint-brush factory, and then closeted himself upstairs to
decide what to do about it.
   The answer: Fight back.
   "The fundamental question is: What would this country be
like if every person's private life were paraded in the
tabloids?" asked James Carville, Mr. Clinton's senior
strategist. "Is a bought story in a supermarket tabloid going
to drive the dialogue in a presidential campaign?"
   That question troubles political analysts and news
executives in the mainstream press too. Tabloid
sensationalism over the private lives of political figures is
more commonly a European phenomenon, where payments to
tipsters for salacious personal stories, true or not, are a
way of life.
   Thus, the Star's stories about Mr. Clinton, which have
appeared in the paper's last two weekly editions and which
will continue next week, mark a departure in American
politics.
   The Star, along with its sister publication, the National
Enquirer, is owned by G.P. Group Inc., Lantana, Fla. G.P.
Group, in turn, is owned by Macfadden Holdings Inc. and
Boston Ventures L.P. The Star specializes in stories about TV
celebrities and rich and famous people; the Enquirer focuses
on celebrities, human interest and health. The Star
reportedly paid Miss Flowers anywhere from $50,000 to
$200,000 to appear in its pages. (One national TV network was
told by a representative of Miss Flowers that she might
appear on the air -- for $100,000.)
   The Star said Miss Flowers made tape recordings of some of
the conversations she had with Gov. Clinton, in which,
according to the Star, he told her to deny what the paper
called "their affair" if reporters asked about it. Miss
Flowers has scheduled a news conference in New York this
afternoon.
   Doubts about Miss Flowers's credibility were raised by
Newsweek magazine, among others. It will report in its Feb. 3
issue several major discrepancies in Miss Flowers's story,
including her claim that she met Gov. Clinton at the
Excelsior Hotel in Little Rock, Ark., in 1979 or 1980. The
hotel didn't open until 1982.
   But even the most sober New Hampshire political activists
acknowledge that Mr. Clinton faces a critical challenge. "If
it turns out that the man lied," says Democratic state Rep.
Debora Pignatelli, who remains undecided, "that would be it
for me and Clinton."
   This challenge, moreover, comes at a crucial time, three
weeks before the New Hampshire primary. "It's all so fragile
here," says former Democratic state chairman George Bruno,
who supports Mr. Clinton. "You've got to slug it out every
day. Just one story in a supermarket tabloid turns things
around. It's all bogus, but you've got to contend with it."
   It was just this month that Mr. Clinton soared to the
front of the Democratic pack, both nationally and in New
Hampshire.
   Because the Democratic candidates are just beginning to
emerge as distinct personalities, and because President
Bush's campaign seems to be in such disarray, there remains
the possibility that better-known Democrats could plunge into
the race -- New York Gov. Mario Cuomo, for example, or Sen.
Lloyd Bentsen of Texas or Rep. Richard Gephardt of Missouri.
There is still time to do so: The filing deadlines have
passed for primaries and caucuses that constitute only about
25% of the delegates that will be selected for the New York
convention in July. Rules governing the selection of
delegates at caucuses, moreover, are sufficiently vague that
even more delegates are available than the official figures
suggest.
   But the candidates already in the race might benefit from
Mr. Clinton's troubles -- Sen. Bob Kerrey of Nebraska,
perhaps. In New Hampshire, if not elsewhere, former Sen. Paul
Tsongas of Massachusetts, who has deployed an impressive
organization in his neighboring state, may pick up votes if
Mr. Clinton begins to fade. Indeed, a New Hampshire poll by
American Research Group released Saturday showed Mr. Clinton
dropping 12 percentage points and Mr. Tsongas picking up 13
percentage points, leaving the race between the two men
almost deadlocked.
   Mr. Clinton began his efforts to reclaim the momentum
Saturday night at a rally before a flag-waving crowd of 500
supporters at the Manchester YMCA. Poised, smiling and
seemingly relaxed, Bill and Hillary Clinton put on a
demonstration of confidence and mutual affection.
   Gov. Clinton told the Manchester crowd how heartened he
was by the turnout. He told the crowd: "Nobody gets to decide
what this election's all about but you."
   The irony for Mr. Clinton is that he has tried to put
together a serious campaign based on serious issues. Here in
New Hampshire, his campaign ads urge people to go to their
libraries to read his detailed position papers. He has
collected the funds necessary to expand his campaign
operation and to deploy forces in states beyond New
Hampshire. His campaign had been well-organized in such key
states as Florida, Illinois, Michigan, Maryland and New York.
   ---
   Dennis Farney in Bedford, N.H., contributed to this
article.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
