ID: 287	RANK: 10	SCORE: 5.689118
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910207-0130
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910207-0130.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Canadian Firms, Fleeing the High Costs
   At Home, Relocate South of the Border
   ----
   By John Urquhart
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/07/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A2
</SO>
<CO>
   CANDA X.MTR
</CO>
<IN>
CANADIAN ECONOMIC AND MONETARY NEWS AND ANALYSIS (CEA)
AUTO PARTS AND EQUIPMENT INCLUDING TIRES (AUP)
</IN>
<LP>
   OTTAWA -- Many Canadian manufacturers, squeezed by high
Canadian costs, are moving or planning to move operations to
the U.S.
   Peraflex Hose Inc. shifted much of its specialty-hose
manufacturing to Buffalo, N.Y., from Toronto about six months
ago and finds everything is cheaper there, except electric
power. Peraflex President Newell Kraik says industrial sites
are approximately $40,000 an acre, compared with $430,000 for
an equivalent Toronto property. He says shipping a 150-pound
parcel to Detroit costs $18 from Buffalo and roughly $80 from
Toronto, even though Toronto is 17 miles closer. "My future
is in the U.S. now," he says.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Motor Wheel Corp., Lansing, Mich., says it intends to
close its steel-wheel plant in Chatham, Ontario, and move
production to its two U.S. plants while it looks for a new
site. It calculates wage and benefit costs at a new U.S.
plant at about 13.25 Canadian dollars (US$11.38) an hour vs.
C$26 an hour at the 25-year-old Chatham factory.
   Slack Transport Co., an Ontario trucking company, has
moved two Canadian plants to the U.S. in the past three
months, and some of its own operations last spring. "It's
scary," says owner Bob Slack. "All of a sudden we will wake
up and the government will say, `Holy mackerel] What happened
to our businesses?'"
   More than 180,000 Canadian manufacturing jobs disappeared
in the past year. "Many of these jobs are ending up south of
the border and will not return," said Cedric Ritchie,
chairman of Bank of Nova Scotia, in a recent speech.
   Royal Bank of Canada economist Alan Yarish says, "It isn't
surprising that you are seeing manufacturers move to the
U.S.," because Canadian competitiveness is declining.
   Canada has trailed the U.S. in productivity growth over
the past decade. Higher Canadian inflation and interest rates
and a strong Canadian dollar have helped boost unit labor
costs in Canada by 33% since 1982, when measured in U.S.
dollars. As a result, almost everything is more expensive to
produce in Canada.
   "It is a very sad scenario because I'm a flag-waving
Canadian," says Donald Green, chairman of Tridon Ltd., an
Ontario auto-parts maker about to move its production to
Tennessee. The move will cost $9 million and 550 Canadian
jobs, but is necessary for the company's survival, says Paul
Davidson, president. He says a comparison of Tridon's Ontario
plants and existing Tennessee plants showed that everything,
from taxes to electric power, was cheaper in the southern
state.
   A recent survey of Ontario's auto-parts firms found most
of them want to build their next plant in the southern U.S.
   U.S. communities are competing aggressively for Canadian
manufacturers. Chillicothe, Ohio, got 48 responses to recent
industrial-promotion ads in a Toronto newspaper, far more
than from similar newspaper ads in Chicago, Cincinnati,
Cleveland and Columbus, Ohio. Chillicothe Mayor Joseph Sulzer
says he will visit Toronto this month to pursue the leads.
   Small Canadian companies tend to favor Northern states for
U.S. operations because their executives can commute from
Canada. Buffalo, only 98 road miles from Toronto, is a
favorite.
   "Buffalo was in the right place at the right time," says
James McConnell, director of the Canada-U.S. Trade Center at
the State University of New York at Buffalo. Canadian
companies employ an estimated 10,000 workers in western New
York state, mostly around Buffalo. About 20 more Canadian
companies set up operations in or around the city last year.
   Stetron International Inc., a maker of electronic parts,
is considering a shift of its production to Buffalo from
Toronto. The company's president, Edward Steger, says
production costs there are about 30% lower than in Toronto.
"That's rather amazing, considering the two cities are only a
two-hour drive apart," he says.
   Moving to the U.S. can be even better than commuting for a
Canadian executive. A $100,000-a-year executive can boost his
after-tax income by as much as $20,000, just by moving to New
York City from heavily taxed Toronto, according to a Price
Waterhouse study. Other U.S. cities are even more attractive.
Buffalo house prices averaged $90,500 last year, compared
with $209,225 in Toronto.
   Some Canadians attribute the plant moves to the
two-year-old U.S.-Canada free-trade agreement. The pact, by
gradually easing trade barriers, allows for more flexibility
in plant locations. But many companies that have shifted
operations to the U.S. say they would have done so anyway
because of U.S. cost advantages.
   Some analysts predict that the current recession will
bring Canadian costs back into line. "When I hear stories of
people moving out of Toronto to Buffalo, I say `don't
panic,'" says Thomas d'Aquino, president of the Business
Council on National Issues, which represents 150 Canadian
chief executives. He predicts Canada will recover its
competitiveness in the recession and emerge "in good shape in
the 1992 and 1993 period." A recent study by Canada's
respected C.D. Howe Institute concluded that the country's
inflation rate may be as low as 2% in 1992.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
