ID: 287	RANK: 21	SCORE: 5.023758
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP901006-0119 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NY-10-06-90 2007EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r i AM-GulfRdp 1stLd-Writethru a0565 10-06 0704</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Gulf Rdp, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0565,0832</SECOND>
<HEAD>U.N. Announces New Refugee Plan, Saudis Recall Ambassador to
Jordan</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: SUBS 1 graf for 5th graf, The officials . . . UPDATING with
British defense remarks. Picks up 6th graf, Also Saturday . . .;
INSERT 3 grafs after 15th graf, In other . . . UPDATING with Iran,
Iraq to talk, Jordan rations energy, Arafat visit. Picks up 16th
graf, British warships . . . editing to trim</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos DHA2,XJED1,NIC4,FRA1</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By DAVID BEARD</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   The United Nations, fearing the Persian Gulf crisis might last
through the winter, announced Saturday it will stockpile food for
another 120,000 refugees from Iraq and Kuwait and buy winter tents
for those stranded in camps.
   Saudi Arabia recalled its ambassador to Jordan, diplomatic
sources said, in another reflection of souring relations between
the Arab neighbors since Iraq's invasion of Kuwait on Aug. 2.
   Saudi Arabia, which requested a U.S.-led multinational force to
help defend it after the Iraqi invasion, expelled Jordanian
diplomats and cut oil and aid to Jordan last month because Amman
had not strongly protested Iraq's actions.
   U.S. officials, meanwhile, said the 2-month-old U.S. troop
buildup in Saudi Arabia is virtually complete. But the officials in
Washington and Saudi Arabia said the U.S. forces still lack the
firepower and supplies necessary to launch a successful ground
offensive against Iraqi troops in Kuwait.
   Britain's armed forces minister, Archibald Hamilton, said in
Dharhran, Saudi Arabia, he expected Britain's 7th Armored Brigade,
with about 7,000 troops and 120 Challenger tanks, to be in place in
the Saudi desert by early November, alongside U.S. Marine uits
already there. The unit won fame as the Desert Rats during World
War II North African campaigns.
   Also Saturday, Italy's remaining two diplomats abandoned its
diplomatic mission in Kuwait and half of Britain's delegation left
the emirate after Iraq cut supplies and power to the compounds.
   Iraqi President Saddam Hussein reportedly assured a top Soviet
diplomat that Soviets in Iraq may leave the country soon.
   The official Soviet news agency Tass reported the assurance,
which it said was made by Saddam to Kremlin envoy Yevgeny Primakov.
Primakov left Baghdad Saturday after talking with Saddam and
delivering a message from President Mikhail Gorbachev.
   About 5,000 Soviets have been prevented from leaving Iraq since
the invasion, although they are not among the Westerners being held
as ``guests'' at hotels and strategic sites in an Iraqi effort to
deter Western attack.
   Hundreds of thousands of foreigners have fled Iraq and Kuwait
since the invasion, and U.N. and Jordanian officials fear 80,000
more refugees may arrive in Jordan this week.
   In Amman, U.N. Undersecretary-General Mohammad Essaafi said the
U.N.'s disaster relief agency and Jordanian authorities are
preparing food stockpiles to feed 120,000 more people. Essaafi said
the agency also is buying 7,600 winter tents to replace the summer
tents now set up in refugee camps around the country.
   ``If there's a worsening of the situation in Iraq and Kuwait, we
might expect an increased flow of evacuees, particularly Egyptian
nationals, who might cross in very large numbers,'' he added.
   Some 422,400 refugees, mainly Egyptian and Asians, have been
flown out of Jordan in more than 1,798 flights by military and
civilian aircraft since Aug. 5, Jordanian civil aviation officials
said.
   Another 60,000 have been flown home from Turkey and hundreds of
thousands, mainly Egyptians, have been taken home by sea.
   In other developments:
   -Iraqi radio, monitored in Britain, said Iran and Iraq would
hold talks this week on reopening embassies in Tehran and Baghdad.
An Iraqi delegation will arrive in Iran Tuesday. The two nations
fought a war from 1980-88. Baghdad now seeks to persuade Iran to
help it skirt U.N. economic sanctions on Iraq.
   -Jordan announced an energy rationing program, effective next
Saturday, due to Saudi Arabia's recent cutoff of oil supplies.
   -Palestine Liberation Organization Chairman Yasser Arafat
arrived in Amman from Baghdad on Saturday, proposing a
U.N.-sponsored solution to the crisis and other regional conflicts.
   -British warships stopped and searched two Indian ships carrying
more than 2,000 Indians from Iraq, then cleared their travel to the
United Arab Emirates. The refugee ships were to arrive Sunday.
   -Japanese Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu met with Saudi King Fahd
and affirmed Japanese support for Saudi Arabia in the gulf crisis.
   -Kuwait's crown prince, Sheik Saad, said the emirate's exiled
rulers have invited 450 prominent Kuwaitis to Saudi Arabia discuss
a new type of government if and when Iraq pulls out of Kuwait.
   -An Egyptian state newspaper said authorities have arrested 30
Arabs - 23 Palestinians and seven Iraqis - sent by Iraq to attack
city squares, tourist attractions and other targets to create
disorder.
   -The British Foreign Office said a 46-year-old Scottish man has
died in Kuwait after suffering an undisclosed illness. William
Norrie Atack, a scientist, had worked in Kuwait for eight years as
a scientific officer at the Ministry of Public Health, his family
said.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
