ID: 287	RANK: 23	SCORE: 5.007403
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP901027-0089 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NY-10-27-90 1400EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a PM-Bush 2ndLd-Writethru a0462 10-27 0742</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Bush, 2nd Ld-Writethru, a0462,900</SECOND>
<HEAD>President Puts Aside Politics for Pacific Summit</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: INSERTS 4 grafs after 3rd graf pvs bgng ``Today's meeting
...'' to include House passage of budget compromise and Bush
comment</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By RITA BEAMISH</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>HONOLULU (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   President Bush is taking time out from
cross-country politicking to meet with leaders of 11 Pacific island
nations worried that their region could become a dumping ground for
old U.S. chemical weapons.
   ``I think it's a good time and I think it's about time that an
American president sat down with the heads of these countries out
there and tell them that we are as one in our respect for and love
of the Pacific,'' Bush said Friday night.
   Today's meeting comes during a two-day stop in Hawaii, where
Bush lent a hand to Republican Rep. Patricia Saiki's bid to unseat
Democratic Sen. Daniel Akaka. She stayed in Washington as the House
debated the budget bill, but sent a videotape in which she thanked
Bush for stopping the use of the island of Kahoolawe as a bombing
range.
   The House passed the deficit-reduction package in a 228-200 vote
at 7 a.m. EDT.
   Bush, who arose for an early morning swim in the balmy sunshine
outside his resort hotel in Honolulu, was asked by reporters for
reaction to the budget agreement.
   ``I'm very pleased it passed the House,'' Bush said as he shook
the water out of his t-shirt and shorts. A small crowd of tourists
followed as he crossed the beach to the hotel.
   He said many Republican members of the House ``had
understandable opposition to many of the individual provisions, but
I'm very pleased that it passed. I'm hoping it will get by the
Senate.''
   Bush came to Hawaii from a pair of campaign appearances in
Southern California, where he verbally bludgeoned the Democrats who
control Congress for ``age old-tax-and-spend plicies.'' He also
accused them of lacking commitment to civil rights.
   The agenda at today's Pacific summit included discussion of the
hazards involving destruction of U.S. chemical munitions at
Johnston Atoll, a U.S.-held ring of islands 825 miles southwest of
Hawaii.
   Those invited to participate included the leaders of Fiji,
Nauru, Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands, Tonga, Western Samoa,
the Cook Islands, Kiribati, the Marshall Islands, Micronesia and
Tuvalu.
   For months, Pacific islanders have expressed concern about plans
to destroy chemical weapons from American military bases in Europe
and Asia at a giant new incinerator on Johnston Atoll.
   Two Navy ships carrying 100,000 artillery shells packed with
nerve agents, the Army's stockpile from West Germany, are expected
to reach the atoll next month.
   All U.S. chemical weapons stockpiles outside the mainland are
stored either on the atoll or in West Germany.
   The government insists it will neither make Johnston Atoll a
permanent toxic waste-disposal site nor maintain chemical weapons
there. But it does intend to destroy the munitions stored there and
those en route from Germany.
   U.S. officials have promised to carry out the operation in an
environmentally sound manner, and ``as safe as humanly possible,''
according to a State Department fact sheet on the problem.
   The United States and the Soviet Union have agreed to destroy
such weapons by 1997.
   Environmental groups oppose the destruction, and the South
Pacific Forum, an organization of regional governments, has
complained the plan could make the region ``the toxic waste
disposal center of the world.''
   The forum's chairman, Prime Minister Geoffrey A. Henry of the
Cook Islands, said the Johnston Atoll issue would be the top theme
on the summit agenda.
   ``It's of great importance to the people here,'' said Bob
Wernet, spokesman for Rep. Saiki. The Hawaii congresswoman supports
allowing the destruction of the chemicals already en route from
Europe and already stockpiled on the atoll, but not allowing any
stockpiles to be shipped from the mainland as of next year. She has
introduced legislation in Congress to that effect.
   Tests of the incinerator are to end late next year, and
full-scale incineration is expected to begin in 1992.
   The island leaders also were expected to press Bush to sign the
South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty, which would ban the
testing, dumping and storage of nuclear weapons and nuclear waste
in the region.
   Before leaving for Hawaii, Bush on Friday attempted to distance
himself from the tax increases his administration negotiated with
Congress for a deficit-reduction package. He said the legislative
branch was to blame for the ``strong medicine'' Americans now have
to take.
   Speaking at a luncheon for Sen. Pete Wilson's GOP gubernatorial
campaign in Los Angeles, Bush also accused Congress of trying to
embarrass him on the civil rights issue.
   He vetoed the sweeping anti-job discrimination bill passed by
Congress, claiming its provisions would force businesses to
establish minority hiring quotas. Sponsors strongly denied that,
but they fell one vote short in the Senate in an attempt Wednesday
to override the veto.
   Bush sent Congress an alternative bill that civil rights
advocates said guts their legislation. Administration officials
have privately claimed that Democrats want to use the veto as an
election issue.
   Bush said lawmakers were ``sitting around up there now. They
could pass it (his alternative) in 20 minutes if there was a
genuine interest in civil rights and less interest in trying to
embarrass the president of the United States.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
