ID: 287	RANK: 68	SCORE: 4.371764
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900908-0124 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-08-90 1853EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-SummitRdp 4thLd-Writethru a0599 09-08 1179</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Summit Rdp, 4th Ld-Writethru, a0599,1180</SECOND>
<HEAD>Bush, Gorbachev Arrive for Summit Seeking Common Ground Against
Iraq</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: INSERTS grafs 8-9 to UPDATE with Saudi source reporting
Soviets prepared to offer maritime transport, withdraw advisers
from Iraq; subs graf 10 for transition.</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By DAVID ESPO</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>HELSINKI, Finland (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   President Bush and Soviet President
Mikhail S. Gorbachev arrived Saturday for summit talks spawned by
the Persian Gulf crisis. Bush said he hoped for common ground
against Iraq that would usher in a ``more peaceful, stable and
secure'' post-Cold War era.
   Gorbachev said it was important for the two men to cooperate to
protect ``positive trends'' taking place elsewhere in the world.
   Iraq's Saddam Hussein directed pre-summit advice to the two
leaders, telling Bush the prestige of the United States would sink
``if it were to slide into the abyss of war'' and telling Gorbachev
that siding with the Americans would increase world doubts about
Soviet status as a superpower.
   Saddam, in a statement read on Iraqi televison by a spokesman,
said that as the two men weigh summit decisions, ``the angels will
be hovering above you on one side and devils on the other.''
   Bush's national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, suggested
later that the prospect of U.S.-Soviet unity on the Persian Gulf
was upsetting Saddam.
   ``We hope it causes him to lose some sleep,'' Scowcroft said
after a working dinner with Bush and other top aides.
   The five-hour summit held out the prospect of an extraordinary
joint declaration against Iraq's invasion of Kuwait. Also on the
agenda for the hastily arranged meeting were sticky arms control
disputes, the future of Europe and other traditional East-West
concerns as well as possible aid to the Soviet Union.
   In Saudi Arabia, a diplomatic source said Gorbachev came to
Helsinki prepared to offer the Soviet maritime fleet to the United
States to transport equipment to the Middle East and to withdraw
the roughly 1,000 Soviet advisers from Iraq.
   The month-old U.S. military deployment has been handicapped by
the lack of sealift for materiel.
   Here in Helsinki, the usual summit accoutrements were in
evidence, from the extremely tight security to the Soviet, American
and Finnish flags flying side by side by side. T-shirts showing the
faces of Bush and Gorbachev superimposed on Saddam's visage were
selling for $20.
   Bush and Gorbachev, accompanied by their wives, arrived seven
hours apart to identical red carpet greetings from Finnish
President Mauno Koivisto.
   The summit will be their third as leaders of their countries.
   Bush denounced Iraq sharply in his arrival remarks, saying it
must be denied the ``fruits of aggression.'' Gorbachev spoke in
more restrained terms of the need to ensure that positive trends in
the world are not ``thwarted by any development.'' He did not
mention Iraq or Saddam by name.
   Both Bush and Gorbachev made it clear they were hoping to use
the summit to continue the improvement in relations between their
two countries.
   ``If you want to think of a complicated situation, shift the
clock back several years and think about how difficult it would be
to work this equation now, get the international support that has
been gotten, but try to do it without the Soviet Union being a part
of it,'' Bush said.
   ``Clearly I hope that we'll come out of this meeting tomorrow
not with every difference ironed out but with a common purpose so
that ... the United States and the Soviet Union will be seen by
others around the world to be in accord in our determination to
stop this ugly aggression,'' he added.
   He called Gorbachev ``not some adversary,'' but the leader of a
country ``with whom I think we're going to have increasingly
productive relations.''
   ``If the nations of the world, acting together, continue, as
they have been, to isolate Iraq and deny Saddam the fruits of
aggression, we will set in place the cornerstone of an
international order, more peaceful, stable and secure than any that
we have known.''
   He added: ``Much is at stake and there is much the world stands
to gain if we succeed.
   Gorbachev said it was important for the two men to meet
personally to ``discuss the acute crisis in the Persian Gulf and a
number of other issues'' and to cooperate.
   The White House took pains to minimize the chances for an arms
control breakthrough at the summit, even though talks are moving
slowly to reduce nuclear stockpiles as well as to cut conventional
forces in Europe. ``This is not a negotiating session,'' said one
official.
   Helsinki is no stranger to important international meetings.
Finlandia Hall, where Bush and Gorbachev will hold a news
conference after their talks, was the site for the signing in 1975
of an international accord on human rights.
   Secretary of State James A. Baker III arrived shortly before
Gorbachev after a trip to the Middle East to drum up increased
support for the effort to isolate Iraq.
   Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak pledged more troops to defend
Saudi Arabia and said the summit participants should stand firm on
sanctions ordered by the U.N. Security Council against Iraq. ``I
hope that Gorbachev and Bush have one line for dealing with this
problem,'' he said. ``This would be a hell of problem in this area
if there are differences.''
   Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze arrived with
Gorbachev, one day after declaring he was ``ready if necessary'' to
go to Iraq to seek a peaceful resolution of the gulf crisis.
   Bush plunged into a schedule of appearances lasting through the
morning and early afternoon despite his overnight flight from
Washington.
   He stopped his limousine to shake hands briefly with the crowds
along his route between stops. Mel Hughes told reporters he was the
mayor of Rancho Palos Verdes, Calif., and that it was terrific to
shake the president's hand, even if ``we had to come all the way to
Finland to do it.''
   Gorbachev had barely arrived when he waded into a crowd along
the street.
   Before arriving, Bush told reporters he would be interested in
pursuing a possible deal with Gorbachev in which the United States
would give the Soviets oil-producing technology, perhaps involving
pipelines. In exchange, the Soviet Union would make some of its
vast oil reserves available to the West to make up for supplies
lost from the Persian Gulf.
   Bush said he did not plan to ask Gorbachev to send ground forces
to supplement the U.S.-led deployment in Saudi Arabia.
   The Soviets have been urging a diplomatic solution to the
Persian Gulf crisis, but Foreign Ministry spokesman Gennady
Gerasimov said earlier that the Soviet Union would be willing to
send military forces to the Middle East under a military staff
committee that included officers from the five permanent members of
the U.N. Security Council.
   Bush also said he wanted ``very much'' to visit U.S. troops in
Saudi Arabia, but planned to wait until ``all our forces are there
and things calm down.'' He said he hoped the American military
deployment in the Persian Gulf ``will keep Saddam Hussein from
doing anything reckless.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
