ID: 287	RANK: 77	SCORE: 4.318646
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP901116-0117 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NY-11-16-90 1601EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-US-Czechoslovakia 1stLd-Writethru a0643 11-16 0673</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-US-Czechoslovakia, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0643,760</SECOND>
<HEAD>U.S.-Czechoslovak Ties Honored On Eve of Bush Visit</HEAD>
<NOTE>EDs: SUBS 3rd graf to CORRECT spelling of `prelude.'</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By ALISON SMALE</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>PRAGUE, Czechoslovakia (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Czechoslovaks on Friday excitedly
awaited President Bush's arrival on a history-making visit
coinciding with the first anniversary of the ``Velvet Revolution''
that toppled communist rule.
   On the eve of its first-ever U.S. presidential visit, Prague
officially renamed its railway station in honor of President
Woodrow Wilson, who encouraged a much earlier Czechoslovak push for
independence.
   The simple ceremony, said Praque Mayor Jaroslav Koran, was a
fitting prelude to a presidential visit that would ``complete the
magic circle'' of U.S.-Czechoslovak relations. ``As if with a
message from our ancestors,'' he said, ``the president will visit
for the first time ever.''
   Within the citadels of power in the post-Cold War Prague
government and among the populace at large, excitement - even
exhileration - was in the air.
   ``It's perfect,'' 24-year-old medical student Tomas Sklenar said
of the timing of Bush's visit. ``American democracy is the greatest
ideal,'' exulted Karel Kren, who also is studying medicine.
   In anticipation of Bush's arrival Saturday, Czechoslovaks donned
buttons showing a smiling U.S. president with the inscription,
``Thank You!'' American flags fluttered in the breeze, mounted on
elegant buildings alongside Czechoslovakia's national flag of
matching red, white and blue.
   ``It's good he's coming on Nov. 17,'' said Zdenek Matejovsky, a
32-year-old waiter, who waived the American flag and then impishly
hid his face behind a mask of Soviet President Mikhail S.
Gorbachev.
   Bush's trip comes at a period of substantially improved
relations between Washington and Prague. Only a week ago, the
president signed legislation extending most-favored-nation trade
status. Bush at the time called the measure ``an important
milestone not only in U.S.-Czechoslovak relations, but also in
re-integration into the global economy and the community of free
nations.''
   Earlier this fall, in a meeting in New York with Czech President
Vaclav Havel, Bush announced he was lifting travel restrictions on
Czechoslovakia's diplomats in the United States. Three months
earlier, U.S. officials said that Prague had agreed to accept U.S.
Peace Corps volunteers.
   Bush hosted Havel at the White House, and the playwright and
former prisoner under the communist regime, addressed a joint
meeting of Congress.
   On Friday, Czechoslovak officials restored Wilson's place in
this country's history, cementing ties that stretch back to when
Wilson helped his friend Tomas G. Masaryk gain Czech and Slovak
independence from the crumbling Austro-Hungarian Empire.
   Wilson recognized Masaryk's ``de facto government'' set up in
U.S. exile before independence. Masaryk, a philosopher and
acknowledged role model for Havel, became the first head of the new
state in 1918.
   Prague's main railway station was named after Wilson in
gratitude for his help. His name was dropped after the communists
seized power in 1948, but remained customary for Prague residents.
   ``Wilson's station has never stopped being Wilson's station ...
even when frightened (Communist) rulers tried to wipe out all
reference to the connections of our history with the ideals of
American democracy,'' Koran said at the renaming ceremony.
   Czechs and Slovaks, like many other East Europeans, looked to
America as a model of democracy during their four decades of
authoritarian communist rule. The turbulent history of this century
has given Czechoslovaks added reason to admire America.
   Caught on the crossroads of Europe, the two Slav nations have
traditionally looked both East and West in their effort to win and
preserve independence.
   Embittered by Stalinist repressions in the 1950s and the Warsaw
Pact invasion that crushed communist-led reform in 1968,
Czechoslovaks have lost any love for the Soviets, who liberated the
country from the Nazis at the end of World War II.
   The betrayal of the 1938 Munich agreement by which Britain and
France allowed Nazi Germany to annex one-third of Czechoslovakia's
territory soured relations with the British and French.
   Nazi occupation fanned Czech hatred of the Germans, who
historically sought to dominate the Czech lands. After World War
II, Czechoslovakia brutally expelled about 2.5 million ethnic
Germans.
   These clouded relationships with other Western nations adds to
the respect for America which found voice on the streets of Prague
Friday.
   ``I know that in America he's not very popular with the budget
deficit and some other problems,'' Sklenar said, but Mr. Reagan
(former President Ronald) could not come here, so it's perfect that
Mr. Bush does.''
   The Czechoslovaks have said that Bush asked to attend Saturday's
anniversary.
   ``We are happy!'' a banner draped from a balcony proclaimed.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
