ID: 287	RANK: 86	SCORE: 4.274427
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920103-0035
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920103-0035.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Big Board Dolls Up for Birthday
   As Wags on Street Debate Her Age
   ----
   By William Power
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/03/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C1
</SO>
<MS>
FINANCIAL (FIN)
</MS>
<IN>
SECURITIES (SCR)
STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
</IN>
<NS>
STOCK &amp; OTHER MARKET NEWS (STK)
</NS>
<GV>
POSTAL SERVICE (POS)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- The New York Stock Exchange turns 200 years
old this year, and the world's center of capitalism is
dreaming up all sorts of ways to celebrate.
   Among them: a 29-cent Big Board anniversary stamp from the
U.S. Postal Service, a coffee-table book, a commemorative
medallion, and an "anniversary weekend" in May featuring
day-to-evening social events. President Bush is expected to
drop by, which would be the first visit to the exchange by a
U.S. president in seven years.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The Big Board's year-long celebration of its May 17 birth
date -- which kicks off on Monday with a special ceremony on
the trading floor -- is the kind of tradition that's become
common when a major American institution passes a milestone.
   In the Big Board's case, the celebrations have taken on a
special importance, exchange officials concede. The exchange
is in the middle of the biggest competitive fight in its
life, as overseas and off-exchange markets continue to eat at
the Big Board's share of trading business. Big Board
officials hope the celebrations will bolster morale, drum up
favorable publicity and perhaps begin to win back investors
caught up by patriotic fervor.
   "We'll be selling the virtues of this place" to investors
and the general public, says Big Board Chairman William
Donaldson, who is celebrating his own one-year anniversary
running the exchange. In a recent interview, he said the Big
Board "has been working on a major marketing program" after
reorganizing its advertising, promotional and marketing
operations. Says an exchange spokesman: "We want to increase
public understanding of the NYSE and how it works," and the
bicentennial is a good chance to do that.
   Actually, there's some debate about whether the exchange
is really turning 200, or just 175, or even less than 130. It
depends on how you interpret history.
   The Big Board says it's turning 200 because the historic
Buttonwood Agreement, which created the germ of what led to
the Big Board, is dated May 17, 1792. That document was
signed by 24 New York brokers and merchants, trading under a
Wall Street buttonwood tree and elsewhere, who agreed to
collect a minimum commission on stock sales and "give a
preference" to each other in stock trading. But there was
still no physical exchange to speak of; trading continued in
the streets and in nearby coffee houses.
   It wasn't until March 1817 that a formal organization was
created, called the New York Stock &amp; Exchange Board. In 1865,
the newly christened New York Stock Exchange moved onto a
permanent trading floor, according to exchange historians.
The current trading floor at Broad and Wall Streets didn't
open until April 1903 -- with an elaborate celebration
including a brass band.
   While Wall Street historians don't begrudge the Big Board
its celebration, they do delight in debating how old the
exchange really is.
   "Strangely enough, New York is not really the birthplace
of an organized stock market in this country," says Jason
Zweig, editor of Friends of Financial History, a newsletter
published by the Museum of American Financial History. "The
first trading that anybody knows about seems to have taken
place in Boston," then Philadelphia, and finally in New York,
he says. (The Philadelphia Stock Exchange, which calls itself
the oldest U.S. exchange, celebrated its 200th anniversary in
1990.)
   But Mr. Zweig adds that 1992 is definitely the 200th
anniversary of something. "While it may be the bicentennial
of the NYSE depending on how you slice it, it's definitely
the bicentennial of the first stock market crash" -- in early
1792 -- "which is one of the reasons they wound up signing
the Buttonwood Agreement," he says.
   The Big Board isn't the only institution trying to make
hay from the celebration. The Postal Service, for example, is
hoping that its Big Board commemorative helps deflect
criticism that U.S. stamps are drab; the service is calling
its 1992 crop of stamps, including the ornate Big Board one,
the "most exciting and colorful" issued. The Big Board stamp
will compete for publicity with those honoring Wendell
Willkie, Earl Warren, the Alaska Highway and the state of
Kentucky (which also is turning 200).
   The intricately drawn Big Board stamp looks like a tiny
stock certificate -- which, to the dismay of many small
investors, some on Wall Street are trying to phase out in
favor of electronic book-entry of stock positions.
   Will other major U.S. stock markets come to the Big
Board's party? "I'm not sure we're invited," chuckles Robert
Ferri, a spokesman for the National Association of Securities
Dealers. The NASD runs the upstart Nasdaq market, the Big
Board's main competition for U.S. stock-trading volume and
company listings. Nasdaq says it didn't do much partying for
its 20th anniversary last year, aside from a press release or
two.
   The smaller American Stock Exchange, isn't quite sure when
its 200th anniversary actually falls. That exchange, like the
Big Board, grew from a group of traders who bought and sold
stocks on the streets in the 1700s. "Last year, we did mark
our 70th year of the move indoors," says an Amex spokesman.
But "it's hard to pinpoint exactly when we started because we
were an outdoor market for so long. We say sometime before
1793 was the beginning."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
