ID: 287	RANK: 87	SCORE: 4.261869
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910930-0083
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910930-0083.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   International:
   PLO Council Endorses Mideast Talks
   ---
   Arafat Scores a Victory and U.S.
   Gains Credibility as Peacemaker
   ----
   By Peter Waldman
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
09/30/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A9
</SO>
<GV>
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)
</GV>
<RE>
AFRICA (AF)
ISRAEL (ISR)
IRAQ (IZ)
MOROCCO (MCO)
MIDDLE EAST (ML)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Yasser Arafat and the Palestine Liberation Organization,
arising from the political junkheap of the Persian Gulf war,
endorsed Palestinian participation in a proposed Mideast
peace conference.
   With a surprising degree of unanimity, the PLO's governing
body, the Palestinian National Council, signaled Saturday in
Algiers that it would accede to Israeli demands on some key
procedural issues, including the PLO's own exclusion from the
talks. The vote, which shifts the spotlight back on Israel,
gives a big boost to U.S.-led efforts to convene a peace
conference next month.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "I am not going to make any predictions," U.S. Secretary
of State James Baker said Saturday. And yet, he added, "any
time we see support for the prospect of trying to create a
peace process in the Middle East, we're very glad to see
that."
   Israel, however, dismissed the PLO concessions. "The PLO
is out of the political process and will remain out, even
after the PNC" meeting, said Yossi Olmert, head of Israel's
government press office. Still, the PLO's softer stance puts
pressure on Israel to be equally accommodating in setting
terms for a peace conference.
   The PLO's acquiescence to Israeli terms, which the group
has long opposed, reflects the PLO's desire to end its
international isolation since backing Iraq in the Gulf War.
It also represents a strong victory for PLO Chairman Arafat,
whose ability to steer the organization on a moderate course
was a crucial test of his power at the council meeting last
week.
   But most importantly, prominent Palestinians and PLO
leaders say, the PLO's endorsement of the peace process
reflects the emergence of the Bush administration as a
credible broker in the Arab-Israeli dispute. Indeed, these
Palestinians say, the main topic of debate at last week's PLO
deliberations didn't center on Israel but on the U.S.
   "We're placing confidence in ourselves and the new winds
of change in international relations," said Afif Safieh, head
of the PLO delegation to the United Kingdom. "In the new
international order, Israel doesn't have its previous
function in the American global strategy any more. With its
territorial greed, it's becoming a nuisance."
   As usual, the PLO's policy shift was subtle but clear. In
a resolution passed by a 313-18 vote, the PNC reiterated
longheld PLO demands that Israel withdraw from Arab lands
held since 1967, that Jerusalem must be an indivisible part
of a Palestinian state, and that only the PLO has the right
to choose Palestinian peace negotiators.
   But rather than stating these demands -- which are opposed
by Israel -- as conditions to Palestinian participation in a
peace conference, the resolution merely called them
"principles." And when Bassam Abu Sharif, a senior PLO
official, was asked in Algiers if the PLO would publicly name
the delegates to a peace conference, he replied, "That is a
different thing," the Associated Press reported.
   "We will not make any obstacles to peace," said Mr. Arafat
in a news conference Saturday, "but we reject the Israeli
conditions."
   Mr. Arafat, lambasted by some Palestinians and other Arabs
for embracing Iraqi President Saddam Hussein, emerged from
the PNC meeting firmly in control. To loud applause, the PNC
re-elected him "President of Palestine," and ousted a rival,
Mohammed Abbas, from the PLO's Executive Committee. Mr. Abbas
organized a terrorist raid on Israel in May 1990 that led to
a rupture in the 18-month-old U.S.-Palestinian dialogue and
prompted U.S. calls for his expulsion.
   But another winner at the PLO meeting may have been
President Bush. Though the PLO is nominally out of the peace
process, a triumph within the organization by hard-liners
would probably have scared off Palestinians in the occupied
territories from continuing talks with the U.S. and attending
a peace conference.
   Instead, after debating the Bush administration's
sincerity in promoting Arab-Israeli peace, the PNC adopted
its conciliatory line. Its deliberations included
presentations by a pair of Palestinian-American professors,
who assessed changing U.S. interests in the Mideast. And
midway through the sessions, Mr. Arafat received a phone call
from King Hassan II of Morocco, who was in Washington
visiting Mr. Bush. The king passed on Mr. Bush's promise that
the U.S. would pressure Israel to abide by U.N. resolutions
calling for Israel to vacate occupied territory in exchange
for peace, a PLO official said. The assurances bolstered the
moderates' hand, this official said.
   "This PNC decision, in my view, pins the hopes of the
Palestinians on American conduct that we hope will develop
during the course of peace negotiations," said Haider Abdel
Shafi, a physician who lives in the Gaza Strip and one of the
Palestinians who has met with Mr. Baker. "We will be flexible
on procedural matters, as long as it will bring territory for
peace."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
