ID: 287	RANK: 99	SCORE: 4.197685
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890727-0002 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-27-89 2358EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-BlochRdp 4thLd-Writethru a0787 07-27 1073</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Bloch Rdp, 4th Ld-Writethru, a0787,980</SECOND>
<HEAD>Bloch Reported Admitting KGB Relationship</HEAD>
<HEAD>EDS: Top 7 grafs new with report of Bloch admissions; picks up 2nd
graf 3rd Ld: ``Bloch got,'' INSERTS 10th graf to specify which ambassador.</HEAD>
<HEAD>Precede WASHINGTON</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By RUTH SINAI</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Felix Bloch, the U.S. diplomat suspected of spying for the
Soviet Union, told FBI agents he had been paid ``a lot of money''
by the Soviet intelligence service during a relationship of ``many
years,'' The New York Times said in Friday editions.
   This new development in the Bloch case came after officials
disclosed in Washington that Bloch got recent merit raises totaling
more than $13,000 for work ``well above average.''
   Bloch's reported admissions came in his one brief interview with
the FBI on June 22, the newspaper said, citing an ``official
involved in the case'' as its source.
   Informed of this report, three administration sources familiar
with the Bloch case said in Washington Thursday night they had not
been informed of such admissions.
   But The Associated Press learned from a congressional source
that the FBI believes Bloch was recruited by the KGB, the Soviet
intelligence service combining the functions of the FBI and the
CIA, during service at the U.S. Embassy in East Berlin 14 years ago.
   Block reportedly refused to discuss with the FBI any possible
spying activities or his motives.
   The newspaper said the FBI received information that prompted
major interest in a trip the diplomat was making to Europe. The
agency notified foreign intelligence services and congressional
committees, and somehow the information got out, leading to the
previously reported overhearing of a Soviet agent telling Bloch,
``A bad virus is going around and we believe you are now infected.''
   Bloch got a raise of $4,500 for fiscal year 1983-84; $4,000 for
1984-85 and $4,800 for 1985-86, said a U.S. official who spoke only
on condition of anonymity.
   The pay increases were given to Bloch while he served as the
deputy chief of mission at the U.S. Embassy in Vienna, where he was
posted from 1980 to 1987. Recommendations for the merit awards were
made by, among others, the U.S. ambassador to Austria who has been
publicly critical of Bloch's performance, said the official.
   The ambassador to which the official referred was Helene Von
Damm.
   The State Department calls such raises performance pay awards,
granted only to those whose work is deemed ``well above average,''
said another official, who also insisted on anonymity.
   Government sources have said Bloch was videotaped in Paris
handing a briefcase to a Soviet agent. He has not been charged with
a crime, but his diplomatic passport and State Department
credentials have been revoked.
   Agents are engaged in what is expected to be a lengthy _ and
possibly futile _ search for the specific evidence required to
charge Bloch under the Espionage Act, including what secrets, if
any, were compromised. Government sources have thus far been
unwilling to say when they believe Bloch began spying for the
Soviets.
   In other developments:
   _President Bush added his voice to those advocating improved
U.S. counterintelligence efforts since disclosure that diplomat
Felix S. Bloch is under investigation as a possible Soviet spy.
   _Government sources familiar with the case said that the
54-year-old State Department official could remain free for a long
time while FBI agents try to identify specific secrets, if any,
that he may have turned over to the Soviets.
   _Bloch ended a three-night stay at his father's East Side co-op
in New York City. Trailed by FBI agents and reporters, he drove to
his daughter's house in Chappaqua, N.Y., north of the city.
   The ambassador during most of Bloch's tenure in Vienna was
Helene Von Damm, who was a senior White House secretary to former
President Reagan before being appointed to the Vienna post.
   Von Damm, who left during a social flap involving her marriage
to an Austrian, was replaced by Ronald Lauder, now a Republican
candidate for the mayor's job in New York City.
   Lauder has said he did not like or trust Bloch, and asked for
him to be recalled. But State Department officials have said it was
time for Bloch to come home anyway, after seven years in Vienna.
   Merit raises in the Senior Foreign Service are sometimes given
to diplomats who are eligible for more senior postings but cannot
get them because of a shortage of vacant slots.
   Raises in the Senior Foreign Service can go as high as $9,000 a
year, one official said.
   Bloch was put on paid leave by the State Department June 22 and
is under no travel restrictions. He makes about $80,000 a year,
according to officials speaking on condition of anonymity.
   Bush, at a photo session in the Oval Office, told reporters,
``The question is: Can we improve our counterintelligence? We
always ought to be striving to do that. Can embassy security be
improved? We go through this periodically and the answer is, I'm
sure it can.''
   In Vienna, Friday's editions of the Neue Kronen Zeitung said an
FBI team had arrived to assist in the investigation there. FBI
spokesmen in Washington would not confirm that, but Viennese
officials had said earlier in the week they were searching for a
prostitute who they said had a relationship with Bloch while he was
the No. 2 officer in the U.S. Embassy there.
   In Moscow, Foreign Ministry spokesman Gennady I. Gerasimov said
the Soviet Union has no connection with Bloch. Gerasimov said he
made inquiries about Bloch's activities. ``The name of Bloch was
not familiar. We have no connection with him. We have nothing to do
with him.'' he told a regular news briefing. ``It is lamentable
that the U.S. press fans such hysteria.''
   U.S. government sources have said Soviet officials in the United
States, who must use autos with license plates coded by country,
took the unusual step of watching Bloch's apartment and following
him and the FBI in an auto caravan from Washington to New York on
Saturday.
   Retired deputy FBI counterintelligence chief James Nolan said,
``I've never heard of that before in 20 years. Normally they stay
as far away from these cases as possible.''
   The American Civil Liberties Union on Thursday ``condemned
government officials who have made statements, publicly and off the
record, suggesting that Felix S. Bloch is guilty of a crime even
though he has not been indicted.'' U.S. law entitles Bloch to a
presumption of innocence, the group said.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
