ID: 209	RANK: 46	SCORE: 8.757934
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900129-0189 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-01-29-90 1417EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>s a BC-APN--FeetofClay Adv11-1stAdd   01-29 0879</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-APN--Feet of Clay, Adv 11-1st Add,0896</SECOND>
<NOTE>$adv11</NOTE>
<HEAD>AGENCIES AND RADIO OUT</HEAD>
<NOTE>For Release Sun., Feb. 11</NOTE>
<HEAD>NEW YORK: the Jews.''</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   Since September, when Gill's article was published, the war has
raged between those who believe him and those who say Campbell was
innocent. Gill is unyielding: ``When he became a conspicuous public
figure and got a response of millions of people, then I had to take
up arms against him.''
   It is not clear that his efforts to alter Campbell's reputation
have had much effect. ``There's still an extraordinary interest in
his point of view. Sales have been excellent on the Campbell book
(`The Power of Myth') for the past four months,'' said Stuart
Applebaum, a spokesman for Bantam Books.
   Campbell, of course, is not around to defend himself; he has
been dead more than two years. Most biographers do not have living
subjects to contend with, and the dead cannot be libeled.
   But when Ian Hamilton attempted to write a biography of J.D.
Salinger, he found that the reclusive writer was very much alive
and willing to fight back.
   Salinger took Hamilton to court to prevent him from quoting from
his private letters, which he had copyrighted. Salinger won, and
Hamilton was reduced to writing a book about how he tried to write
a Salinger biography.
   Surviving relatives of cultural figures can be divided into
three camps.
   Some cooperate with biographers. Some have become biographers
themselves: When novelist and short story writer John Cheever died,
his daughter, Susan, disclosed his alcoholism and homosexuality in
a memoir, ``Home Before Dark.''
   ``I did it out of anguish and love,'' she said.
   Cheever's son, Ben, published his father's letters (including
sexually explicit love letters to men and women) and is preparing a
volume of his father's journals.
   But other survivors are reticent, and some are angry. Stephen
Joyce, grandson of James and Nora Joyce, was angered by Brenda
Maddox's use of a sexually explicit correspondence between the
Joyces in her book ``Nora: The Real Life of Molly Bloom.''
   Stephen Joyce destroyed letters he had received from his aunt
Lucia _ James Joyce's daughter, who spent time in a mental
institution _ and letters from playwright Samuel Beckett to Lucia.
Beckett had requested that his letters be destroyed; the rest were
destroyed to guard his aunt's privacy.
   ``I firmly believe that there is a part of every man or woman's
life, no matter how famous he or she may be, that should remain
private,'' Stephen Joyce wrote in a letter to The New York Times.
``Furthermore, I believe that the Joyce family's privacy has been
invaded more than that of any other writer in this century. Enough
is enough, even too much.''
   Writing in the Times, Janna Malamud Smith, daughter of novelist
and short story writer Bernard Malamud, said her family might burn
her father's papers.
   Biographers, she said, ``can extract a high and often hidden
price in exchange for satisfying our curiosity. Too often readers
end up with theories about Hemingway's identity confusion or
alcohol abuse, but lose their pleasure in his fiction. Some mystery
about the writer helps maintain the work. I remember how much my
father enjoyed knowing little about Shakespeare's life, relishing
the untethered quality that absence conferred upon his plays.''
   But Goldman says biography should not affect how we look at art:
``A biographer is concerned with the man _ a critic is concerned
with the art.'' Nor will Americans be culturally bereft if they
find their idols have feet of clay, says Kazin: ``If we had any
culture in America, it would be harder.''
   Mencken did not destroy his diaries. He placed them in the Enoch
Pratt Free Library in Baltimore, to be sealed for 25 years after
his death, and then to be opened to ``students engaged in critical
or historical investigation.'' He did not mention publication; the
trustees debated the issue before going ahead.
   The book is mostly a list of Mencken's daily doings, mixed with
a few observations about people and events and the complaints of a
notorious hypochondriac. Just a few words are objectionable:
``kikes'' and ``shrewd Jew'' and ``linthead,'' among them.
   The editor, Charles A. Fecher, says the diaries prove Mencken
was an anti-Semite and felt that blacks were inferiors. The
revelations led the National Press Club to consider renaming the
Mencken Memorial Library, and induced the winner of an award named
after Mencken to refuse the honor.
   But New York Times columnist Russell Baker, who knew Mencken
from his early days at The Sun in Baltimore, noted that there is no
evidence that Mencken ever acted in a bigoted way. The diary
entries were ``night faults,'' Baker said.
   Others argue that the offensive jottings were more reflective of
Mencken's times _ an era when words like ``kikes'' and ``hunkies''
and ``wops'' were the stuff of conversation _ than of Mencken
himself.
   What would Mencken have said? Should a man's private musings
affect the way his public accomplishments are regarded? ``The
public ... demands certainties. It must be told definitely and a
bit raucously that this is true and that is false. But there are no
certainties,'' he once wrote.
   But he also wrote: ``Nothing can come out of an artist that is
not in the man.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>END ADV</NOTE>
</DOC>
