ID: 209	RANK: 57	SCORE: 8.544428
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910111-0090
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910111-0090.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Bloomsberries Galore
   ----
   By Paul Levy
</HL>
<DATE>
01/11/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8
</SO>
<LP>
   Britain's new Bloomsbury revival is in full spate.
Virginia Woolf's publisher, the Hogarth Press, has issued-by
my count -- 42 volumes by or about her since July. The
cynical will point out that Virginia Woolf drowned herself in
1941, and that, therefore, her British copyright expires next
year. Certainly, the best way to discourage other publishers
from helping themselves to works that will soon be in the
public domain is to use the final year of copyright to
publish definitive new editions of anything anyone else might
be tempted to pinch.
   Fair enough. But how do you account for the fact that the
best reviewed book in Britain in 1990 (both in terms of
column inches and of praise) was "Clever Hearts," a biography
of fringe Bloomsberries Desmond and Molly MacCarthy by their
grandson Hugh Cecil and his wife Mirabel (it has just won the
glamourous Duff Cooper memorial award but still doesn't have
a U.S. publisher)? Or that Frances Partridge's "Hanging On,"
the fifth volume of diaries to be published by the oldest
surviving member of the original Bloomsbury Group, received
universal acclaim? In 1978, when the first volume of Ms.
Partridge's diaries appeared, at least one young would-be
litterateur made his name by writing a gratuitously bitchy
review of it. (The 90-year-old and still very vigorous Ms.
Partridge, incidentally, has this year embarked upon a new
career as a fashion model for Issey Miyake, and was
photographed by Lord Snowdon.)
</LP>
<TEXT>
   In other Bloomsbury news, David Garnett's "Aspects of
Love" is still one of the hottest tickets in London. The BBC
recently scandalized very large viewing audiences (and Nigel
Nicolson) with the lesbian sex scenes in its adaptation of
his "Portrait of a Marriage" (in which Mr Nicolson himself
revealed the homosexuality of both his parents). The same
cynics will relish the recently published "illustrated
edition" of that book. There is a new large-format art book
on Bloomsbury's "artists, authors and designers" and another,
the first devoted exclusively to the art of Duncan Grant.
   There is even a work called "Bloomsbury Reflections," with
splendid color photographs of Frances Partridge, and of Hugh
Cecil and other descendants of those members of Bloomsbury
who weren't homosexual or celibate. Feminist works about
Bloomsbury have never waned, and there is the usual annual
crop of books with titles such as Mary Ann Caws's "Women of
Bloomsbury: Virginia, Vanessa and Carrington," as well as the
normal harvest of nitpicking academic books. Above all, there
is Noel Annan's testament to his generation, "Our Age," in
which Lord Annan, an intellectual historian with Bloomsbury
ties himself, faces head-on and bravely tries to account for:
the importance of homosexuality in English life, the
influence of the Bloomsbury Group on British culture, the
Cambridge spies and "the deviancy of F.R. Leavis," that
self-appointed scourge of Bloomsbury.
   Finally, the Hogarth Press, while reissuing Quentin Bell's
biography of his aunt Virginia Woolf in a single volume, has
also commissioned a new one from university teacher and
television personality Hermione Lee.
   This flood of Bloomsburiana has inundated the spare
bedroom bookshelves of half the country houses of England.
Less grand houses make do with paperback editions, but the
books are ubiquitous. The only explanation for this frenzy of
publishing activity is that a new generation is buying books
about Bloomsbury. Why should this be?
   The Bloomsberries' collective sway over British culture
remains, though Mrs. Thatcher's monetary policies have
displaced those of Bloomsberry elder John Maynard Keynes, at
least for the time being. Lytton Strachey's prose is still
the model writers of history and biography emulate, and the
grip of E.M. Forster and Virginia Woolf can still be felt on
the English novel. It is true that only the decorative side
of the Bloomsbury painters has left much trace on the visual
arts, but that is of no small importance, as the late Laura
Ashley showed when she revived and marketed textiles by
Duncan Grant and Vanessa Bell. The restored Charleston, the
Sussex farmhouse they shared, is now a visitable monument to
Bloomsbury decorative art.
   Yet apart from the interest of the women's movement in
Virginia Woolf, there was a backlash against Bloomsbury in
the '80s. Books about other aspects of Bloomsbury slowed to a
trickle, and those that managed to get published were often
badly reviewed. The craze for reading about their lives, even
their complicatedly original sex lives, subsided. Bloomsbury
was out of tune with the Reaganite, Thatcherite times.
   So why are they popular now, with a new generation of
television viewers, theater-goers and even readers?
   Michael Holroyd, the biographer and literary historian,
thinks it's all part of a larger '60s revival: "Interest in
Bloomsbury really began in the late '60s, with the
publication of Leonard Woolf's autobiography" and Mr.
Holroyd's own work on Lytton Strachey. "It was the age of the
legal reforms brought about by the Wolfenden report on
homosexuality, of `flower power' attitudes to personal
relations, and of `make love, not war' -- all part of the
Bloomsbury ethos of pacifism, sexual liberation and
hedonism."
   "True," says Mr. Holroyd, "many of these (trends) were
American in origin. But Bloomsbury had prepared Britain to
receive these American influences. Then American feminists in
particular took up Bloomsbury -- most of the dozens of books
about Virginia Woolf and Carrington were written by Americans
-- and now we've reimported Bloomsbury from America.
   "Another reason for the current renaissance," Mr. Holroyd
continues, "is the strength of Bloomsbury's non-fiction
writing, so that the publication of the diaries and letters
of Virginia Woolf and Frances Partridge has awakened interest
in their other work. And `Aspects of Love,' `Portrait of a
Marriage' and the new life of the MacCarthys have showed that
Bloomsbury was more densely and interestingly populated than
we originally thought."
   Still, there's something else going on, too. As the
Thatcher period in Britain came to an end, there was bound to
be a reaction to its official ideology. Socialism, the
obvious alternative, is dead. While the younger generation
looks for a replacement for it, Bloomsbury's elevation of
personal relationships over market forces, its preference for
beauty over wealth, and its emphasis on personal liberation,
has its attractions, even if they are only a stopgap.
   ---
   Mr. Levy, author of "G.E. Moore and the Cambridge
Apostles," is Lytton Strachey's co-literary executor (with
Michael Holroyd).
</TEXT>
</DOC>
