ID: 209	RANK: 60	SCORE: 8.475085
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890827-0059 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-08-27-89 2221EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a AM-Obit-Stone 5thLd-Writethru a0721 08-27 0896</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Obit-Stone, 5th Ld-Writethru, a0721,0918</SECOND>
<HEAD>Irving Stone, Best-Selling Writer of Biographical Novels, Dies at
86</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: INSERTS 2 grafs after 12th graf, ```That will ...,' to UPDATE
with more reaction; picks up 13th graf, `Born in ...'</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By JENNIFER BOWLES</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>LOS ANGELES (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Author Irving Stone, the pioneer of the
biographical novel who wrote the popular epics ``Lust for Life,''
``The Agony and the Ecstasy'' and ``Love is Eternal,'' has died at
age 86.
   Stone died of heart failure Saturday at 11:20 p.m. at
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, hospital spokesman Paula Correia said
Sunday. He was admitted to Cedars-Sinai on July 24 after complaining
of difficulty in swallowing.
   Stone produced a stream of best-selling biographical novels that
his publishing company estimates have totaled more than 30 million
copies.
   His fictionalized portraits include Michelangelo in ``The Agony
and the Ecstasy,'' Vincent Van Gogh in ``Lust for Life,'' Jack
London in ``Sailor on Horseback,'' Abraham and Mary Lincoln in
``Love is Eternal,'' Sigmund Freud in ``The Passions of the Mind,''
Charles Darwin in ``The Origin,'' Andrew and Rachel Jackson in ``The
President's Lady,'' and Eugene Debs in ``Adversary in the House.''
   Five books were made into movies. ``The Agony and the Ecstasy,''
released in 1965, starred Charlton Heston in the title role. ``Lust
for Life,'' released in 1956, featured Kirk Douglas as Van Gogh and
Anthony Quinn as Paul Gauguin.
   ``Irving Stone's gift was remarkable,'' Heston said Sunday. ``He
had a prodigious talent. We'll miss him, but I'm glad we still have
his books.''
   Stone also produced ``Clarence Darrow for the Defense,'' a
biography of the famed lawyer.
   In a 1985 interview with The Associated Press, Stone explained
his fascination with biography:
   ``In the biographical novel there's only one person involved. I,
the author, spend two to five years becoming the main character. I
do that so by the time you get to the bottom of page two or three,
you forget your name, where you live, your profession and the year
it is. You become the main character of the book. You live the
book.''
   His wife, Jean, said her husband was working on a biographical
novel up to his death and she hoped it would somehow be completed in
the future. She did not disclose the subject of the book.
   ``The only thing he ever wanted to do was write books and that's
what he did all his live and we did it together,'' Mrs. Stone said
in a telephone interview from the couple's Beverly Hills home.
   ``That will be his immortality _ the books he left,'' she added.
   ``Whether you call his books biographical novels or novelistic
biographies, Irving Stone set out to do something completely
distinctive and he succeeded,'' said Jack Miles, book editor of the
Los Angeles Times. ``He was a teacher as well as a writer.''
   ``He brought history to millions of people who otherwise might be
not be interested in it,'' said Herbert Mitgang, cultural
correspondent for The New York Times.
   Born in San Francisco on July 14, 1903, Stone attended the
University of California at Berkeley and taught economics there. He
seemed destined for a teaching career until he went to Paris in 1926.
   There he made his first acquaintance with the impressionist
artists. Out of it came ``Lust for Life,'' which was published in
1934.
   ```Lust for Life' was turned down by 17 leading publishers in New
York and Boston,'' Stone recalled in a 1984 interview.
   ``Always with the same comment: How can you sell a book about an
unknown Dutch painter to the American public in the middle of a
depression?
   ``At the time I was engaged to Jean (Factor) but I had no money
to get married,'' he continued. ``She said, `Let me read the book.'
She suggested making cuts here and there and prepared a new
typescript. Longmans Green, which had published only one novel
before, accepted it.''
   ``Lust for Life'' allowed Stone and Ms. Factor to marry, and she
has been his editor ever since. For 55 years they had been
associated with Doubleday &amp; Co., one of the houses that initially
rejected ``Lust for Life.''
   Stone once said he never got lonely as a writer, and added: ``I
have always believed that the book is the most important tool that
man has ever invented, more important that the wheel, cement or
running water.
   ``As long as I can remember, I never wanted to do anything but
write. I started with a short story at 9. I never stopped, even when
I was rejected by the literary magazine at Berkeley. My manuscript
came back with the note, `Why don't you learn how to write?','' he
said.
   He meticulously researched each novel spending numerous months
delving into archives, scouring libraries, digging in basemants, and
living in garrets, studios and even asylums.
   ``To write the inner truth of these people, I have to get inside
them. I have to go through absolutely everything they did,'' he
said. ``By the end of the first page, the reader should have
forgotten his name, his job, where he lives. He should have become
Michelangelo, Van Gogh.''
   Stone is survived by his wife, their son Kenneth and daughter
Paula.
   A memorial service for friends and relatives will be held at Leo
Baeck Temple in Los Angeles later this week, his wife said. There
will be no funeral.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
