ID: 209	RANK: 85	SCORE: 7.892445
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910530-0086
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910530-0086.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
   A Very Long Childhood
   ----
   By Bruce Bawer
</HL>
<DATE>
05/30/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   Henry Miller had "joie de vivre." The titles of books
about him tell us so: "The Happy Rock," "Henry Miller: Full
of Life," "Always Merry and Bright." At times, these books'
authors write about his happiness as if it were a
transcendent feat, an act of genius or heroism or holiness.
Yet one wonders: How hard can happiness be when you lack
conscience or a sense of responsibility and live, as Miller
did, by the creed that your only goal should be "to satisfy
your own impulses and fulfill your own desires"?
   This was, after all, a writer who supported himself for
decades by scrounging off friends, who advocated crime ("If I
can steal it, I will"), who loved sex but said women were
"worthless as human beings," who exalted violence yet fled
Europe when World War II started, who mocked "literature" but
craved recognition as a literary master.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   To him, as Robert Ferguson notes in his breezy "Henry
Miller: A Life" (Norton, 416 pages, $24.95), "childishness
was the hallmark of genius"; and to read about his life --
whether here or in Mary V. Dearborn's elegant "The Happiest
Man Alive" (Simon &amp; Schuster, 368 pages, $24.95) -- is to be
struck on almost every page by just how childishly
self-absorbed Miller was, and by the fact that his books,
often described as celebrations of life, might more honestly
be called celebrations of the self by a colossal little-boy
ego.
   How did Miller happen? Born in 1891, he grew up in
Brooklyn, the son of a hapless German tailor who loved booze
and his buddies more than he did his imperious spouse. Miller
too would always prefer the company of men, and Ms. Dearborn
argues persuasively that the "liberated" sexual views that
made him a hero to '60s Playboy readers were in fact grounded
in a puritanical equation of male society with the virtues of
the mind and of female companionship with the sins of the
flesh.
   As a young man, Miller wavered between conformity and
rebellion. He enrolled in City College but left after six
weeks; he married a prude and cheated on her; he held down a
desk job for four years but craved a wilder, grubbier life.
He got his wish when he took as his second wife a psychotic
gold digger named June, who, after he quit work, supported
him with handouts from sugar daddies. Meanwhile, he
panhandled, circulated "begging letters" and wrote awkward,
amateurish prose that nobody would publish.
   It was in Paris -- to which he relocated in 1930 -- that
his literary fortunes changed. There he met Anais Nin, who
would immortalize their affair in her diaries, and one
Michael Fraenkel, who urged him to write as he talked. He did
so, and won fame with "Tropic of Cancer" (1934), a raw,
ribald, stream-of-consciousness account of his Paris life. It
is his sturdiest creation, at best intensely hypnotic in its
evocation of the bohemian scene and Miller's own state of
mind, at worst tedious and silly. Miller continued the
account in "Black Spring" (1936) and "Tropic of Capricorn"
(1938).
   Because these books were branded obscene and barred from
importation to the U.S., they made their author famous. By
the time they could be published here in the '60s, Miller had
published a shelf-full of self-indulgent autobiographical
volumes. He spent his last years as a rich Californian,
surrounded by sycophants, tended to by a series of young
wives and immersed in astrology, Scientology, UFOs and
pennyante spiritualism. (A cornerstone of his spiritual
thought was the Ronald Colman movie "Lost Horizon.") As Ms.
Dearborn notes, "Miller's lack of discrimination was
striking: He seemed unable to distinguish the crackpot from
the visionary."
   Fortunately, she doesn't share this failing. Though
lauding "Tropic of Cancer" as a "virile masterpiece of
chaos," and perceptively noting such things as the effect on
his prose of June's nutty, rambling "coketalk," she readily
acknowledges his grave flaws as man and writer and admits
that he is of interest mainly as a "twentieth-century
personality."
   To be sure, one wishes she had paid less attention to
biographical minutiae and more to such works as his trilogy
"The Rosy Crucifixion," about which she has little to say.
Yet her biography is a vast improvement over its predecessor,
Jay Martin's lackluster "Always Merry and Bright" (1978). It
is also generally better than Mr. Ferguson's book, though he
is not without his strengths. He mounts a cogent defense of
"Tropic of Cancer," and focuses fresh attention on Miller's
literary debts to Knut Hamsun, the subject of Mr. Ferguson's
previous biography.
   Yet the parts of Miller's self and life fall together more
coherently in Ms. Dearborn's well-shaped book; she seems
closer than Mr. Ferguson to Miller's inner life, and has a
keener grasp of the world of his youth. Mr. Ferguson, for his
part, is too quick to smile on Miller's glib
anti-Americanism, to explain away his anti-Semitism and to
buy into the myth of Miller as a "religious seeker" who
"successfully carried out the journey . . . along the road of
excess to the palace of Wisdom."
   Though he celebrates Miller's sexual liberation, Mr.
Ferguson prefers to believe -- in the face of considerable
evidence to the contrary -- that June's whoring was
"platonic," that she never had a lesbian affair, that the
young Miller never "experimented" with homosexuality, and
that when he found his dad in bed with a man it was an
innocent misunderstanding. And what is one to say of Mr.
Ferguson's concluding remarks to the effect that Miller
deserved the Nobel Prize for his "literary buffoonery" alone?
"Generally speaking," he asserts, "there is not enough of
this." What century has he been living in?
</TEXT>
</DOC>
