ID: 169	RANK: 24	SCORE: 14.961398
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911217-0027
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911217-0027.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   What's News --
   World-Wide
</HL>
<DATE>
12/17/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<LP>
   THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY REVOKED a 1975 "Zionism-is-racism"
resolution.
   The U.N. vote to rescind condemnation of Zionism, the
Jewish national movement that led to the birth of Israel in
1948, was 111-25, with 13 abstentions. The vote marked only
the second time in U.N. history that the assembly overturned
one of its own resolutions. The repeal resolution was
spearheaded by the U.S. and co-sponsored by 85 countries.
Among them were a number that voted for the original
anti-Zionism draft, including the Soviet Union.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Mideast peace talks in Washington hit new snags as Israel
accused Arabs of "fomenting violence" and Palestinians
condemned an Israeli crackdown in the West Bank and Gaza
Strip.
   ---
   BAKER RECEIVED assurances on nuclear arms from Yeltsin and
Gorbachev.
   In meetings with the secretary of state in Moscow, the
leaders tried to ease concern about the Soviet arsenal.
Russia's Yeltsin vowed that the new commonwealth would impose
strict controls over storage and export of nuclear arms. He
also suggested that eventually only Russia would have nuclear
arms on its territory. Baker told reporters he felt "very
reassured." Yeltsin said the commonwealth would begin
operating this month.
   Ukrainian President Kravchuk voiced hope that the U.S.
would help his republic destroy the nuclear weapons based on
its territory "as quickly as possible."
   ---
   THE SUPREME COURT AGREED to review a formula for
allocating House seats.
   The high court said it would -- for the first time --
consider the constitutionality of the method used to
apportion House seats among states. The court will review a
2-1 decision by a federal court that the apportionment law
violates the constitutional guarantee of equal
representation. The lower-court ruling was a victory for
Montana, which had filed a suit complaining that it was
unfairly allocated one House seat, rather than two, for the
1992 election.
   If the justices affirm the Montana decision, other states
could try to send more lawmakers to Washington than the
government has allocated to them.
   ---
   Energy Secretary Watkins announced steps to accelerate the
shrinking and consolidation of the nation's weapons-building
capacity over the next four years. The planned actions are in
response to the reduced need for nuclear arms.
   ---
   The European Community agreed to recognize Yugoslavia's
breakaway republics as independent states by Jan. 15,
Belgium's foreign minister announced. He said the republics
would have to meet certain criteria, however, including
democratic rule and human-rights safeguards.
   ---
   A bomb exploded on a track near Britain's busy Clapham
Junction station in south London, paralyzing the city's rail
network and disrupting service for as many as one million
commuters. The morning blast came minutes after a telephone
warning from a man who claimed to be a member of the Irish
Republican Army.
   ---
   Canada ended its negotiations with the Eskimos by agreeing
to split the Northwest Territories in two, giving the Eskimos
the right to hunt, fish and trap across the eastern half. The
Eskimos, or Inuit, would receive outright ownership of
136,000 square miles of land and compensation totaling more
than $500 million over 14 years.
   ---
   Duke was dropped from the list of candidates opposing Bush
in Georgia's March presidential primary by Republican
officials who cited "his Nazi past." The action against the
former Ku Klux Klan leader left Buchanan as Bush's only
opponent in the March 3 primary. An aide said Duke would
attempt to get back on the ballot.
   ---
   Iraq's Saddam Hussein made a major concession to
autonomy-seeking Kurds by ruling that members of the Kurdish
regional legislature no longer had to swear allegiance to his
Baath party.
   ---
   Trial proceedings began in Manila for former first lady
Imelda Marcos and her son on tax fraud charges, the first
time any member of the Marcos family has faced prosecution in
the Philippines. The two defendants didn't appear in court.
   ---
   Salvadoran officials and rebels opened separate
discussions with a U.N. mediator aimed at producing a formal
cease-fire and a final agreement for ending El Salvador's
12-year-old civil war.
   ---
   A small radical black group withdrew from negotiations
scheduled to begin Friday between the Pretoria government and
South African black organizations concerning political
power-sharing. The decision by leaders of the Pan Africanist
Congress evoked a standing ovation from 2,000 delegates at a
party conference.
   ---
   Prime Minister Robinson was defeated in the first general
elections in the two-island republic of Trinidad and Tobago
since a 1990 coup attempt. The winner was the People's
National Movement, which governed for 30 years before losing
in 1986. Robinson's tough austerity measures were widely
blamed for his plunge in popularity.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
