ID: 169	RANK: 29	SCORE: 14.187115
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880906-0036 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-06-88 0356EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i PM-Canada-Natives     09-06 0453</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Canada-Natives,0469</SECOND>
<HEAD>Prime Minister Signs Historic Pact To Give Indians Arctic Tract</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Dollar figures U.S.</NOTE>
<TEXT>
   RAE-EDZO, Northwest Territories (AP) _ Two native groups in the
Arctic will become the largest non-government landholders in North
America under a historic agreement signed by Prime Minister Brian
Mulroney.
   The long-delayed agreement, signed in this tiny community 200
miles south of the Arctic Circle on the shores of Great Slave Lake,
will give the Denes and Metis Indian nations nearly 4,000 square
miles of land and special rights to an area the size of Oklahoma.
   Mulroney said the signing marked a ``day of justice'' and
heralds ``new economic and political development'' for the north.
But native leaders say many specifics must be negotiated before a
final pact is signed in two years.
   Monday's agreement gives about 15,000 natives of the Dene and
Metis Indian nations ownership and oil and mineral rights to about
3,850 square miles of the rocky bush land bordering the Arctic
Ocean.
   It would also give them special rights and interests _ including
a voice in wildlife, forestry and land management _ for a nearly
70,000 square miles area.
   The agreement, which followed 15 years of negotiations, includes
a $405 million cash settlement that would be paid out over 20 years
beginning in 1990 _ the year negotiators hope to have a final
settlement.
   ``This agreement of principle, when carried forward to its final
form, will establish a new, stronger and healthier relationship
between the people of this area and the governments which serve
them,'' said Mulroney, who was welcomed with the beat of drums and
a ceremonial prayer chant.
   He added that the agreement marks ``real progress'' in the Dene
quest for self-determination.
   But the chief of the Dene nation warned that Ottawa and native
leaders must still negotiate issues such as aboriginal title and
self-government.
   ``We will be seeking changes before we reach the final
agreement,'' Bill Erasmus told about 1,000 Dogrib Indians on the
steps of the village's Roman Catholic church.
   The Dogribs are the largest of seven groups making up the Dene
nation.
   Ottawa said the Dene handed over their aboriginal rights when
they signed 1899 and 1921 treaties.
   But the Dene contend they never gave up their aboriginal rights
and, under Monday's agreement, are handing over some of their land
in return for financial compensation and the guarantee of hunting
and fishing rights.
   Mike Paulette, president of the Northwest Territories Metis
Association, said he was sure ``we can now negotiate a satisfactory
deal within the next two years.''
   Mulroney's visit to Rae-Edzo, 65 miles northwest of the
territorial capital of Yellowknife, marked his first trip to the
Northwest Territories since his Conservatives gained power four
years ago.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
