ID: 169	RANK: 32	SCORE: 13.168213
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880711-0090 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-11-88 1422EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r i AM-Canada-Indians     07-11 0446</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Canada-Indians,0459</SECOND>
<HEAD>Northwest Indians Reject Record Offer of Land, Cash</HEAD>
<DATELINE>HAY RIVER RESERVE, Northwest Territories (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Leaders of
15,000 native Indians in Canada's Northwest Territories have
rejected a land claim offer from the federal government.
   All but four of the 300 delegates to a special joint assembly
voted Sunday to reject the offer of $500 million ($415 million
U.S.) in cash and the use of 72,000 square miles of land in the
Mackenzie River region.
   Leaders of the Dene Indians and the northern Metis _ who are
half-descended from French fur traders _ called for more
negotiations with Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, setting a two-year
deadline for agreement.
   About 1,000 Indians gathered for a week at Hay River Indian
reservation for the heated debate over whether to accept a
tentative agreement reached in May after protracted negotiations.
   Some bands wanted to sign the agreement because of the toll
taken by poverty, alcoholism and other chronic problems on Indian
settlements.
   But other groups demanded a broader agreement including
provisions for self-government and clear title to their ancestral
land. In the end, there were only three dissenting votes and one
abstention.
   Georges Erasmus, president of the Assembly of First Nations
which represents all Canadian Indians, urged Dene leaders not to
``nail themselves to the cross'' of the federal offer. Anyone too
tired to continue fighting for their rights should step down, he
said.
   The assembly called for a meeting with Mulroney and Indian
Affairs Minister Bill McKnight to renegotiate areas such as
self-government, aboriginal title, taxation and water rights.
   In a letter to the Dene and Metis last week, McKnight termed the
deal the government's last offer and demanded a decision by July
15. He warned that Ottawa may not be willing to reopen negotiations.
   The Snare Lakes Indian band leader, Alexis Arrowmaker, said he
is willing to take that chance. ``We are powerful, we're strong
enough to talk to any government.''
   The Dene live below the timber line in a wintry region rich in
fish, game and mineral resources. Many follow a traditional way of
life by trapping for furs and hunting caribou.
   The original Dene and Meti negotiators of the land claim said
ownership of 72,000 square miles _ an area larger than North Dakota
_ would have made their people the largest private landholders in
North America.
   The government would have retained oil and mineral rights
underneath most of it, but the Indians were offered subsurface
rights for 3,200 square miles.
   In addition, the government promised continued hunting, trapping
and fishing rights on another 480,000 square miles of Crown land,
stretching from the borders of Alberta and Saskatchewan to above
the Arctic Circle.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
