ID: 169	RANK: 58	SCORE: 10.205113
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910625-0114
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910625-0114.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Time Off: Diversions and Excursions June 25-July 8
</HL>
<DATE>
06/25/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A20
</SO>
<LP>

                                                                                                       

                        Cleveland
                      Object Lessons
             Cleveland Creates an Art Museum
                                                                                                       

</LP>
<TEXT>
   The Cleveland Museum of Art marks its 75th anniversary
with an exhibit of more than 200 works tracing the "turning
points" in the museum's life: major acquisitions, bequests,
changes in leadership. Through Sept. 8. Also see "Notable
Acquisitions," more than 50 important works added to the
permanent collection since 1989. Through Sept. 15.
   11150 East Boulevard. (216) 421-7340.
                                                                                                       

                       New York
                      Arctic Art
                                                                                                       

   Small soapstone sculptures -- some embellished with fur,
bone, grass and other natural materials -- from the Harry
Goldsmith Collection. Created by Inuit artists in Quebec
during the 1970s, they illustrate scenes from traditional
life. The exhibition also includes a model of a traditional
sod-and-sealskin house with a minature kayak in front, and
five prehistoric ivory carvings by the Ipiutak people
(forerunners of today's Alaskan Eskimo) depicting mysterious
part-human, part-animal beings as well as sea mammals. They
may have been used by hunters and shamans to gain favor with
the animal spirits.
   American Museum of Natural History: Central Park West at
79th Street, through January. (212) 769-5800.
                                                                                                       

                      San Francisco
           Chicano Art: Resistance and Affirmation
                                                                                                       

   More than 130 paintings, works on paper, mixed-media
installations and photographs by 90 Chicano artists from
across the country. The show explores the Chicano art
movement and its relationship to the Chicano civil rights
movement that was active from the mid-1960s to the late '70s.
   San Francisco Museum of Modern Art: 401 Van Ness Ave. June
27-Aug. 25. (415) 863-8800.
                                                                                                       

                     San Jose, Calif.

              Recent Social and Political Art
                                                                                                       

   The San Jose Museum of Art inaugurates a new
45,000-square-foot wing designed by Skidmore, Owings &amp;
Merrill with an exhibition of about 30 works exploring how
artists during the past two decades have engaged in political
and social commentary through their work. Artists include
Jean-Michel Basquiat, Keith Haring, Jenny Holzer, Anselm
Kiefer and Andy Warhol.
   110 S. Market, through Aug. 29. (408) 294-2787.
                                                                                                       

                         DANCE
                                                                                                       

                        New York
                       Royal Ballet
                                                                                                       

   This British troupe returns to Lincoln Center for the
first time in eight years with an 80-member roster led by
Darcey Bussell, Viviana Durante, Bruce Sansom and guest
artist Sylvie Guillem. The three programs to be presented
are: the New York premiere of Anthony Dowell's 1987 staging
of "Swan Lake;" a revival of Sir Kenneth MacMillan's "Manon;"
and a triple bill featuring Sir Frederick Ashton's "Scenes de
Ballet," the American premiere of MacMillan's "Winter
Dreams," and the New York premiere of "`Still Life' at the
Penguin Cafe," by resident choreographer David Bintley.
   Metropolitan Opera House: 65th Street and Broadway. July
8-20. (212) 362-2080.
                                                                                                       

                         MUSIC
                    Cooperstown, N.Y.
                    Glimmerglass Opera
                                                                                                       

   The summer festival season offers up three productions:
Gilbert and Sullivan's "The Mikado," directed by Dorothy
Danner (July 5-20); Mozart's "Il Re Pastore" ("The Shepherd
King"), directed by Mark Lamos and conducted by Ransom Wilson
(Aug. 9-25); and Beethoven's "Fidelio," directed by Jonathan
Miller, designed by John Conklin and starring Jeanine
Altmeyer as Leonora and Mark Baker as Florestan (Aug. 10-26).
   Alice Busch Opera Theater: Eight miles north of
Cooperstown on Route 80. (607) 547-2255.
                                                                                                       

                      Santa Fe, N.M.
                      Santa Fe Opera
                                                                                                       

   The company kicks off its 35th season with a revival of
the 1989 John Copley production of Verdi's "La Traviata."
Also on the schedule: Mozart's "Le Nozze de Figaro,"
conducted by Edo de Waartcq; Puccini's "La Fanciulla del West
("The Girl of the Golden West"); Strauss's "Die Schweigsame
Frau" ("The Silent Woman"), starring Erie Mills, Mark Thomsen
and Joyce Castle; and the American premiere of contemporary
German composer Wolfgang Rihm's "Oedipus," sung in English.
   Santa Fe Opera Theater: Seven miles north of Santa Fe on
Highway 84-285. June 28-Aug. 24. (505) 982-3855.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
