ID: 265	RANK: 1	SCORE: 26.289289
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911122-0185
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911122-0185.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Can You Do Justice
   To the Difficult Part
   Of Scarlett O'Hara?
   ---
   A Talent Hunt Is in Progress
   To Fill the Petticoats,
   On TV, of Vivien Leigh
   ----
   By Kevin Goldman
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
11/22/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)
</IN>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- "Dear Mr. Halmi: Quite frankly . . . the
trials and tribulations of my own life have borne a
remarkable resemblance to those of Scarlett O'Hara."
   Let's overlook the fact that the letter writer is a credit
analyst at Chemical Bank (though Scarlett did have a head for
figures). The actress/banker has long felt this weird
affinity for the wasp-waisted, manipulative heroine of "Gone
With the Wind." And she has seen the movie eight times.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But no names, please: She has to protect her day job.
   Women all over America share the feeling for the scheming
Scarlett, and a goodly number of them have been sending
impassioned pitches in their own behalf to producer Robert
Halmi. He's the man who, for $9 million, bought the TV rights
to "Scarlett," Alexandra Ripley's newly published sequel to
the Margaret Mitchell classic. Mr. Halmi plans to turn the
best selling -- but much-ridiculed -- 823-page book into an
eight-hour miniseries. Imagine.
   Following in the footsteps of David O. Selznick, who
produced the film "Gone With the Wind" in 1939, Mr. Halmi is
conducting a world-wide search for an unknown actress to play
the rapacious heroine.
   Jean Ahern-Lubin, an actress and homemaker in Woodland
Hills outside Los Angeles, answers a reporter's phone call in
character. "Didn't my mammy tell you not to call me when I'm
resting?" she drawls. Scarlett is the "part I was created
for." In the meantime she has been biding her time with
appearances on "Knight Rider" and "The Fall Guy." She also
was in a TV movie a decade ago based on the search for the
original Scarlett. She played an actress vying for the role,
so auditioning for "Scarlett" must come naturally.
   Ms. Ahern-Lubin says she read the Ripley sequel and,
believe it or not, found it "fascinating."
   Many women have long known that, though born in the wrong
bodies, they were made to play Scarlett. They often can be
recognized by their resemblance to Liz Taylor, though why
that should help is a mystery. Some say girlfriends and old
beaus alike have actually called them Scarlett.
   Susan Grimes, a registered nurse in Jonesboro, Ga., wants
the part but isn't optimistic about getting it. "They'll wind
up picking an unknown from England, just like the original
Scarlett." Nurse Grimes's credits include a stint as the
Ivory Soap girl in print ads and as a stand-in for Kristy
McNichol in the movie "Little Darlin's."
   Like some other Scarlett hopefuls -- many of whom haven't
bothered to read the Ripley sequel -- Ms. Grimes says she
isn't a "Goner" nor a "Windy" -- shorthand terms for cultists
who watch "GWTW" over and over, always feigning the fervent
hope that Rhett will give a damn. But everybody has seen the
movie at least once.
   Emily Stroud from Birmingham, Ala., won a Scarlett
lookalike contest sponsored by Atlanta cable and baseball
mogul Ted Turner in 1989 on the 50th anniversary of the
release of "Gone With the Wind." And she threw her bonnet
into the ring. "Sure, I'm interested in the part," says Ms.
Stroud, a producer for the local ABC affiliate. "This is a
challenging role. It'll take someone who can get to the soul
of her character."
   Of course, a lot of the Scarletts waiting in the wings say
that all their lives they have been told they look like
Vivien Leigh. That's more like it. She, not Elizabeth Taylor,
played Scarlett O'Hara in the original epic, and won an
Oscar. Some, including Ms. Ahern-Lubin, do resemble her.
Others would need heavy make-up and a suspension of disbelief
from the audience.
   It took Mr. Selznick, the producer of "Gone With the
Wind," two-and-a-half years and $50,000 to come across Miss
Leigh to play the whiny, willful Scarlett. Lucille Ball, Jean
Arthur and Joan Crawford all did screen tests but weren't
quite right.
   The quest ended when Mr. Selznick's brother, Myron, a
Hollywood talent agent, plucked Vivien Leigh from the
relative obscurity of the British theater and brought her to
the Hollywood soundstage where Atlanta was burning. "Here,
genius," Myron is said to have told his brother, "meet your
Scarlett O'Hara." Miss Leigh was able to surmount a British
accent.
   Susan Lucci, who plays the beloved/reviled Erica on the
ABC soap "All My Children," knows TV and wants the job: "It's
definitely a part I am interested in. I play Erica like a
modern-day Scarlett." But following in Miss Leigh's
petticoats could be ruinous for any established film actress,
and not just because Vivien Leigh put her indelible stamp on
the role. The new novel, some think, is a dog, though of a
popular breed. And this isn't the movies we are talking
about, it is television. Would Julia Roberts, who might be
perfect, take the risk? Would Michelle Pfeiffer? Who knows?
Who cares? Mr. Halmi, true to tradition, isn't looking for a
star. He'd rather create one.
   Mr. Halmi, a charming Hungarian immigrant, insists that
his globe-girdling quest for a slim-waisted Scarlett is more
than a publicity stunt, but what's wrong with a little
publicity?
   "I was reading the book," he says, "and no famous actress
came to mind. So we look."
   The casting director for "Scarlett" isn't worried about
the unknown either. Lynn Kressler, who cast Mr. Halmi's
megahit miniseries "Lonesome Dove" for CBS, says the book is
the star: "You don't need a big name to attract an audience."
   Whoever wins will have to beg Rhett to come back to Tara,
will nearly drown when Rhett takes her on a boat ride and
will have to settle for a one-night stand with the cad. (He
really doesn't give a damn.) And the winner will have to be
"infantile" and "headstrong" while the cameras are rolling,
according to Christopher Lofton, who is writing the
screenplay.
   That's fine by Tara (get it?) Steinberg, a Californian
studying at Boston University's School of Fine Arts. She is
headstrong enough to want the part and sees herself in it. "I
know it's not a compliment," she says, "but I have some of
her characteristics. People have called me Scarlett."
   Another aspirant, Lori Javitz, thinks she has a chance.
The Long Island housewife studied at the Royal Academy of
Dramatic Arts in London and did some acting before she
married an investment banker. She hasn't read the book but
she wrote Mr. Halmi: "P.S. I have a tiny waist."
   Most Scarlett wannabe's claim to be about 22 inches around
the middle; in the Mitchell book, Scarlett had the 17-inch
waist of an anorexic.
   A script for "Scarlett" should be ready by early next
year, and Mr. Halmi hopes to begin filming in June. The
miniseries could be ready to run on CBS by February 1993.
   The world is waiting.
   For now, Mr. Halmi plans to give screen tests and serious
consideration to 100 applicants. And there may even be
something in it for the losers. He plans, on the side, to use
the auditions in a TV documentary to be called "Testing
`Scarlett.'"
</TEXT>
</DOC>
