ID: 265	RANK: 19	SCORE: 19.301165
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911114-0111
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911114-0111.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Publishing:
   Success of `Scarlett' Is an Epic in Itself
   ----
   By Meg Cox
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
11/14/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   PCI TWX
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)
</IN>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- "Tomorrow is another day," said Scarlett
O'Hara at the conclusion of "Gone With the Wind." Little did
she know.
   As the sequel to Margaret Mitchell's classic continues to
infect the country with "Scarlett" fever, publishers marvel
that a book almost universally disdained by critics could be
such a huge hit with readers. But most of them agree that
"Scarlett" is a phenomenon they won't be able to duplicate
easily -- if at all.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "Every few years a book comes along that gets people who
don't usually go into bookstores to buy a book," says Stuart
Applebaum, a senior vice president of Bertelsmann AG's Bantam
Doubleday Dell Publishing Group. "`Scarlett' will be the new
Mount Everest that every publisher wants to climb, but I
think it will be impossible to repeat."
   Indeed, no other novel in the history of the printed word
has sold so many copies as quickly as "Scarlett: the Sequel
to Margaret Mitchell's Gone With the Wind." The Mitchell
classic is second only to the Bible in total sales of 28
million copies, but that's over more than 50 years. Americans
bought 1.2 million copies of the sequel in six weeks, and
sales are expected to near two million by Christmas. There
are three million copies in print outside the U.S., and the
book is the No. 1 seller in more than a dozen countries.
   For Time Warner Inc.'s Warner Books unit, a $5 million
gamble on U.S. rights to "Scarlett" and a costly marketing
campaign are paying off handsomely. With estimated profits of
$4 on every $25 book, Warner could make $5 million or more on
the hardcover alone, plus millions more when it publishes the
paperback next year. There has also been a burst in sales of
author Alexandra Ripley's three previous romance novels, all
Warner paperbacks.
   Though one critic skewered "Scarlett" as "cultural
cannibalism," and others called it "crude" and "phony," such
barbs didn't deter readers like Elizabeth Gilbert Fortune.
Mrs. Fortune, a widow who divides her time between
Indianapolis and a Texas ranch, is an avid reader of romance
novels who reserved her copy of the sequel three months in
advance. "I was crazy about it," she says, "and I'm just so
irritated about these terrible reviews."
   Bookstore managers say the overwhelming share of buyers in
the U.S. has been women, many in their 30s and 40s -- and a
good number weren't regular customers. "You could see they
were uncomfortable in the store, and some weren't even sure
of the title," says David Schwartz, owner of five bookstores
in Milwaukee.
   Not surprisingly, sales are heaviest in the South. "I was
right back at Tara right at the first page," says Barbara
Lindsay of Columbia, S.C. "I started reading it the day I got
it, and I never put it down till I finished. I read the
reviews, but I wanted to judge it myself." She loved it.
   Sara Lorusso, who manages marketing services for
fertilizer and chemicals at a farm cooperative near Atlanta,
isn't in a hurry to read the book but had to own it. "I never
thought it would be as good as the original; and I have a
feeling I'll be disappointed, because I heard it's sunk to
the level of a romance novel," she says. "But it's a Southern
thing. There is this undying curiosity as to what would have
happened with these magnetic characters. You've thought about
it all your life."
   Publishers and booksellers were caught unprepared for the
"Scarlett" rush, but Warner did well in building public
anticipation. "Common wisdom in publishing said the book just
wouldn't work," says Mr. Applebaum of Bantam. "When it was a
year late, it was supposed to be in real trouble. Then once
it appeared and sold like crazy, awful reviews came out and
everybody said sales would die fast."
   Even Waldenbooks, a bookstore chain with a good track
record for predicting what will sell, ordered far too few
copies. "We actually had customers fighting in stores because
we didn't have enough copies to cover all the advance
registrations," says Charles Cumello, chief executive officer
of Waldenbooks, a unit of Kmart Corp.
   "Scarlett" is running circles around other best-selling
authors. Tom Clancy, the Putnam Berkley novelist who ranks as
the best-selling fiction writer of the past decade, sold 1.7
million copies of his last thriller. But even his books don't
move this fast: Book Inventory Systems Inc., which
distributes books to 25 extra-large bookstores, says it sold
more copies of "Scarlett" in one day than it sold of Mr.
Clancy's newest novel in seven weeks.
   Warner made some very shrewd publishing decisions. The
decision to choose a romance writer for the project was made
by the Mitchell estate, but Warner targeted its strategy to
capture the vast audience of romance readers even in choosing
the title. Focus groups composed mostly of women were given
"Scarlett" and another title the publisher liked much better,
"Tomorrow Is Another Day."
   "All these women said `Scarlett' was `more romantic' as a
title," says Laurence Kirshbaum, chairman of Warner Books.
"At least a third had never read the original, but everybody
knows who Scarlett is."
   Reservation signs in bookstores and an excerpt trumpeted
on the front page of Life magazine kindled curiosity. But
Warner refused to release advance copies of the book to store
buyers or critics; though the extreme hostility of critics
was a shock, Warner didn't expect raves from traditional
fiction reviewers and wanted books to hit stores before the
reviews were out. The media, not knowing plot details, went
after the first-day-of-sale story.
   On Sept. 25, the day the book came out, bookseller
Mitchell Kaplan had crews from all three television networks
pacing his Coral Gables, Fla., store. "Every time someone
went to the counter, three cameras would follow, hoping they
were buying it," says Mr. Kaplan.
   "I'd be glad to take credit for orchestrating all this;
but the fact is, this was consumer democracy in action," says
Warner Books' Mr. Kirshbaum.
   Some publishers say the interest in the original book was
so universal that it guaranteed success to a sequel. Phyllis
Grann, chief executive of the Putnam Berkley publishing unit
of Matsushita Electric Industrial Co.'s MCA Inc., says: "I
don't think there is a single other book with such a hold on
the American public as `Gone With the Wind,' and I'd be wary
of attempting to translate this success into something else."
   Not that some won't try. Pocketbooks, a division of
Paramount Communications Inc.'s Simon &amp; Schuster unit, will
publish a sort-of sequel next summer. The new book -- "H" --
will deal with what happened to Emily Bronte's character
Heathcliff during the three years he disappeared from
"Wuthering Heights."
   The publisher, however, wants to distance its effort from
the "Gone With the Wind" sequel. Irwyn Applebaum, publisher
of Pocketbooks, says the company will market "H" as a
"compelling first novel" and will not attempt to "create
`Scarlett Fever II.'"
   He adds: "We're very wary of the sequel skepticism after
`Scarlett.' Whenever I mention our book to someone in the
industry, they begin rolling their eyes, as if to say, `Oh
no, here comes another one.'"
</TEXT>
</DOC>
