ID: 265	RANK: 20	SCORE: 19.298277
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911121-0151
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911121-0151.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   The Sequel to the Sequel Is in the Wind
   ----
   By Larry Wallberg
</HL>
<DATE>
11/21/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   The publishing world is abuzz with the news that a
consortium made up of Margaret Mitchell's two nephew-heirs
and Alexandra Ripley's innumerable friends and acquaintances
has just signed a nine-figure agreement with Warner Books
authorizing a sequel to Ms. Ripley's "Scarlett: The Sequel to
Margaret Mitchell's `Gone With the Wind'" (823 pages,
$24.95). Referred to by insiders as "Wind III," the book is
already slated for publication in May of 1992, and the search
for an appropriate author who can write really fast is under
way.
   Spurred on by rumors that Arnold Schwarzenegger has
scrawled his signature on a contract with Disney's Touch-Up
Studios for him to play the title role in "Rhett the
Destroyer: The Movie Version of Alexandra Ripley's `Scarlett:
The Sequel to etc.'," a number of well-known writers have
already submitted proposed sample chapters for the third
volume in the saga. When asked why the current best-seller's
creator would not automatically be awarded the opportunity to
expand on her success, a high-ranking official at Warner read
the following statement: "Ms. Ripley, believe it or not, is
presently committed to another project, `Holden: The Sequel
to J.D. Salinger's The Catcher in the Rye.'" At the same
press conference, he did, however, make reference to two from
among the hundreds of manuscripts the communications
conglomerate has received: Stephen King's "Gore With the
Wind" and Norman Maller's "Scarlett's Ghost."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   No longer under consideration, unfortunately, is the
publisher's proclaimed favorite, the late Theodor Geisel,
better known as Dr. Seuss, who at the time of his death
earlier this year had begun sketches for "Oh, the Places
You'll Go With the Wind]" The beloved author/illustrator
lived to complete only one drawing, a picture of a
long-necked, feathery creature in hoop skirt having a
conversation with a gentlemanly elephant. The accompanying
text says, "Your naughty wife is a coquette/I do not like
her, Rhett-I-bet."
   Still, many famous penpersons are reported to be in the
running. Derek Humphry, author of "Final Exit," could not be
reached to confirm or deny reports that he had outlined a
story he calls "Going With the Wind," the climax of which is
reached when both Rhett and Scarlett decide to euthanize
themselves in Southern comfort. Oliver Sacks apparently is
laboring under the delusion that the publishers have already
made a deal with him for "The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a
Plantation." In an interview yesterday he said: "Of course
they're going to pick me. It's as plain as the shoe on your
face." Sue Grafton refuses to comment on "`F' is for
Fiddle-dee-dee," in which Ashley Wilkes would be found
stabbed with his own sword. "All I can reveal right now," she
said, "is that it was definitely not done by Miss Scarlett
with a lead pipe in the conservatory."
   But not everyone in the literary world is affected with
Windmania. Last week, the heirs rejected Jeff Smith's
manuscript of "The Frugal Gourmet Cooks With Scarlet Runner
Beans" after they actually tasted some of the dishes. Our
spies tell us that Tom Clancy seems to have lost his way in
"The Hunt for Rhett's October." And a few days ago, Robert
Fulghum actually tore up his first draft of "Atlanta Was on
Fire, But I Left Town During It" when he woke up in a bad
mood.
   Of course, following up on addenda to continuations of a
good thing is not limited strictly to the printmongers.
Entrepreneurs everywhere are tantalizing consumers with
merchandise spun off from the books. Expectations are high
for a soon-to-be released how-to video for aspiring midwives
called "You Doan Know Nuthin' 'Bout Birthin' Babies." This
Christmas, Bloomingdale's will be spritzing shoppers
aggressively with the latest scent: "Eau Hara." A
"twelve-step" organization that prefers to remain anonymous
will sell sleepwear emblazoned with the slogan: "Frankly, My
Dear, I Don't Give a Dram." And the earth's most famous
fast-food chain will greet the Yuletide season with a
superplump burger called the Pattie McDaniel. You've probably
seen its ad campaign: "As God is our witness, you'll never be
hungry again."
   ---
   Mr. Wallberg is a Yankee free-lance writer.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
