ID: 265	RANK: 57	SCORE: 12.929043
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910619-0095
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910619-0095.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Publishing:
   To Make Their Big Books Even Bigger,
   Firms Are Spending the Biggest Bucks
   ----
   By Meg Cox
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
06/19/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   PCI TWX U.PSO
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)
</IN>
<RE>
EUROPE (EU)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
GREAT BRITAIN (UK)
UNITED STATES (US)
WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)
</RE>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- Bigger Than Ever]
   More Than You Would Have Dreamed]
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Lavish Beyond Belief]
   For the nation's book publishers, that sums up the price
of hype these days. Complain though they might about
dwindling profit margins, companies are spending more than
ever on advertising and promotion budgets for major books.
   Warner Books has never spent as much to market a book as
the $600,000 earmarked to launch this fall's sequel to "Gone
With The Wind." Viking Penguin will spend in excess of
$750,000 promoting Stephen King's next novel, even though he
is already one of the top-selling authors in publishing
history. Random House is pitching a thriller called
"Patriots" with ads on radio and cable television, plus a
money-back guarantee -- very rare for a hardcover book.
   And Simon &amp; Schuster spent plenty attempting to have Mary
Higgins Clark's latest thriller, "Loves Music, Loves to
Dance," make its first appearance on the New York Times'
best-seller list in the No. 1 spot. To that end, Simon &amp;
Schuster mounted a major campaign that included store
displays, bus ads and network television commercials -- still
fairly rare for books -- on top of a 16-city author tour. And
it worked: "Loves Music" started on top and has been the
top-selling novel on the Times list for six weeks.
   Compared with budgets for movies and consumer products,
these amounts may seem insignificant. But by publishing
standards they are huge: Publishers say the usual marketing
budget for an anticipated best seller is more like $200,000,
while the average "midlist" book by a little-known author is
lucky to get a budget of $10,000. Publishers aren't about to
routinely spend big money on expensive media like television;
and for most nonfiction, publishers say publicity is far more
effective than advertising.
   But there are several changes in the book business that
compel publishers to spend so lavishly in tight times for
some titles. For starters, competition is fiercer than ever:
The '80s created a number of merged megapublishers who paid
staggering advances for brand-name authors. As these books
come out, publishers can only make money if sales are
staggering, too. With the recession, sales have been sluggish
lately even for best sellers.
   Also adding pressure is the increasing computerization of
bookstores. Stores now have a much better grasp of what is
selling; what isn't gets shipped back more quickly. If
publishers wait for word-of-mouth to build sales gradually, a
book may be gone from stores by the time it's popular.
   "As publishers, we are all very conscious of the shortened
shelf life of hardcover books," says Jack McKeown, publisher
of trade, or general-interest, books for Simon &amp; Schuster, a
unit of Paramount Communications Inc. "Computers have brought
many blessings to the bookselling industry, but booksellers
are tempted to drop quickly what doesn't move. It has become
extremely important to maximize sales in the first three,
four weeks."
   Publishers attempt to "leverage" their big authors,
ratcheting up the awareness and sales level with each new
book, which also often requires stepped-up ad spending. In
the case of "Loves Music," Ms. Clark's eighth novel, Simon &amp;
Schuster wanted to outsell the previous one, which took
several weeks to reach No. 1 and only stayed for two weeks,
says Mr. McKeown.
   "Our objective this time was to start her at No. 1, which
is very hard to do," says Mr. McKeown. "We feel there will be
a payoff for our advertising commitment down the road in
increased sales," he says. When a writer hits a certain level
of mass popularity, all of his or her earlier titles are
often re-released in paperback, and sales of the writer's
whole body of work rise across the board.
   Simon &amp; Schuster had experimented with television ads on
Ms. Clark's previous novel and tracked the sales rise in the
four markets where the TV ads ran. This time, ads ran in
eight cities during morning talk shows for two weeks,
starting the day books landed in stores. The 15-second spot
dramatized the plot, about a serial killer who stalks his
victims through the personal ads: The commercial showed a
newspaper ad, a couple dancing and the woman's dead body.
"Meeting Mr. Right can be murder," says an announcer, a line
also featured in ads inside 500 buses traversing greater New
York.
   "Everything clicked," says Mr. McKeown. "On a week-to-week
comparison at the national chains, her sales are running 50%
ahead of the previous book." He won't divulge the total cost
of the marketing and promotion campaign but says the
television time alone cost more than $100,000.
   Given his legions of passionate fans, Stephen King's new
novel, "Needful Things" probably doesn't need any promotion
to start out as a No. 1 best seller, but his publisher plans
a massive campaign. "We've always spent a lot promoting
Stephen King," says Michael Jacobs, president of Viking
Penguin, a unit of Pearson PLC. "Every time we do an
innovative ad campaign, we add new readers. We want to
increase the sales of hardcover copies with each title."
   Weeks before the Sept. 30 publication date, bookstores
will be sent counter-top displays with cards that allow King
fans to reserve their copy of the book, a growing practice
with hot titles. Readers who pre-order will be sent a post
card when the books arrive, plus an as-yet-undetermined
souvenir.
   Later, large cardboard bins called "dumps" will be
distributed to 5,000 stores to display the book in bulk. For
the entire month of October, transit ads will run on buses
and subways in three cities. There will also be a billboard
-- another medium publishers are using more -- along Los
Angeles' Sunset Boulevard. Print advertising will include
teasers in newspapers in eight major cities, running three
days in a row just before the book goes on sale.
   With "Scarlett: the Sequel to Margaret Mitchell's Gone
With the Wind," Warner Books says it must spend heavily to
announce the book because its contents are being tightly
guarded. "Since no one has read it and there's no
word-of-mouth, we have to take extra measures so that people
know it's available," says Nanscy Neiman, publisher of the
Time Warner Inc. unit.
   The $600,000 budget is Warner Books' biggest ever for
advertising and promotion, but Warner reportedly paid $5
million just for the U.S. and Canadian rights and plans an
ambitious initial run of 500,000 copies. The book was delayed
a year amid rumors of problems, but the publisher insists
"Scarlett" is a great read with a built-in audience. Still,
author Alexandra Ripley, despite three previous best-selling
paperback romances, is hardly a household name.
   To get the word out, Warner plans a 30-second television
commercial to run in major markets during talk shows, soap
operas and some prime-time shows as the book arrives in
stores in late September. Ms. Neiman will only say that the
spot will be "romantic and wonderful."
   In addition, Warner plans an extensive print-ad campaign
in popular magazines like People, with lots of newspaper ads,
especially in the South. As with the King book, readers will
be encouraged to pre-order the book in stores. And bookstores
will be sent red buttons for clerks to wear. The button's
slogan, playing off the last line of "Gone With the Wind,"
tells customers: "Tomorrow is here at last . . . ."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
