ID: 265	RANK: 73	SCORE: 10.704698
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911213-0015
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911213-0015.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Retailing:
   This Christmas May Be One for the Books
   ----
   By Meg Cox
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
12/13/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
SPECIALTY RETAILERS OF LIMITED PRODUCT LINES (OTS)
PUBLISHING, INFORMATION SERVICES COMPANIES (PUB)
ALL SPECIALTY RETAILERS (RTS)
</IN>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Despite the recession, Santa Claus's bag will be heavy
this year.
   While retailers in general report little holiday cheer,
many booksellers are ringing up sales that are comfortably
ahead of last year's. Pricey coffee-table books have suffered
in the recession and book buyers are choosy, but they aren't
leaving stores empty-handed.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "The combination of my instinct and the pattern so far
tells me Christmas is going to be very good for books," says
Edward Morrow, owner of the Northshire Bookstore in
Manchester Center, Vt., and former chairman of the American
Booksellers Association. "Sales of nonbook items like records
and toys are down in my store, but books are up. It tells me
that people look upon books as items of substance worth
having in times of stress."
   Besides the search by financially stressed consumers for
reasonably priced gifts, booksellers cite an unusually broad
selection of high-quality and popular titles in many
categories. "We're a product-driven business, and the product
is wonderful right now," says Jeff Rogart, vice president of
merchandising for Waldenbooks, a unit of Kmart Corp. "I've
been in this business 20 years, and this is the best season
for books I can remember. Almost every major novelist has a
book out; then you throw in `Scarlett' and Katharine
Hepburn's memoirs, and there is even a new Betty Crocker
cookbook."
   Booksellers say there isn't a single "must-have" title
this year, like the $50 "Civil War" book that sold more than
half a million copies last year. While "Scarlett" continues
to rack up impressive sales, a wide range of novels by
popular favorites like Tom Clancy and Stephen King are
selling briskly, as are practical, basic nonfiction books
like cookbooks and home-improvement guides. "The Best
Treatment," a home reference guide on treatments for various
ailments, is a major how-to hit since Ann Landers plugged it
in a column recently.
   Price is clearly a factor in consumers' book shopping.
"There isn't a lot of impulse buying," says Brian Weese,
general manager of Encore Books, a chain of 83 stores in the
mid-Atlantic region. "There isn't one book selling in what I
call floor-stack quantities, where we stack it on the floor
in waist-high piles and the stacks just melt."
   "We definitely feel the effects of the recession in the
high-ticket coffee-table books," says Robert Teicher, a book
buyer for Book Inventory Systems Inc., which supplies books
for several dozen extra-large, upscale bookstores. A photo
collection by Annie Leibovitz, at $60, is a top seller in its
category, he adds, though not doing as well as expected. And
in areas like cookbooks, old standbys are selling faster than
newer models: the revised 40th anniversary edition of Betty
Crocker's cookbook "is a classic and also a great buy at
$22," Mr. Teicher says.
   Shanna Hamilton, manager of a B. Dalton bookstore in
Dearborn, Mich., says, "People will ask for something cheaper
in the same category, or they'll buy something off the
bargain table. A lot of people balk at paying $25 for a
hardcover novel, so even for gifts they'll ask `What do you
have by that author in paperback?'"
   Catering to consumers' interest in bargain basics, B.
Dalton is running a tie-in program called "Master Value,"
which gives a 25% discount on 20 popular titles to anybody
charging at least $55 on their MasterCard. This has given an
extra boost to such favorites as "The Joy of Cooking" and
Shel Silverstein's "A Light in the Attic." Also courtesy of
the special deal, "Civil War" has shot back to No. 1 on B.
Dalton's list of best-selling coffee-table books.
   The sticker shock caused by full-size hardcover books is
one of the factors boosting sales of small, cleverly packaged
gift books ranging from the silly to the inspirational. One
of the sleeper hits of last Christmas was a palm-sized $8.95
paperback called "Meditations for Women Who Do Too Much."
This year there are dozens of tempting little tomes under
$10, but nothing has sold like "French For Cats," a tiny
hardcover featuring a cartoon cat wearing a beret.
   So far, more than 170,000 copies of the book are in print,
and it's selling big at both chain stores and independent
bookstores. At the classy Brentano's chain, "French For Cats"
is outselling "Scarlett." Henry Beard, the book's author, did
well previously with "Miss Piggy's Guide to Life" and "Latin
for All Occasions," but the cat book is his biggest hit to
date.
   This silly book purports to portray a cat's thoughts, with
English expressions like "I think I'm going to cough up a fur
ball" translated into French. It has captivated book buyers,
and its publisher, Random House's Villard Books division,
says it was all by design.
   "We knew people were resisting high book prices, and we
noticed that small books were selling, selling, selling,"
says Diane Reverand, publisher of Villard. "I think the cute
packaging is a big selling point, and it's a level of whimsy
people need at the moment, with things so bleak. You can't
even say the title aloud without smiling." At this rate, a
sequel seems likely. Perhaps "Italian for Dogs," says Ms.
Reverand.
   Children's books, meanwhile, continue to boom, almost
regardless of price. At Books &amp; Books, a bookstore in Coral
Gables, Fla., the most popular children's book is "Pish Posh
Said Hieronymus Bosch," an illustrated book selling for
$18.95. The favorite children's book nationwide seems to be
"The Jolly Christmas Postman," a $16.95 picturebook with
letters and postcards that can be removed and read. It's the
sequel to "The Jolly Postman," also by Janet and Allan
Ahlberg.
   Books in every price range tied to Walt Disney's new movie
"Beauty and the Beast" are also big sellers. And sales have
been strong for many titles by the recently deceased Dr.
Seuss. Publisher Random House combined six Seuss favorites in
a $25 hardcover book that is a big gift item.
   Even in tough times, there are still enough big spenders
out there to make a success of Alfred A. Knopf's two-volume
set on "The Sistine Chapel," priced at $1,000. Produced with
Nippon Television Network Association, which funded the
chapel's restoration, the set's lavish 740 pages feature 600
color photographs.
   "We published a limited edition of 2,500, and only 500 are
still in the warehouse; I expect those to be gone by
Christmas," says Bruce Harris, an executive vice president of
Knopf parent Random House Inc. "About 25% have sold to
institutions like libraries and museums, but the rest are
being bought by individuals. Many bookstores have said to us,
`I'll take two or three, and I know exactly who I'm going to
sell them to.'"
</TEXT>
</DOC>
