ID: 272	RANK: 25	SCORE: 6.790981
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP901231-0157 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NY-12-31-90 1418EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>a a AM-CelebrityDivorces Adv07   12-31 0863</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Celebrity Divorces, Adv07,1107</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv07</NOTE>
<NOTE>For release Mon AMs, Jan 7, and thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>Give Me the House, the Car, and Half Your Celebrity Status</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By PAUL GEITNER</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>NEW YORK (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   It's the same old story.
   Boy meets girl. Boy gets girl. Boy bills girl for grooming of
schnauzer. Girl makes tuna fish for boy, again and again. Boy and
girl sit atop the high-powered world of publishing. Girl divorces
boy.
   OK, maybe the story of Richard Snyder and Joni Evans is not the
same old story. It certainly has had a novel ending; both sides
want a judge to declare the other's ``celebrity status'' a marital
asset, give it a dollar value and divvy it up just like the family
house, furniture and other belongings.
   Snyder and Evans each claimed to have made the other what he or
she is today. And to prove the point, they were willing to fling
major mud.
   The case has more than gossip value. Divorce lawyers are
watching it and similar cases to see whether the courts will agree
that fame should be appraised and its value apportioned.
   ``It's an idea whose time hopefully will never come,'' said
attorney Raoul Felder, who's fighting to keep Metropolitan Opera
diva Frederica von Stade's husband from claiming a piece of her
stardom.
   But Marvin Mitchelson, who represents Roseanne Barr's ex-husband
Bill Pentland, hopes to win the first California case based on the
principle.
   ``The attaining of celebrity status during the marriage ... is a
definite asset, just as appreciation of a house or an art
collection is an asset,'' he argues. ``I think it is slowly being
recognized.''
   The story of Evans and Snyder, played out in a New York
courtroom last spring, is light on hearts and violins and heavy on
the bottom line.
   Snyder, head of Simon &amp; Shuster, hired Evans as director of
subsidiary rights in 1974. She'd advanced to associate publisher by
1976 when they began dating. Two years later, they married at City
Hall - during their lunch hour.
   Theirs was an egalitarian marriage, though he always out-earned
her. Bank accounts were separate. His assistant billed her monthly
for her share of the food, utilities and schnauzer-grooming bills,
she testified.
   In 1979, Snyder created an imprint (a semi-autonomous shop
within a larger publishing house) called Linden Press for Evans to
run. It was a success.
   She says the marriage began to break down in 1985, when Snyder
promoted her to president of the trade book division and she was
working directly under him again. Snyder, who has publicly
complained about her workaholism, testified that the marriage
``went south'' two years earlier.
   They agreed to separate in 1986 and she filed for divorce in
February 1987, resigning from Simon &amp; Schuster at the same time to
join Random House.
   Had they agreed to an out-of-court property settlement, the case
might have ended there. Instead, the history of their marriage was
recounted in public.
   Evans said Snyder aimed a tennis ball at her during an argument
on the tennis court. Snyder said Evans put him ``in a very
humiliating and embarrassing and ... emotionally unhappy position''
by turning her back on him at a publishing convention.
   The last time they had conjugal relations? ``The weekend of July
4, 1986,'' Evans testified, matter-of-factly.
   Evans said she cooked and cleaned when the maid was off duty,
but conceded she made ``tuna fish 75 percent of the time.''
   Even then, Snyder said, he opened the can and removed the tuna,
``because that was the dangerous part.''
   Evans, 48, who now heads her own imprint at Random House,
contended in her pretrial memorandum she acted as Snyder's
``sounding board,'' entertained his corporate bosses (Simon &amp;
Schuster is owned by Paramount Communications), participated in
business decisions and served as ``a source of emotional stability
and as moral anchor.''
   That, she said, entitles her to a share of the marital estate,
which she estimates at more than $18 million.
   On the contrary, answered the 57-year-old Snyder. She would be
nothing without him, he argued, so he should get a cut of all her
future earnings.
   ``She is the very opposite of the wife who sacrifices her own
career or performs unremunerated services for the benefit of her
spouse and family,'' he argued in court papers made available to
The Associated Press.
   ``In significant part as a result of his efforts, she is today
one of the highest paid and most powerful executives in the
publishing industry.''
   Manhattan state Supreme Court Justice Elliot Wilk has reserved
decision.
   A decade ago, the Snyder-Evans contretemps would have been an
impossibility. Judges simply awarded property to the spouse who
held the title - usually the husband - while providing alimony to
the untitled spouse.
   But in 1980, New York's laws were revised to protect the spouse
whose contribution was non-monetary. In New York and 41 other
states, judges must now make an ``equitable distribution'' of all
property acquired during the marriage, regardless of who holds the
title.
   Then, in a landmark 1985 case, New York's top court ruled that a
woman who gave up her career to put her husband through medical
school, only to be divorced two months after he got his license,
must be compensated with a share of the husband's medical license.
   A New Jersey judge took that concept one step farther, awarding
Joe Piscopo's ex-wife $50,000, or half the value placed on his
celebrity status. The state's highest court upheld the award in May
1989.
   Mitchelson hopes similar logic will prevail in his case against
Roseanne Barr. He argues that her ex-husband helped launch her
career in comedy clubs, was the main parent and homemaker while she
was on the road and auditioning, then worked with her to launch her
hit ABC show and wrote some of the scripts.
   ``Here you've got clearly a career that was made and developed
during the marriage,'' he said. Barr's current earnings ``are a
thousand times more than they were because of what happened during
the marriage.''
   Alfred Ferrer, attorney for Frederica von Stade's former
husband, Peter Elkus, is appealing a ruling declaring the singer's
career was not a marital asset. He too describes marriage in terms
more numismatic than romantic.
   ``Marriage is an economic partnership,'' he said. ``If one's
career is enhanced during that partnership, each spouse has a right
to participate in that value.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Mon AMs, Jan 7</NOTE>
<TEXT>
</TEXT>
</DOC>
