ID: 272	RANK: 33	SCORE: 6.647178
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920114-0144
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920114-0144.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   A.N. Wilson: Tabloid Trollope and Vicar of Dish
   ----
   By Amy Gamerman
</HL>
<DATE>
01/14/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   London -- The glass-and-marble tower of the tabloid
Evening Standard is an unlikely place for Britain's most
famous young fogey. The picture most people have of A.N.
Wilson is a much-reproduced photograph showing him on a
battered bicycle, bundled in tweed from trilby-hatted head to
toe. Once described as a Victorian prelate out of a Trollope
novel, the 41-year-old writer nevertheless looks quite happy
and at home in his high-tech office.
   "Monday-Tuesday-Wednesday I'm having all this fun," Mr.
Wilson says, with a wave at the stacks of books that come his
way as the Standard's literary editor. "And then
Thursday-Friday-Saturday I'm usually working on whatever book
I've got on. I occasionally take time off. I am what they
call a workaholic."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Indeed. Mr. Wilson is the author of five literary
biographies (Milton, Walter Scott, Hilaire Belloc, Tolstoy
and C.S. Lewis) and 12 novels ("Daughters of Albion" -- the
third in a series -- has just been published in the U.S.
{Viking, 287 pages, $21}). He also has turned out two books
of collected essays, two critiques on religion and "Stray," a
children's book about cats.
   That's the highbrow A.N. Wilson. His lowbrow alter ego
vents itself in a weekly column in the Standard, airing views
on everything from the Palm Beach rape trial to the small
bomb that paralyzed London subways last Christmas, to Koko,
"the talking gorilla" and the fellow "accused of enjoying
improper relations with a dolphin." "They can all go into the
sausage machine," the writer says, with a wintry smile.
   No grist, it seems, is too coarse for Mr. Wilson's mill.
One of England's most erudite and productive men of letters,
he is also a famous gossip, gadfly and occasional vulgarian.
If that seems like a contradiction, then you've stumbled on
the key to Mr. Wilson's career: His writing is driven by the
conflict between noble aims and all-too-human failings.
   Few writers delight as much in the ridiculous. Take
Tolstoy: What fascinated Mr. Wilson "was the tremendous
contradiction between all his ideals and the way he behaved,"
he says. "He wrote that book called `The Kreutzer Sonata,' in
which he preached total sexual abstinence. . . . His wife,
who was in effect his literary agent, felt a pretty big fool
going to Moscow to get permission to have her husband's new
story printed when she was out to here with her umpteenth
child."
   In Mr. Wilson's fiction, too, the more principled or
ascetic the characters, the more likely they are to trip over
their baser lusts. There's the monkish Monica of "Love
Unknown," who ditches Russian lessons and embroidery for an
affair with her best friend's husband. Or the blind
philosopher of "Wise Virgin," whose chilly intellectual
snobbery thaws when he falls, unexpectedly, for his dowdy
assistant.
   "Daughters of Albion" is the latest installment in the
life of Julian Ramsay, a lazy would-be writer and chronicler
of the Lampitts, a minor aristocratic family. Like its
predecessors, the novel is most memorable for its humbugs,
fakers and fools. The star is Albion Pugh, a noisome gossip
whose epic about the life of Christ may be a masterpiece --
or a joke. Pugh is also inexplicably attractive to women,
among them Julian's drab cousin Felicity: "the most glaring
contradictions in his character, and the most off-putting
faults positively increased his attractiveness to her," says
Julian. "She even seemed to relish the fact that he was, by
any ordinary criteria, a quite stunningly bad writer." More
such eccentrics are sure to follow: The series may run to
seven novels.
   But the most interesting character Mr. Wilson has created
may be his own: Invariably, his writing has been overshadowed
by his notoriety. First there was that fogey business: The
image of Mr. Wilson as a donnish scribbler keeping alive
traditions that had died years before he was born dogged him
for years. "It was sort of a cosy little joke, wasn't it?" he
says now. "Which was one of the things that annoyed me at the
time, but now I don't mind cosiness and affection."
   For one thing, Mr. Wilson isn't so young anymore. And the
names he gets called aren't so affectionate. His face has
been slapped, his name struck from guest lists and reviled at
Oxbridge high tables by those he has mocked in his novels.
But perhaps nothing he's written has raised a bigger fuss
than his 1990 Spectator account of a dinner party for the
Queen Mother, Britain's most beloved royal.
   It was mild stuff: The Queen Mum declared Dorothy Sayers
and Barbara Pym her favorite writers, recounted how T.S.
Eliot ("such a gloomy man, looked as though he worked in a
bank") gave them all the giggles during a wartime poetry
reading, and took a few potshots at her relatives ("I can't
understand a word Prince Michael says. He will mumble into
his beard. As for Princess Michael . . .").
   But in the drawing-room society that had adopted Mr.
Wilson as its pet, this was an act of treachery right up
there with Guy Fawkes's plot to bomb Parliament. "Everyone
should be warned not to have him in their house or at a
private dinner," thundered Lord Wyatt of Weeford, the Queen
Mum's embarrassed host.
   Unrepentant, Mr. Wilson has made royal bashing a staple of
his Standard columns. When asked to attend a lunch in honor
of Austrian-born Princess Michael, he wondered, "was it in
good taste so near to Remembrance Sunday to break bread with
the enemy?" In another column, he berated the Duchess of York
for leaving her new baby to join her husband in Australia,
adding: "It won't stop Andrew from getting bored with her
when she's 45."
   "Childish, childish," Mr. Wilson says with a grin-not that
he cares. "The royal family deserves all the obloquy we can
heap on their heads, because there's so much royal worship
here . . . and it's so sickly and sentimental and
sycophantic."
   But other targets seem less deserving. Mr. Wilson's
attacks can come off as spiteful and cruel, such as this one
on fellow pundit Bernard Levin: "Since he only comes up to
most people's bottoms, visual confusions can be created," he
wrote.
   "That was a little bit rude," Mr. Wilson concedes. "It
seems funny at the time, but then one realizes it's offended
somebody. Sometimes I don't mind in the least."
   It's hardly surprising that Mr. Wilson has come in for his
own share of abuse. "Whatever view he holds, he always goes
too far in it and embarrasses everyone on his side," old
fogey Auberon Waugh wrote in the Sunday Telegraph last June.
Those who aren't on his side don't scruple at personal
attacks: When Mr. Wilson left his first wife (his former
Oxford tutor and 10 years his senior) for a younger woman, he
was accused of humbuggery for his earlier writing on the
sanctity of marriage.
   "That's a bit unfair," says Mr. Wilson, who recently
married the woman in question -- Ruth Guilding, an art
historian 10 years his junior. "What I said, years ago, was
if you're a Christian you can't get around the fact that the
New Testament forbids divorce."
   But the High Church communicant who once took religion so
seriously that he spent a year in a seminary, has lost his
faith. Mr. Wilson now goes after organized religion with the
same glee that he once reserved for bashing Princess Michael.
He's attacked Pope John Paul II as an anti-intellectual
reactionary with a "vulgar roadshow," and lumps the pontiff,
several home-grown spiritual leaders and the Ayatollah
together as "religious bullies."
   Mr. Wilson's anti-conversion experience is at the heart of
his latest project.
   "I don't believe the historic figure of Jesus wanted to
start Christianity. I don't think it was in his mind at all,"
he says. "I'm at work on a book about it -- in fact I've
finished it. . . . I'm just going to call it `Jesus.'"
   "Jesus" has already caused a fair amount of media hubbub,
with Mr. Wilson condemned in advance by those who fear he
will do to the Prince of Peace what Kitty Kelley did to Ol'
Blue Eyes. Once again, he's in the spotlight -- not that he's
complaining.
   "I'm a fairground, comic character, but it would be
pompous to mind it," he says, a Cheshire cat grin slipping
once again across his face. "You know what journalism is
like."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
