ID: 272	RANK: 36	SCORE: 6.633901

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-40074 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar008___94019" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-008 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  31 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SOCIAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Changing Family Value System Characterized </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0094A Shanghai SHEHUI [SOCIETY] in Chinese No 105, Oct 
93 pp 38-41 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0094A </F>
<F P=104>  Shanghai SHEHUI [SOCIETY] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Bao Lei (0545 7191): "Changes in </F>
Current Outlook on Family Values"] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] The phenomena of "losing 
sight" of family moral values and changes in family moral 
outlook are primarily expressed as follows: 
  First, it is reflected in the norms of marital relations, 
where the emotional content and spiritual and cultural content 
in marital relationships appear to be increasing, and more and 
more are becoming the leading factors in deciding whether or not 
to establish marital relations. But at present the majority of 
people still take a solid and stable marriage based on a partner 
who "has good moral character, is capable, is easy to get along 
with on a daily basis, and is able to remain devoted until the 
end" as the ideal; at the same time, a utilitarian marriage 
involving grovelling for money is looked at as sacrificing the 
happiness of the parties to the marriage, while feudal marriages 
in which an individual's humanity is destroyed to further family 
interests is looked on as having a tendency to raise eyebrows, 
through such methods as having repeated marriages and accepting 
mistresses, transnational marriages, arranged and mercenary 
marriages and abduction and selling of women; in terms of 
marriage choices, people have even more "individual freedoms," 
and the society has gradually adopted a more understanding 
attitude towards varied marital choices, while "freedom of 
divorce" is becoming a reality. 
  [passage omitted] Second, it is reflected in the norms of 
the 
relations between the two sexes, where the new concept sees a 
sincere, equal, happy, and harmonious sexual life between 
husband and wife as increasing the affection between a man and 
woman and strengthening the biological and physiological basis 
of marital relations, sexual scientific knowledge has gone from 
being shackled to being widely disseminated, and the quality of 
sexual life between men and women has been increased; 
consciousness of female sexual rights has gradually been 
awakened; the sexual rights of the elderly have achieved a 
certain degree of respect, and the need for love of those bereft 
of a spouse in later years is gradually receiving the 
understanding of children and support from public opinion; the 
serious effect of the feudal concept of chastity is weakening, 
and when it comes to female victims of rape and women who have 
made sexually-related mistakes, people are gradually changing to 
be more tolerant and helpful. People are also gradually adopting 
a tolerant attitude towards premarital sexual activity and 
extra-marital sexual activity; at the same time, for business 
and educational circles, the Western trends towards "sexual 
revolution," and sexual liberation," have had an effect that 
cannot be underrated on the younger generation, and have to a 
certain degree rocked the existing marital family system. Such 
phenomena as living together, trial marriages, third 
participants, and pregnancies outside of marriage are occurring; 
and there has been a resurgence of prostitution, which had been 
stamped out after the founding of New China. The phenomenon has 
day by day gotten more serious and more open, venereal disease 
is spreading, while cases of people with AIDS and people 
carrying the HIV virus are appearing on the mainland. 
  [passage omitted] Third, it is reflected in the norms for 
relations between husband and wife, and relations between 
husband and wife with an equality based on a cooperative 
division of labor are gradually coming to the fore; however, in 
large numbers of worker families from rural and township 
enterprises, relations between husband and wife characterized by 
the not fully equal equation "the man rules outside, the woman 
rules inside" still exists to a large degree; among the group of 
newly rich people, there exists a "rich ladies social stratum" 
in which the wife or mistress is totally dependent on the 
husband, while in some poor regions, through various types of 
buying and selling of marriages or abductions, the wife becomes 
the husband's "child bearing tool" and "family slave," and loses 
her personal freedom. 
  Fourth, it is reflected in the norms of intergenerational 
relations. Equal and democratic intergenerational relations are 
gradually replacing the feudal patriarchal relationships between 
principal and subordinate, and for parents and children, senior 
family members and the younger generation, a good deal of the 
familial ties and bonds are democratic and equal relations of 
mutual respect, mutual love and mutual assistance based on 
respect for individual autonomy, and with a general trend 
towards independence of the branches of the household of the 
children's generation and the parents' household, and various 
types of independent relations between the childrens' household 
and the parents' household, creating various "family networks" 
encompassing the childrens' household and the parents' 
household, and a trend towards simplification of household 
structure, and household relations; an increase in the number of 
nuclear households; however, the influence of the feudal 
patriarchal family system still exists, and in recent years 
feudal patriarchal clan strength has reared its head; in a 
relatively large number of independent childrens' households, 
the "disease of thorough spoiling," that is, taking the 
grandchild as the center of all things, has fostered a situation 
where only sons and daughters occupy a paramount and lofty 
special position within the family, so much so that the 
phenomenon of prolonged childhood has emerged; after children 
reach adulthood, they are unwilling to support themselves, and 
still rely on their parents to provide them shelter, find them 
jobs, handle marriage matters, raise grandchildren, and in rural 
areas the phenomenon of childrens' household reliance on, and 
expropriation of parents' households exists to a large extent; 
some senior citizens, particularly rural elderly people, have 
been ill-treated by children, and children are unwilling to take 
care of the old. That a "white haired wave" will soon break on 
China's shores is a social problem that China must focus on. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
