ID: 272	RANK: 44	SCORE: 6.441719
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910925-0105
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910925-0105.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
   Illicit Love: A Victorian Lady and Her Prince
   ----
   By Julie Salamon
</HL>
<DATE>
09/25/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8
</SO>
<LP>
   The romance between Sarah Austin and Prince Hermann von
Puckler sounds like something that evolved out of a story
conference for a daytime soap opera:
   The beautiful and successful Sarah, trapped in an unhappy
marriage, falls madly in love with an exotic foreigner.
Unwilling to leave her husband and child, she carries on with
her Prince Charming for years -- only by letter. But what
letters] The proper married lady and her prince tease each
other with the kind of erotic suggestions one would expect to
hear on Dial-for-Sex telephone messages. Their passionate
outpourings are all the more titillating because the
correspondents never lay eyes on one another.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   This improbable plot line wasn't sponsored by Procter &amp;
Gamble. It was created by real people, 160 years ago. Sarah's
half of the correspondence has lived to tell their tale.
Lotte and Joseph Hamburger, husband and wife scholars,
unearthed her letters in an unlikely place, the Jagiellonion
University Library in Cracow, Poland. Her outpourings form
the basis for their fascinating book, "Contemplating
Adultery: The Secret Life of a Victorian Woman" (Fawcett
Columbine, 314 pages, $20).
   The Hamburgers first learned of the Austin-Puckler
correspondence while doing research for "Troubled Lives,"
their book about that model Victorian couple, Sarah and John
Austin. The couple was part of London's radical
intelligentsia-about-town in the early 1800s. They became
disciples of Jeremy Bentham and pals of John Stuart Mill.
John Austin, a lawyer, didn't enjoy the practice of his
profession and hoped to become something more, something
"significant," and did eventually gain respect as a legal
philosopher. While he floundered, Sarah supported the family,
translating into English the works of French, Italian and
German authors, including Goethe, Voltaire and Stendhal.
   Sarah had been raised by progressive Unitarian parents to
be independent, but she hadn't planned to be saddled with a
morose, non-income-producing husband. Indeed, everyone had
been surprised when Sarah Taylor married Austin. She was not
only bright, she was a sexually provocative daredevil (for a
respectable middle-class girl in the dawn of the Victorian
era). But Sarah had visions of a perfect marriage built on
intellectual compatability. She overlooked the fact that the
man she chose to marry was a morbid hypochondriac. By the
time this dreary reality sank in, they'd married and had a
child.
   By necessity and inclination Sarah directed her passion
into her work, but she wasn't happy. Then she met her great
diversion. Her prince (he really was one) was also a German
writer of travel books, sharp-witted critiques of high
society that had become best sellers in Germany. Sarah read
the books at her publisher's request, then urged him to
overcome his inhibitions against publishing the racy books in
England.
   Soon Sarah was corresponding directly with the author, and
her infatuation was evident from the start. "Strange that I
should think of you as I do so constantly, so affectionately
and always as if I knew you and had talked to you," she
wrote.
   The tone of their correspondence quickly escalated from
friendly flirtation to an intense erotic interest in one
another. Assuring the prince that her teeth were "regular,
strong and white," Sarah wrote: "Be assured that I would make
you cry mercy if we were at that point. You would carry the
mark on your shoulder . . ." Later, it appears that the
prince asked Sarah for a lock of her hair -- not from her
head.
   Because only Sarah's letters have survived largely intact,
the Hamburgers had to surmise what the prince was thinking
from what Sarah had to say and from other information
available about him.
   It seems that he did love Sarah, in his way. But he lived
a lusty, vagabond life, loosely modeled on the hedonistic
style of his hero, Lord Byron. He was an intriguing man of
wide-ranging interests. He traveled the world, indulged
himself in all ways, including sexually, and was, in addition
to being a best-selling author, a respected landscape
architect.
   The prince had married a woman nine years older than
himself, a woman he admired for her brains and personality --
and for her bank account. They divorced when his financial
straits required an infusion of income from, he hoped, a new
wife. His parting from wife one was cordial; indeed, his
letters to her formed the basis of his epistolary travel
books.
   Sarah wrote the prince more than 70 letters over a
three-year period. The letters would eventually come to haunt
Sarah, who was well aware that her lover-correspondent saw
letter-writing as a way to gather material for his books.
   He did, in fact, save Sarah's letters -- lucky for us.
They became part of a family collection that wound up in the
German State Library. During World War II, the papers were
shipped off to a Benedictine monastery in Silesia for
safekeeping. Silesia became part of Poland, which is how
Sarah's letters found their way to Cracow.
   The Hamburgers, who may have thought they'd finished with
the Austins with their earlier book, recognized the treasure
they found in Cracow. With scholarly precision and fluid
prose, they've brought to life both an evocative love story
and a hidden piece of Victorian history.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
