ID: 272	RANK: 68	SCORE: 6.120016
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891026-0211 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-10-26-89 0009EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a AM-Obit-McCarthy 2ndLd-Writethru a0855 10-26 1013</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Obit-McCarthy, 2nd Ld - Writethru, a0855,1035</SECOND>
<HEAD>Novelist, Literary Critic Mary McCarthy Dies at Age 77</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: INSERTS one graf after 14th, `Memories of...', to add Miss McCarthy's
awards. Picks up 15th graf, `Miss McCarthy...'</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto NY74</HEAD>
<DATELINE>NEW YORK (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Novelist and critic Mary McCarthy, whose
scathing wit and bold explorations of social mores made her one of
America's preeminent literary lions, died of cancer Wednesday at
the age of 77.
   Miss McCarthy died at New York Hospital, said Dixie Sheridan,
spokeswoman for the author's alma mater, Vassar College in
Poughkeepsie.
   Though she first made her mark among the brawling New York
intellectuals of the 1930s, writing literary and theatrical reviews
for The Nation and Partisan Review, Miss McCarthy reached a wider
audience only in 1963 with her novel, ``The Group.''
   The spicy, best-selling chronicle of the lives of eight college
graduates starting out in the 1930s was made into a movie in 1966.
   Miss McCarthy had an ``unerring ability to spot the hidden
weakness or inconsistency in any literary effort and every person.
To this weakness she instinctively leaped with cries of pleasure _
surprised that her victim, as he lay torn and bleeding, did not
applaud her perspicacity,'' wrote Alfred Kazin, a member and
chronicler of New York's jazz age intellectuals.
   Norman Mailer once called her ``our first lady of letters.''
   She provoked a celebrated literary feud with Lillian Hellman by
declaring, on national television, ``Everything she writes is a
lie, including `and' and `the.'''
   Hellman sued for libel, but died in 1984 before the suit reached
a trial which Miss McCarthy eagerly sought.
   She had also been sued by a former lover, Partisan Review editor
Philip Rahv, who objected to her portrait of him in ``The Oasis.''
The suit was dropped.
   ``She had a reputation for being a sharp and dangerous woman but
there was no justification whatever for it in the sphere of her
friendships,'' said poet James Merrill, one of Miss McCarthy's
close friends, upon hearing of her death.
   William Jovanovich, chairman of Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc.,
Miss McCarthy's publisher, said in a statement: ``She treasured
intelligence and wit and was herself blessed with both. Mary
McCarthy doubted much but was never a cynic. Her political views
were at times criticized, at times applauded, but were at all times
selfless.''
   ``She was very, very clever and also very brave in saying what
she thought,'' said essayist Elizabeth Hardwick, another close
friend. ``There was no trendiness in Mary. She stood up for what
she believed in.''
   Most of her writing was autobiographical, beginning with ``The
Company She Keeps,'' published in 1942, a series of interconnected
short stories about the people she knew in New York during the
Depression.
   ``Memories of a Catholic Girlhood,'' published in 1957 and now
considered a landmark in autobiographical writing, recounted her
sordid childhood in Minneapolis where she was brutally mistreated
by relatives after her parents died.
   She was awarded many honors for her work, including membership
in the American Academy of Arts and Letters and the National
Institute of Arts and Letters, two Guggenheim Fellowships, the
National Medal for Literature, and the Horizon Prize.
   Miss McCarthy was born in Seattle on June 21, 1912, the daughter
of Roy Winfield McCarthy and Therese Preston McCarthy, a handsome
and romantic couple who died within a day of each other during the
flu epidemic of 1918.
   Mary, who was 6, and three younger brothers were entrusted to
the care of Aunt Margaret and Uncle Meyers, sadistic and miserly
guardians who dressed them like paupers, fed them a diet of root
vegetables, forbade reading and, at night, taped their mouths shut
``to prevent mouth breathing.''
   ``How I Grew,'' published in 1987 as a sequel to ``Memories,''
described her timely rescue at 11 by her maternal grandparents who
took her west to Tacoma, Wash., and enrolled her in the fashionable
Annie Wright Seminary. The book, she once wrote, was the story of
the birth of a mind.
   The seminary, where she became an atheist, prepared her for
Vassar, where she hobnobbed with the bright, wealthy Eastern
society girls she used as models for her characters in ``The
Group.''
   With her keen eye for detail, ruthless wit and deep insight,
Miss McCarthy for decades was regarded the ultimate highbrow of New
York radical and intellectual circles. She moved to Paris in 1962,
dividing her time between a comfortable Left Bank apartment and her
home in Castine, Maine. In recent years, she occupied a creative
writing chair at Bard College in Annadale-on-Hudson, N.Y.
   One week after graduation in 1933, she married Harold Johnsrud,
an actor. The marriage was brief and in 1938, Miss McCarthy married
her professor, the eminent critic Edmund Wilson. They had one son,
Reuel, before a bitter divorce in which each accused the other of
battery.
   She met her fourth husband, James West, while on a trip to
Warsaw, divorced her third husband Bowden Broadwater and married
West in Paris in 1961.
   Combative, outspoken and independent, Miss McCarthy wrote about
subjects as diverse as the pretentious world of academia (``A
Charmed Life'') and terrorists (``Cannibals and Missionaries'').
   Taken as a whole, her work explored the concerns of McCarthy's
liberal intellectual set from the 1930s through the 1970s: sexual
freedom in the 30s, radicalism in the 40s and 50s, Vietnam and
social and moral upheaval of the 60s the Watergate scandal and the
rise of terrorism in the 70s.
   McCarthy was often hailed as a feminist before her time. But she
always refused that label, saying equality between the sexes was
unrealistic.
   ``Somebody has to give more,'' she told an interviewer in 1987.
Her belief was simple: women should learn to think for themselves
and act accordingly.
   If she appeared cold and hard in her judgments of others, she
was even harder on herself. At 74, on the eve of the publication of
``How I Grew'' in 1987, she was asked her assessment of herself.
``Not favorable,'' she replied.
   She is survived by West and her son. A private funeral was
planned for next week in Castine.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
