ID: 195	RANK: 12	SCORE: 12.359058
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890428-0105 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-04-28-89 1259EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r e BC-Theater 1stLd-Writethru a0788 04-28 0829</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-Theater, 1st Ld - Writethru, a0788,0821</SECOND>
<HEAD>`Starmites,' A New Musical, Opens On Broadway</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: Adds 5 grafs with what other critics said</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By MICHAEL KUCHWARA</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP Drama Critic</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>NEW YORK (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Pow! Bam! Zap! Thud!
   So goes ``Starmites,'' the futuristic comic book musical that
arrived Thursday at Broadway's Criterion Center.
   The show purports to be a salute to the fabled sci-fi
superheroes of DC and Marvel comics. Instead, it trashes them,
trampling on their sense of fun, style and most of all, adventure.
   Don't look for the exuberance George Lucas captured on film more
than a decade ago in ``Star Wars,'' or the innocent dumb fun of the
mid-1950s ``Superman'' television series starring George Reeves.
They are missing here.
   Barry Keating, who wrote the music and lyrics for ``Starmites,''
and Stuart Ross who, along with Keating, concocted the book, can't
settle on the right tone for their meager story. It vacillates
between high camp and sappy, juvenile comedy.
   The tale concerns a young girl, Eleanor, who lives in her own
fantasy world of comic books. She's pulled into Inner Space,
Earth's parallel dimension, and a meeting with the Starmites who
are sort of an intergalactic version of the Guardian Angels.
   These good guys are led by Spacepunk, played by Brian Lane Green
who bears an uncanny resemblance to ``Star Wars'' hero Harrison
Ford. Green acts with the same breezy and appealing nonchalance and
has a good voice, too.
   Eleanor is played by Liz Larsen whose show business savvy and
brash, belting style of selling a song are at odds with her
supposedly waif-like character.
   They end up meeting Trinkulus, a lizard-like creature who sings
what sounds like off-key, soft-rock madrigals, and Diva, the tough,
brassy leader of the Banshees. As played by Sharon McNight, Diva
resembles the late drag artist Divine, only her crew cut is a
little more punkish. Miss McNight certainly can put over a number.
Her ``Hard to Be Diva'' pretty much stops the show, although it
wasn't going much of anywhere.
   The villain of the piece, a steel-plated warrior called Shak
Graa, looks like a tin-can version of Darth Vader and sounds like
the Phantom of the Opera with a head cold.
   The minimal plot includes a feeble love triangle involving
Spacepunk, Eleanor and Diva's daughter, Bizarbara, also played by
Miss Larsen. You may not care who wins out, but true love does
triumph in the end.
   At least director Larry Carpenter gets the actors through the
dialogue quickly and choreographer Michele Assaf has experly
drilled the cast. But it's hard to judge their expertise when they
are forced to jump around on stage to something called ``The Dance
of Spousal Arousal.''
   The production's special effects are negligible. Set designer
Lowell Detweiler has provided a nice backdrop of twinkly stars but
the rest of his designs, including a giant bird that unfolds its
wings to reveal a throne, are suprisingly tacky.
   The costumes are worse, especially for the women. Diva and her
quartet of leather-clad ladies-in-waiting are dressed by designer
Susan Hirschfeld to look like extras out of ``Ilsa, the She-Wolf of
the SS.''
   Keating's score slips from memory as soon as it's heard. It's
cartoonish in the worst sense, crude and obvious. The music and
lyrics have none of the wit and sophistication that Charles Strouse
and Lee Adams displayed in ``It's a Bird! It's a Plane! It's
Superman!'' (one of the theater's most unjustly neglected scores),
or the Broadway professionalism that Strouse and Martin Charnin
managed to pack into ``Annie.''
   ``Starmites'' is the first production at the Criterion Center
Stage Right, one part of a new theater complex in Times Square. Its
other theater, a cabaret space, housed ``Suds,'' a lamentable
celebration of Golden Oldies, last fall. What ``Suds'' did to those
hits of the 1950s and '60s, ``Starmites'' does to the comics.
Where's ``Little Lulu'' now that we really need her?
   What other critics said:
   Clive Barnes in the New York Post wrote, ``The trouble with it _
even before the music and lyrics _ is the idea. It is a foolish
idea for a musical. And nothing in the theater can redeem folly
except a circus. And this is no circus.''
   Howard Kissel in the Daily News said, ``In the last few years a
whole new genre has emerged, musicals that have no intrinsic merit
but are suitable for leaving the kids while you go shopping.
   ``In this genre, you have `Cats,' `Starlight Express' and now
`Starmites.' In this genre, you don't judge a musical by its
content but rather by its visuals. Will they live up to the
expectations of kids suckled on MTV? Here `Starmites' is a sort of
trailblazer. ... the style of the show is Tacky High-Tech, surely a
new category with loads of potential.''
   Mel Gussow of The New York Times wrote, ``To its credit,
`Starmites' never takes itself too seriously and is always tongue
in cheek. It remains a light-hearted space flight.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
