ID: 195	RANK: 17	SCORE: 11.390687
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910620-0140
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910620-0140.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Sounds Very Simple:
   Take a Brilliant Idea,
   Present It Brilliantly
   ---
   Robert McKee Teaches Stars
   And Hopefuls the Fine Art
   Of Writing Screenplays
   ----
   By Ellen Graham
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
06/20/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
BIOGRAPHY (BIO)
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)
</IN>
<NS>
BIOGRAPHY (BIO)
</NS>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- If you squint, Robert McKee could almost pass
for Darth Vader. Dressed in black, stocky with dark,
glowering eyebrows, he rumbles into the microphone as 300
rapt students hang on his words. "No, Luke. I am your . . .
{wheeze} . . . father."
   It's the climax of "The Empire Strikes Back," and as
script-writing guru Mr. McKee enacts it, Luke Skywalker has
just learned the true identity of the dread enemy he has been
stalking through two feature-length movies.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Socko endings like this -- where the hero comes face to
face with the powerful antagonistic forces arrayed against
him and the plot twists still another time -- well, such
moments are the apex of the screenwriter's art, according to
Mr. McKee.
   "If you can create this most sublime ending of all," he
says, "you too can have a Mercedes and a home in Beverly
Hills."
   It hooks them every time -- in Los Angeles, New York,
Toronto, London and the more than two dozen other cities here
and abroad where Mr. McKee has taken his script-writing
roadshow. For $350 a head, studio executives, performers and
writers (as well as hopefuls) give up a weekend to learn the
lost art of storytelling -- and, by tantalizing implication,
the mysteries of box-office success.
   In his seamless, 30-hour near-monologue, Mr. McKee heaps
disdain upon film-school "auteurs" with their dazzling but
empty camera work. Audiences, he says, hunger for well-told,
classically structured tales, and Hollywood isn't delivering.
As he sniffs the scene: "That's not smog in LA. It's the
stench of all the rotten scripts."
   Movies, he says, are propelled by an "inciting incident"
that pitches the hero's life out of balance and sends him on
a quest to restore that balance. In "Jaws," it was when the
shark ate the swimmer. In "Kramer vs. Kramer," it was Mrs.
Kramer's decision to leave her child with her husband. The
effect on the audience, he suggests, is to provoke the
question "how will this turn out?" and to foreshadow in their
minds the final crisis: when, for example, the sheriff fights
the shark. "Nothing moves forward except through conflict,"
Mr. McKee says. "Conflict is to story as sound is to music."
   By what right does Robert McKee preach story structure to
Kirk Douglas, Diane Keaton and John Cleese? These are some
alums of the course he began as a lark at a Hollywood
experimental school eight years ago and now delivers to 3,000
people annually in North America alone.
   A 50-year-old theatrical actor and director who turned
screenwriter and story analyst in Hollywood, Mr. McKee has
yet to see one of his own scripts on the screen. (Mr. McKee,
whose father made him analyze Aesop's Fables as a childhood
punishment, has written televised episodes of "Quincy" and
"Columbo," and has sold 10 film scripts over the past 10
years, two of which are now in development.)
   Mr. McKee makes no secret of his lack of screen credits;
indeed, he makes use of it in the course. In 1990, he says,
50,000 screenplays were registered with the Writers Guild; he
estimates 250,000 were actually written. Hollywood, after
spending some $500 million annually to option ideas and
scripts, produces 400 to 500 movies -- about one for every 20
optioned.
   To writers who whine that their gems go unbought and
unrecognized, he flings unprintable expletives. "Write a
brilliant original screenplay and Hollywood's doors fly
open," he says. "It's a seller's market." But quality merely
gets you into the race, he warns. If Julia Roberts pulls out,
or if financing falls through -- well, such are the vagaries
of the business.
   Screen credits or no, Mr. McKee has something of a cult
following. Hollywood brass once registered for the course
under pseudonyms, but today it is more often worn as a badge.
Freddie Fields, who produced "Glory," says the course
inspired him to start his first screenplay. Quincy Jones
attended, then bought tickets for people at his production
company. So did Corbin Bernsen of "LA Law." One result, Mr.
Bernsen says, is that writers at his company, Team Cherokee
Entertainment, are now taking more time to craft TV scripts.
And rather than merely pitching ideas around Hollywood, they
"put them in writing," a McKee maxim.
   On a recent weekend, a capacity crowd shuffles into a
windowless auditorium at Hunter College, Mr. McKee's New York
venue. Stand-bys mill around during registration, including
one woman who has driven from Rhode Island in hopes of
filling the seat of a no-show.
   The audience crackles with anticipation; we have heard the
advance word-of-mouth. And Robert McKee has a compelling
story to tell. It's a riveting -- if exhausting -- journey
into the dark night of the human soul and back again --
transcendentally -- at the climax. It's Schopenhauer and
Sophocles as well as Schwarzenegger; metaphysics as much as
mechanics.
   Dogmatic, profane and inspiring by turns, he paces the
weekend like a wellcrafted script: punching up material with
comic subplots, skewering pretention and dropping nuggets of
movie lore (how in "Casablanca," Bogart wore four-inch
platform shoes to dance with Bergman, and how "Here's looking
at you, kid" is dubbed "To your health" in Italian).
   We learn how movie mores evolve with the times, a fact
that scriptwriters ignore at their peril. In "Falling in
Love," the relationship between Robert De Niro and Meryl
Streep was thwarted because they were each married to someone
else. (Mr. McKee yawns pointedly, saying, "The audience
screamed inside: `What is their PROBLEM? Dump the stiffs]'")
   He explains that the female audience's empathy with the
psychopath played by Glenn Close in "Fatal Attraction"
surprised the movie's creators, and that she lost that
empathy only after boiling the pet rabbit. "Do anything you
want to a human being," he says, "but {torture} a bunny and
we drop you like a hot rock."
   We are advised to fall in love with our characters --
especially our villains. When the Terminator cuts out his eye
with an X-acto knife and then checks his reflection in the
mirror and smoothes his hair, the terrifying contradiction
grows out of the writer's "love for her Terminator," Mr.
McKee says.
   As we wend our way through text and subtext, the arc of
the scene, conflict, controlling ideas and plot turns, some
bristle at Mr. McKee's curt dismissal of audience
interruptions. "It's Seven Stages of Enlightenment -- No
Questions," mutters one television writer during a break.
   Though a few people creep out during the six-hour,
frame-by-frame structural analysis of "Casablanca" that winds
up the weekend, attrition is otherwise almost nil. And at the
close, after Mr. McKee sings his rendition of "As Time Goes
By," there's a standing ovation.
   "Amazing," says Mike Shatzkin, a writer and book
publishing consultant. "My first reaction when it was over
was, `Well, what else would you like to talk to me about for
three days?'"
   Mr. McKee, whose company, Two Arts Inc., is based in Los
Angeles, does this about two dozen times a year, reaping
enough income from the course and his $2,000 private script
consultations to qualify as a millionaire. But do his
students benefit tangibly as well?
   "There's a tendency to see this in the most cynical light
-- of the sheep coming to be sheared," he says. "I'm no fool
-- I know that of the 300 people here in New York, if one or
two screenplays of excellence grew out of this, it would be a
very successful course. But that's the nature of art -- the
odds are thousands to one against achieving great success."
   In the end, we return to a point he drives home in the
lecture with a scene from "Moulin Rouge." In it,
Toulouse-Lautrec is showing someone the Venus de Milo. It was
dug up by a farmer, and "no one knows who made it," the
artist says. "But it doesn't matter. For he had the pleasure
of doing it."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
