ID: 195	RANK: 51	SCORE: 8.770399
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910919-0059
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910919-0059.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   With Yogis' Help,
   A Baseball Player
   Looks for the Zone
   ---
   At the Plate, Brent Mayne
   Wants Watermelons --
   So He Turns to Ayurveda
   ----
   By Joseph Pereira
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
09/19/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)
</IN>
<RE>
MASSACHUSETTS (MA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   BOSTON -- It's the top of the ninth and Fenway Park is on
fire. The Boston Red Sox are ahead 2-1, but the Kansas City
Royals are at bat with two out and two on. In the on-deck
circle, Royals catcher Brent Mayne is doing breathing
exercises that make him sound like Darth Vader. Then it's
time. He picks up his bat and strolls to the plate.
   Good thing he's prepared.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Before the game, at a nearby health center, two men hosed
Mr. Mayne with gallons of hot sesame oil and squirted ginger
juice up his nose. As he lay still under yellow-green light,
a white-garmented technician anointed his body with oil in
more than a dozen spots. The process, called Panchakarma, was
capped with a maharajah's meal of vegetables and rose petal
jam.
   "I feel right on the money," Mr. Mayne says. "Energized,
but in a relaxed way."
   The catcher's fitness program is based on the Ayurveda, a
Hindu system of medicine and well-being developed by yogis
who never heard of Berra. Mr. Mayne wants to play baseball
the Indian way.
   Why?
   The 22-year-old rookie says he is hunting for what some
call the Zone -- a level of lucidity in which time slows
almost to a standstill and baseballs, as Mr. Mayne puts it,
"loom as large as watermelons." In such a state Ted Williams
said he could see the seams of a pitched baseball.
   Mr. Mayne shows the lengths to which baseball players will
go to get an edge. Wade Boggs of the Red Sox, a perennial
batting leader, insists on a meal of chicken before every
game. Texas Ranger Kevin Reimer hangs bats from a dog chain
near his locker. As an Astro, Charlie Kerfeld always pitched
wearing a Jetsons T-shirt under his uniform.
   Others have relied on mental gymnastics. Sadaharu Oh,
Japan's Babe Ruth, turned to Zen. Balanced on one leg at the
plate, in a Zen-style martial arts pose, he smashed 868 home
runs. Lesser mortals have tried using hypnosis, biofeedback
and cybernetics.
   For Mr. Mayne, it's Ayurveda.
   Ayurveda, which means "life knowledge" in Hindi, is the
subject of two recent best-selling books, "Quantum Healing"
and "Perfect Health." Imported to the U.S. by the Maharishi
Mahesh Yogi, of Transcendental Meditation fame, Ayurveda has
already enraptured thousands of seekers. Devotees pay up to
$4,000 for a week's stay at an Ayurvedic health center; four
to seven visits are recommended a year. By cleansing the
body, exercising at a slower pace, meditating and breathing
correctly, athletes can better their best, the system
promises.
   Skeptics, of course, abound. "The only folks who think
that they're in the Zone all the time can be found on the
fifth floor of Bellevue Hospital," says Keith Henschen, a
sports psychologist who assisted the U.S. team at the World
Track and Field Championships in Tokyo.
   Cynicism circulates among the Royals, as well. "Brent can
do anything he pleases," says Royals outfielder Warren
Cromartie, one of the league's better hitters. "Me? I play
Ping-Pong to improve my game."
   Most in the Royals organization, including assistant
trainer Steve Morrow, didn't know what Mr. Mayne was up to.
"Tell me," asks an amused Mr. Morrow, "can I buy this stuff
at Kmart?" George Brett, the Royals' venerable designated
hitter, wants no part of a pre-game dugout conversation
between a reporter and team trainers. "Seeing watermelons
lately?" Mr. Morrow asks. "Not this year," Mr. Brett says
before ducking out of sight.
   As far as he knows, Mr. Mayne is the only Ayurvedic
ballplayer in the major leagues. He got acquainted with the
Zone as a teen-ager, when he recalls "feeling one with the
ocean" while surfing at Southern California beaches. Later,
playing baseball in college, the experience returned. Indeed,
it was spurts of spectacular play that brought him to the
majors at an early age.
   But about three years ago, faced with the prospect of a
career in baseball, Mr. Mayne says he became a bit unnerved.
So he looked in the Yellow Pages under stress management and
discovered Transcendental Meditation. Poring through
literature from the Maharishi Health Organization earlier
this year, he noticed an offer promising a journey to the
Zone. So he called for an appointment. In May, Mr. Mayne had
his first treatment. Now, in the clubhouse before games, he
reads the Bhagavad-Gita while teammates play poker.
   Under the Ayurvedic system, the first step to wellness is
to know your body type, or "prakriti." There are three
prakriti: Vatta, Pitta and Kaffa, which, once diagnosed, help
the doctor determine a tune-up plan. Vatta types are thin,
excitable and creative. Pitta people have blond, light brown
or red hair; they have keen intellects and expensive tastes.
Kaffas are teddy bears -- big and slow.
   Mr. Mayne, muscular with light brown hair, is a
Kaffa-Pitta combination. Recently, he visited the clinic
complaining of not "seeing the ball well," though batting a
respectable .270. The diagnosis: Mr. Mayne's Kaffa was
causing nasal congestion and blurring his vision. His Pitta,
overheated by the warm days of summer, had thrown his body
out of alignment. The prescription: "yellow light to break up
the Kaffa and green to cool the Pitta."
   Ginger juice was squeezed into his nose to help clear his
congestion. The sesame oil rub channeled excess Pitta into
the bowels.
   "This is cleverly commercialized folk lore," says Dr. John
Renner of Consumer Health Information Research Institute in
Colorado, who plans to discuss Ayurveda in an upcoming column
in the Kansas City Star.
   But Mr. Mayne is optimistic Ayurveda will help him "bottle
the Zone." In his first at-bat against the 95-m.p.h. pitches
of Red Sox ace Roger Clemens, however, Mr. Mayne strikes out.
"At least I didn't fling my helmet in anger," says Mr. Mayne,
recalling his common reaction in the days before he found
serenity.
   In the on-deck circle in the fifth inning, Mr. Mayne
breathes using Ayurvedic techniques, inhaling from his solar
plexus and swooshing air back through his nasal cavities.
Nevertheless, he grounds out.
   On his third trip to the plate, in the seventh, Mr. Mayne
slashes a fast ball into right-center for a single.
   But Mr. Mayne hasn't been in the Zone all evening. Now, in
the ninth, the pressure is really on. The crowd stops doing
"the wave" and begins to clap and stomp. Mr. Mayne works the
count to three-and-two. Sox reliever Jeff Reardon, a fast
ball specialist, winds up. He unleashes another fast ball.
   Suddenly, Mr. Mayne feels he may be entering the Zone.
When not in the Zone, "I can hear the kid in the third row
crying," he explains later. But now the stadium sounds as
quiet as "a slow motion scene in a movie."
   As the pitch floats toward him -- not as big as a
watermelon, but seemingly as slow as one -- Mr. Mayne can see
clearly that it's high and outside. He takes it for ball
four.
   "I think I was in the Zone the last time up," Mr. Mayne
reflects later. But it doesn't matter. Mr. Cromartie, the
Ping-Pong playing batter, pops up to third to end the game.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
