ID: 195	RANK: 54	SCORE: 8.728588
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910920-0161
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910920-0161.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
   The Twilight of the Networks
   ---
   By Peter R. Kann
</HL>
<DATE>
09/20/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10
</SO>
<LP>
   If you were awakened one night by the Communications Fairy
waving her magic antenna and offering you your choice of (a)
a cable franchise, (b) a Hollywood studio, (c) a group of
local television stations, (d) a telephone company or (e) a
television network, which would you choose?
   If the allure of being boss of Dan Rather, broadcasting
"NFL Monday Night Football" and adding Bill Cosby to your
"product line" led you to pick "e" you are in good company --
and bad trouble.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   That's the basic theme of Ken Auletta's "Three Blind Mice:
How the TV Networks Lost Their Way" (Random House, 642 pages,
$25), a long and largely captivating account of the three
networks, the companies that bought them, the men who battled
to tame them and the forces -- largely beyond their control
-- that have humbled them.
   The saga opens in the mid-1980s, as NBC, ABC and CBS,
within one 18-month period, are acquired by larger, tougher
and smarter corporate owners intent on cutting fat, seeking
synergism and imposing the benefits of modern management.
These new owners -- General Electric Co., Capital Cities
Communications Inc. (which became Capital Cities/ABC Inc.)
and Laurence Tisch of Loews Corp., respectively -- differ
markedly in management strategy and style.
   "Were each new owner running a football team," says Mr.
Auletta, "GE would field an offense-minded team going for the
long touchdown bomb; Tisch would stack the defense and play
for turnovers; and Cap Cities would grind out a few yards
each play." Yet, the differences have only a small effect on
results.
   The three owner-coaches are faced with the same
fundamental flaws in their franchises. The networks they've
bought (excepting the handful of high-profit owned and
operated stations purchased with them) are fragile
enterprises with few real assets. They basically buy programs
(from Hollywood studios) and sell mass audiences (to fickle
advertisers). They control neither entertainment product nor
affiliate distribution. And they operate at the mercy of
Congress and federal regulators.
   Meanwhile, their rented audience, which once included
almost every U.S. home, rapidly is being cannibalized by
cable channels, independent stations, new networks and the
omnipresent VCR. New menaces, such as direct broadcast
satellites and fiber-optic communication, threaten on the
horizon.
   The average American home still watches some seven hours a
day of television, but fewer and fewer tune into the networks
-- 60% today vs. 90% a decade ago. They are dinosaurs, says
Mr. Auletta. And chaining them on corporate leashes or
putting them on cost-cutting diets isn't likely to extend
their lives for long. The lessons in this book for other
businesses are very basic: Create, own and understand your
product; control your own channels of distribution; and deal
directly with your customers.
   If TV has a lesson for Mr. Auletta it is to tell it a
little shorter. Weaving together three network histories,
countless characters and a constantly changing score card of
Nielsen ratings and audience shares that yo-yo to largely
meaningless effect required as talented an editor as Mr.
Auletta is a reporter.
   Still, the book's fascination and fun lie in the detail --
Mr. Auletta's extraordinary access to the principal players,
his eye for color, ear for anecdote and reporter's instinct
for conflict. The largely on-the-record recounting of a
series of CBS board meetings in which a hapless Chairman Tom
Wyman and his board allies are outmaneuvered by a sly (and
rich) Larry Tisch ranks among the best of
inside-the-board-room reporting.
   The story of the battle pitting ABC news czar Roone
Arledge and his "client" Barbara Walters against ABC
entertainment baron Brandon Stoddard and his "client" Dolly
Parton for access to a 10 p.m. time slot, as dazed Cap Cities
Chairman Tom Murphy tries to referee, is hilarious -- or
inane if you conclude that the battle is merely between two
different forms of trite, celebrity-centered television.
   Best of all is the tale of the inception, creation and
collapse of producer Aaron Spelling's "Nightingales," a
prime-time series intended to skyrocket NBC's entertainment
ratings. Mr. Spelling brings the proposal to NBC's
entertainment chief, Brandon Tartikoff. "I can pitch it to
you in a sentence," says Mr. Spelling.
   "Okay, what is it?" asks Mr. Tartikoff.
   "Student nurses in Dallas in the summer and the air
conditioning doesn't work so they sweat a lot," says Mr.
Spelling.
   "It's a 40% {share}," says Mr. Tartikoff, who proceeds to
invest some millions of GE Chairman John Welch Jr.'s money in
what turns out to be a fulsome flop. (The network later
explains the program to GE as the story of "a group of young
women struggling with their identity and aspirations.")
   For all its pessimism and pointed humor, Mr. Auletta's
book is not without heroes. Apparently, unlike some of the
men who run the networks, Mr. Auletta watches and likes TV. A
book brimming with caustic business judgments on the medium
is largely free of pompous moral or artistic judgments on the
message. The heroes include some outstanding newsmen, such as
Peter Jennings; clever (sometimes) programmers, such as Mr.
Tartikoff; and the strong and steady Cap Cities executive
team of Mr. Murphy and Daniel Burke.
   ABC by and large comes off the winner in Mr. Auletta's
book (though not always in the ratings). Like a moth circling
a candle, Mr. Auletta alternately is drawn to and repelled by
the flame of GE's Jack Welch, easily the book's most complex
and compelling character. Then there is Mr. Tisch of CBS,
described by one Auletta source as white knight turned Darth
Vader. Actually, Mr. Auletta paints him more comic than
cruel, as a kind of visionless Mickey of the Three Blind
Mice.
   Whether or not the networks survive in present febrile
form or as alphabet brands of some new form of media
conglomerate, there is something sad about what has been
lost.
   Once upon a time, before cable channels, VCRs and the
myriad choices we now have on those boxes in our bedrooms,
the networks did create a national TV culture. When our
family gathered in the living room to watch "Mr. Peepers,"
"The Ed Sullivan Show," "Gunsmoke" or "The $64,000 Question,"
we could be almost certain our neighbors were watching it
too. I'm not sure we've traded up today, with one child
watching the Disney Channel, another a Dumbo video and
another MTV, while we parents flick from C-SPAN to ESPN.
   The old network fare may have been common culture, but at
least we had it in common.
   ---
   Mr. Kann is publisher of the Journal.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
