ID: 195	RANK: 59	SCORE: 8.382698
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910925-0085
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910925-0085.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Tractor-Pull Sport
   Fights Muddy Image
   To Win More Fans
   ---
   Indy Racing's Country Cousin
   Now Wants Off the Farm;
   The `Hooker of the Year'
   ----
   By Dana Milbank
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
09/25/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)
</IN>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
OHIO (OH)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   FORT RECOVERY, Ohio -- It's Saturday night in this tiny
farm town and some 10,000 people have come to sit in a blue
haze of diesel exhaust and stare at a field of dirt.
   A helmeted figure resembling Darth Vader rides into view
on what looks like a dragster on steroids. He hooks it to a
huge cast-iron sled. Flames leap, engines whine, and
five-feet-tall rear tires spin. The vehicle lurches forward,
drags the 65,000-pound sled nearly the length of the 100-yard
field, shudders and dies. Scattered applause.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Another driver, barely visible behind rows of engines,
rolls into the pit and chains his vehicle to the weight.
Spectators cover their ears as the machine roars, bucks,
kicks mud and pulls the barge 10 feet farther than the first
driver did. The crowded bleachers go wild.
   These folks haven't come to watch the mud dry. They're
here to see these two "tractors," Gardner Stone's "General"
and David Banter's "Bandit," clash in the Copenhagen Skoal
Pulling Circuit.
   The tractor pull, once the pastime of farmers, is trying
to go mainstream. Promoters tout it as the fastest growing
motor sport. But it'll be a long haul before the sport shucks
its tobacco chewin' image. "We're still at the low point of
our growth curve," admits Michael Camillo, associate editor
of the Puller magazine, a slick monthly of the National
Tractor Pullers Association in Worthington, Ohio. "These guys
are mechanical wizards, but they don't have the marketing
down yet."
   In an era of multimillion dollar contracts for athletes,
pullers have been passed by. Most pullers, including a
California accountant and a retired Ohio State dairy
professor, do it just for fun. Even a star like Mr. Banter
barely breaks even doing it full time. He and his partner
have hauled off $85,000 in winnings in good years, but most
of it goes to expenses; the rest is plowed into new tractors
(they've had 36 so far). They make some money selling their
own custom-made tractor parts.
   The NTPA has sought TV deals and big name sponsors,
advertised in big-city papers and even dropped the word
"tractor" from its main crowd-pleaser, the unlimited modified
division. But the yahoo image dies hard. "If we called it
anything but a tractor pull we'd be better off," says Mr.
Banter, an affable 46-year-old who has won the "Hooker of the
Year" award for entering the most pulls and won this year's
15-event Grand National tour.
   Mr. Banter's Bandit wouldn't be much use on a farm, unless
you wanted to move a barn. Each of the tractor's seven
engines has more than triple the power of a Chevy pickup, for
a total of about 8,400 horsepower. But it only gets about 25
feet per gallon, must refuel every 325 feet, and its $4,000
tires wear out after a mile.
   Fine-tuned athletes aren't part of this sport. Mr. Stone,
a Vermont car dealer with a pot belly and firm handshake,
paces about his trailer and pops Rolaids before a heat, and
pops open beers afterward.
   Drivers are forbidden from drinking beer before a pull,
but fans aren't. Vendors sell six-packs for $5. By the start
of the pull, the tractors and crowd are tanked up, and the
stands are littered with empty cans (and pouches of Skoal
chewing tobacco, handed out as free samples).
   An NTPA survey found that 69% of those who attend pulls
are blue collar, 82% own pickups and 95% fix their own
vehicles. This crowd, then, is typical, with many farmers,
truckers and mechanics. They are united by a hunger for raw,
unmuffled power. "To other people it's smoke and noise; to us
it's music," says Joseph Fowler of Dayton, sitting near the
finish line wearing a "Desert Storm" baseball cap, pink
earplugs (sold at concession stands), and clenching a Busch
beer. Mr. Fowler came with 14 others in two trailers a day
before the pull and chained lawn chairs to the fence to
secure front row seats. Nearby, a man in boots and a plaid
shirt shouts, "Damn, we got one beer left]"
   The sport hails from when farmers harnessed real
horsepower, pitting teams of workhorses in pulling contests.
When tractors began displacing horses around the turn of the
century, the machines took over pulling competitions too. In
the late l980s, NTPA's rival, TNT Motorsports, now part of
SRO-Pace Promotions, won TV contracts with ESPN and other
cable networks. But those are indoor competitions for less
mighty machines. NTPA members consider those a distortion of
the true sport, because the engines are fewer, the tracks are
shorter and the smoke is thinner. Still, the TV contracts
helped double attendance at tractor pulls to 1.8 million a
year.
   The spirited rivalry between Messrs. Banter and Stone,
which makes the nuclear arms race look like a horseshoe
match, has done much to spur the sport. Mr. Banter came to
the scene 25 years ago when he and his brother, Ralph,
started with a 28 horsepower tractor. Soon, one engine became
two, then three and four. Mr. Stone and others responded with
an Allison engine, the kind used to power World War II
fighter planes. But one Allison wasn't enough, of course, and
soon the "tractors" had four aircraft engines. Undaunted, Mr.
Banter kept adding triple-strength Chevy engines, finally
reaching six.
   Not to be outdone, Mr. Stone retaliated last year with the
mighty General, a tractor powered by four turbine engines,
built to fly helicopters. He won that year's Grand National
easily. Mr. Banter countered in the off-season by building
the seven-engine Bandit, quite possibly the loudest vehicle
ever made.
   Mr. Banter sees his rivalry with Mr. Stone as a David and
Goliath tale on wheels. Mr. Stone and his crew wear shiny,
black warm-up suits and travel in a custom-built 18-wheeler
with computer, television and VCR. His four $40,000 engines
easily have more horsepower than Mr. Banter's.
   But Mr. Banter says that what he lacks in power, he makes
up for in pulling finesse, if there is such a thing. "I can
outsmart him on the track," he says.
   Mr. Stone says his tractor doesn't cost any more than
anybody else's, and points out that Mr. Banter's isn't
exactly a moped.
   Clearly, though, there's more than brute force involved
here. Early Sunday morning, following his Saturday night
victory, Mr. Banter is out "wrenching," tightening bolts and
cutting treads in his tires, shredded in the last pull.
   He surveys the track. The untrained eye sees a pile of
mud; Mr. Banter sees a battle plan. "Too damn low and chopped
up to even think of pulling through here," he says of one
spot in the mud. He plots a course through the dirt, adjusts
his tires and chooses a gear that will give him enough speed
to pull the sled without making his tires spin out. He's
ready.
   The day's first contender, "Multi Chaos," lives up to its
name, zigzagging down the track and dying after 245 feet.
Next, "Papa Bear," drags the sled 294 feet when an engine
blows up in flames. "Sassy Massey" and "Just Add Dirt" do no
better.
   But Mr. Banter has no problem. Bandit goes the distance --
another effortless run.
   Finally, Mr. Stone's General hitches to the sled. The fans
put down their beers. Engines scream, flames leap and the
General bounds ahead. Within 18 feet of putting himself into
a first-place "pull-off" with Mr. Banter, Mr. Stone's General
jerks to a fiery halt. Dead engine.
   The fans groan, and revisit their beers. An undeterred Mr.
Stone wheels his smoking tractor back to his trailer to
prepare for next week's pull. "That's tractor pulling," he
says with a shrug. "It ain't over `til the last dog is hung."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
