ID: 195	RANK: 66	SCORE: 8.060495
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910620-0085
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910620-0085.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Economy:
   U.S. Manufacturers' Export Prospects
   Get Darker as Prices Fall, Dollar Rises
   ----
   By Clare Ansberry
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
06/20/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A2
</SO>
<MS>
BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)
</MS>
<IN>
RAW AND FINISHED PAPER PRODUCTS (PAP)
STEEL MANUFACTURERS (STL)
INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)
</IN>
<NS>
TRADE ISSUES (TRD)
</NS>
<RE>
BELGIUM (BEL)
CANADA (CN)
EUROPE (EU)
NETHERLANDS (NL)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
GREAT BRITAIN (UK)
UNITED STATES (US)
WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)
</RE>
<LP>
   American manufacturers are exporting more but they're not
making much money doing so.
   In fact, some are retrenching from overseas markets as
export prices plunge, paring profits.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Export enthusiasm recently began to wane after the
spectacular growth that culminated in last week's report of
the country's first-quarter trade surplus, the first since
1982. Administration officials saluted the report as further
proof that strong exports are pulling the country out of
recession.
   But manufacturers aren't so sure. Daniel J. Meyer,
president of machine-tool maker Cincinnati Milacron Inc.,
recently noted, as has nearly every executive with overseas
business, "a softening in Europe." Germany's economy is
struggling with its unification process, while France and the
United Kingdom are mired in recession. Then there's the Darth
Vader of exports: the stronger dollar, which makes U.S. goods
more expensive for foreign buyers. If U.S. manufacturers
don't cut prices, they could lose market share to the
lower-priced goods of overseas competitors. If they do slash
prices, they lose profits.
   Because of the strong dollar, it makes little sense for A.
Schulman Inc. of Akron, Ohio, to export its plastic compounds
from Texas to Europe. Instead, the company is relying on
European manufacturing operations to supply that part of the
world. "We haven't had the export opportunities we had
earlier due to the dollar situation," says President Terry
Haines.
   WEFA Group, an economics forecasting concern based in Bala
Cynwyd, Pa., expects the dollar to remain strong through the
fourth quarter. Thomas Runiewicz, a senior economist at WEFA,
notes that as industrial manufacturers scale back prices to
remain internationally competitive, export prices of capital
goods will fall 3.3% in 1991.
   No one expects manufacturing exports to vanish. Companies
making car parts and plastic have made tremendous
international inroads during the era of a cheap dollar and
strong foreign demand. Durable-goods exports, mesasured in
billions of dollars, have increased 88% from 1986 to 1990.
And while the trade deficit widened marginally in April,
exports were up 4.5% from the previous month to a record
$35.56 billion. Manufacturers are loath to surrender those
gains. Moreover, exports enable companies to keep production
levels high and operations more efficient, while avoiding the
costs of laying off workers and idle operations.
   While the volume and number of products being exported
will expand, high growth rates likely won't continue for
industrial manufacturers in the current climate. For example,
exports by U.S. steelmakers have doubled since 1988 and
surged 36% in the first four months of 1991 from the year
ago, but in recent weeks some steelmakers have begun to
retrench.
   "Steel companies are beginning to pull out of the export
market," says Peter Marcus of PaineWebber. It's no wonder.
Export prices have already fallen about 10% in recent months.
Now, says Mr. Marcus, ubiquitous hot-rolled sheet steel
fetches $245 a ton on the export market, even though average
pretax costs are about $300 a ton.
   Moreover, steelmakers are finding the usually receptive
Asian market saturated: Japanese steel buyers are beginning
to have excess inventories and the construction boom there
seems to be slowing.
   Plastic and pulp makers aren't faring much better. Prices
for plastic resins have fallen 30% to 35% since the beginning
of the year, while list prices for pulp exports plummeted
about 28% in recent months.
   "There's simply too much production," says Russell Fulton,
who directs pulp operations for Northwood Forest Industries
Ltd., a 50-50 joint venture between Mead Corp. and Noranda
Forest Inc. The U.S., Canada, Brazil and the Scandinavian
countries have continued to add pulp capacity even though
demand for paper is sinking along with advertising linage.
   Northwood, based in Prince George, British Columbia,
hasn't been driven from any markets by bare-bones pricing.
But Mr. Fulton says, "Whether or not we opt to get into a
market is now price-related." Other pulp makers are likewise
expected to be more selective, resulting in fewer exports.
Pulp exports are expected to grow by only 2% in 1991,
compared with almost 5% in 90.
   Snap-On Tools Corp., Kenosha, Wis., has already shifted
emphasis from its larger but weaker export markets -- Canada
and the United Kingdom -- to smaller, less mature markets,
including Belgium and the Netherlands. While overseas sales
of its automotive-related hand tools will be profitable,
export profits won't be at their traditional level of 11% of
sales, the company said.
   Nor is export growth expected to continue at double-digit
levels. "We didn't anticipate a lengthy recession anywhere,"
says spokesman David Heide, adding that non-U.S. sales
figures are being revised downward. Analysts expect the
company's exports to grow only about 7% in 1991, down from
17% in 1990.
   As world markets ease, foreign companies are turning to
the less-lethargic U.S., threatening domestic trade gains.
Telltale signs are already emerging: According to a recent
survey by the Steel Service Center Institute, which
represents steel buyers, 15% of the institute's members said
foreign mills were more actively seeking U.S. business, up
from 10% in April. Steel imports rose 27.6% in April from
March.
   WEFA Group expects net exports to be barely positive in
1991, and turn negative in 1992, when exports expand by 3.6%
and imports grow 5.3%
   Some export areas remain strong. For example, while
profits for Mead's pulp export business are down, business is
booming both in the U.S. and overseas for its coated board
products used in packaging wet and frozen foods. Food-related
products are more recession-proof than durable goods.
   And even in the depressed steel industry, there are some
exceptions. Pittsburgh-based Allegheny Ludlum Corp. manages
to maintain strong prices and profits for its
corrosion-resistant stainless steel used for offshore oil
platforms.
   Still, profit margins are less attractive on exports than
domestic sales. John Tumazos, an analyst with Donaldson
Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, says while Allegheny Ludlum shipped 2%
more steel in the first quarter than in the year-ago period
thanks to exports, revenues per ton fell 6% reflecting in
part more-competitive export prices.
   "With the dollar, it's going to be a greater challenge to
maintain the export business," the company says. "But you
can't go in and out of a market. We've worked very hard to
increase our export business and intend to stay there."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
