ID: 157	RANK: 1	SCORE: 12.729723
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911004-0152
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911004-0152.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   On Sports: Basketball at 100
   ----
   By Frederick C. Klein
</HL>
<DATE>
10/04/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   If James Naismith had a better sense of history, he would
have invented basketball a few weeks after he did, sometime
in late December of 1891. That would have given his sport's
centennial a Columbian parallel, and also would have made it
coincide with an Olympiad in which basketball is expected to
be a, and maybe the, featured attraction, thanks to the
recently named "dream team" of U.S. professional stars.
   Naismith, however, fashioned the game in response to a
more immediate imperative. In his 1941 book, "Basketball: Its
Origin and Development," he recounts how, as a new,
30-year-old gym instructor at the YMCA International Training
School in Springfield, Mass., now Springfield College, he was
put in charge of a class of administrators-in-training that
was bored to the point of mutiny with its daily winter
regimen of calisthenics. He'd badgered superiors with his
belief that if exercise could be made to seem like play
instead of work, the most re-calcitrant pupils would
participate willingly. One responded by giving him the
troublesome class, saying, in effect, "Put up or shut up."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "I went to work with this class," Naismith wrote. "I tried
{having the men play} soccer and we smashed all the windows.
I tried lacrosse and smashed most of the fellows' arms. Rugby
football finished the students up, until they were ready to
quit on recreative games."
   He went on: "In a day or two I would have to report to the
faculty the success or failure of my attempts. So far they
had been all failures. How I hated the thought of admitting
that, after all my theories, I, too, had failed to hold the
interest of the class."
   So he repaired to his office to meditate on the sort of
game that might be played indoors and be challenging but not
rough. It must, of course, involve a ball -- didn't they all?
-- and be easy to learn. But what of the fun element?
   The most interesting game at that time was American rugby
(football), he mused, but it was inappropriate for indoors
because it involved tackling. Why? Because players were
allowed to run with the ball and it was necessary to stop
them. But . . . if they couldn't run with the ball, tackling
could be eliminated]
   "I can still recall how I snapped my fingers and shouted,
`I've got it]'" he wrote.
   The rest -- the elevated, horizontal goal and general
rules -- fell into place, and within days Naismith's Y
charges were happily playing the game that would be the
U.S.'s most important gift to sports. Baseball may be our
poets' choice, and football may be No. 1 on the domestic
tube, but basketball, with its free-flowing form and abundant
opportunities for individual virtuosity, is the American game
the world has chosen. FIBA, the Olympic regulator of the
sport, recognizes national governing bodies in 176 countries,
10 more than belong to the United Nations. Surveys I've seen
identify basketball as the world's foremost spectator sport.
   It is, furthermore, the game that is most purely "ours,"
baseball and football having direct British antecedents. My
encyclopedia mentions a 16th-century Aztec game called
"ollamalitzli," in which players tried to throw a ball
through an elevated stone ring. But it notes that any player
who succeeded was entitled to the clothes of all the
spectators, so it couldn't have been very high scoring.
   Several things about basketball's beginnings seem worth
mentioning in this centennial year. One is the biography of
Naismith. This was a man of parts. Born and raised in the
northern Ontario hamlet of Bennie's Corners, he was orphaned
at eight and at times had to drop out of public school to
support himself as a logger or farmhand. Nonetheless, he
would receive a degree in theology from McGill University and
an M.D. from Gross Medical School in Denver.
   He never held a pastorate, though, nor did he practice
medicine. He wrote that his aim in life was to "do good," and
he concluded that encouraging wholesome leisure pursuits
among the young would accomplish this best. A naturalized
U.S. citizen, he spent most of his working life at the
University of Kansas, where he became chairman of the
physical education department. He died in 1939 at age 78.
   Secondly, we are reminded of the role of chance in
invention; many of basketball's most salient features just
kind of happened. For instance, Naismith wanted boxes to
serve as goals, but the janitor he asked had only peach
baskets handy. They were placed 10 feet off the ground
because that was where the balcony of the Springfield gym, on
which they were nailed, began. And backboards were
introduced, in 1893, to keep spectators from helping their
favorite teams by swatting away opponents' shots.
   Lastly, once basketball's foundations were laid, it was
remarkable how quickly it approached its present form. Free
throws after fouls were introduced in 1894, the point system
of two points for field goals and one for free throws came in
1896, five-player teams were accepted in 1897 and the dribble
-- the most important change in Naismith's original plan --
was made legal in 1898. In later life, he liked to remark
that the biggest difference between the game he devised and
the one that evolved was in the skill of the players.
   Over the next few months, the centennial will be marked in
a number of ways. The YMCA, which also spread the game
abroad, has various celebrations planned, and the game's Hall
of Fame in Springfield will host a series of events
culminating in a black-tie gala on Dec. 21. That's the day
set as the game's birthday, although nobody knows for sure.
   The National Basketball Association, whose teams begin
practice this week, says its players will wear centennial
patches on their warmup suits in the coming season, and other
commemorations will be staged. But it's questionable how
Naismith would regard the league. He wrote that basketball
would be basketball as long as four things didn't change: The
large, light ball; the elevated, horizontal goal; and no
personal contact or running with the ball. Seems that NBAball
qualifies on only two of those counts.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
