ID: 157	RANK: 31	SCORE: 5.286418
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910108-0139
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910108-0139.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
   They're Rooting for Home Team in Hogland
   ----
   By Frederick C. Klein
</HL>
<DATE>
01/08/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   Fayetteville, Ark. -- As its many supporters will tell
you, the University of Arkansas is a faaaahn institution, one
whose innovations have made lasting contributions to human
betterment. Take, for instance, the light-pole meter
developed a half-dozen years ago by Jim Robken, the school's
band director, to measure crowd noise. Without it, basketball
fans in many places would be in the dark about how much of an
uproar they're creating.
   "I didn't invent it alone -- a friend from Fort Smith who
knows electronics did the wiring -- but it was my idea," says
the trim Robken, who does his game-day conducting in shorts
to faciliate the rousing, round-the-court laps he runs to the
tune of the William Tell Overture during Razorback timeouts.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   He adds: "Being able to visualize noise gives the fans
more incentive to cheer. They tell me it really helps them
get into the game."
   While Robken, et al., are lighting it up in the stands at
Barnhill Arena these wintry afternoons, the fellas on the
floor are doing their bit, too, and if they keep it up they
also might come up with something new. That would be a
first-ever NCAA crown for their school, and for the entire
Southwest Conference. Sure, basketball traditionally has been
the fourth-favorite sport in these parts, behind football,
spring football and football recruiting, but you'd have
thought that at least one SWC club would have lassoed the
trophy during all these years.
   That this finally might be Arkansas's -- and the SWC's --
year has occurred to many: The Hogs are ranked No. 2 in the
land, behind only defending-champ Nevada-Las Vegas. That it
had better be their year for their conference to benefit has
occurred to all, because beginning next season the school is
taking its business to the Southeastern Conference as part of
the continental drift that's remaking the bigtime college
sports map.
   "It'd be nice to go out (of the league) a winner," muses
Nolan Richardson, Arkansas's coach. "Of course," he smiles,
"I can think of lots of reasons it'd be nice."
   On Sunday, before the usual Barnhill full-house of
9,000-odd people, Richardson's lads took a sizable step
toward that goal by beating Houston, the second-best team in
their league, 95-79. They did it in typical fashion, which
means they swiped everything but the visitors' shoelaces.
Their hounding defense created 11 steals and 28 turnovers,
some of which they turned into points so fast that if you
blinked you missed seeing the scoreboard change.
   The win ran the Razorbacks' won-lost record to 13-1,
promising the continuing improvement that has been their lot
since Richardson arrived here for the 1985-86 season as the
school's, and the SWC's, first black head basketball coach.
   This hasn't come about without some travail. The Hogs went
12-16 in Richardson's first campaign, which was less than
pleasing to fans who had tasted Final Four glory (in 1978)
under his predecessor, Eddie Sutton. But the victory total
has risen annually since -- to 19, 21, 25 and last year's 30
and a Final Four berth -- emboldening the authors of the
team's media guide to gush that the coach is "approaching
legendary status" in Hogland.
   Legendary or not, Richardson is every inch the modern
college-hoops honcho. A dapper man who favors sharp-pressed
suits, shiny cowboy boots and Frenchcuffed shirts, he throws
his recruiting net so wide that his present scholarship list
includes half as many players from Yugoslavia (one; red-shirt
freshman Davor Rimac) as from Arkansas (two).
   And when he says he treats his players "like family" once
they're here, it's no idle boast: The sister of his star
guard, Lee Mayberry, is married to one of Richardson's sons.
   What the coach asks in return is simple. "He wants us to
play our butts off every minute we're on the floor," says
Mayberry, a junior from Tulsa. "You get tired, you sit down.
That's the rule."
   Indeed, Richardson throws his Razorbacks at opponents in
human waves, substituting so liberally that 10 or more of his
players average 10-plus minutes a game. The idea, he says, is
to disrupt foes' "rhythm" by forcing them to play faster than
they're used to.
   And spreading the work has its own rewards. "The other
team can substitute, too, but our subs usually are readier
'cause they've seen more action," Richardson avers. "Also,
we're in shape because every day we practice as hard as we
play. I see to that."
   To handle such a pace, Richardson has assembled a crew
consisting mostly of skinny-legged whippets, but this can
have its drawbacks; to wit, a tall, rugged team that doesn't
panic can give the Razorbacks trouble. Their only loss this
season, in the finals of the NIT tournament, was to muscular
Arizona, which out-rebounded them, 54-32.
   For a half on Sunday, Houston threatened to repeat that
lesson. The Cougars trailed by just four points at the break
-- 43-47 -- mainly because Alvaro Teheran, their 7-foot-1
Colombian center, parked himself under the basket and scored
16 points, 10 on tip-ins or follow-up shots. "Teheran
terrorized us," said Richardson, pun apparently intended.
   In half two, though, Arkansas zipped in and out of zone
defenses that kept the ball away from Teheran (he scored just
two points more) and the Cougar guards on their heels. The
Hogs clinched the win with a two-minute, 11-1 scoring run
that upped their lead to 79-62. It was triggered by an
alley-oop basket by Mayberry off a Todd Day in-bounds pass
following a timeout in which bandmaster Robken spurred the
fans to light the uppermost bulb on his cheer-meter.
   Afterward, Richardson clucked in admiration of the
6-foot-2 Mayberry, whose 27 points tied him for team scoring
leadership with the 6-8 Day. "Other guys jump as high as they
can. Lee jumps as high as he needs to," he said of his
tightly wound playmaker.
   And the coach tipped his hat to the fans. "We run our
press better here, where they're behind us," he said. "Maybe
we'd better charter a train to take a whole bunch of them to
Indianapolis when we go."
   Indianapolis is the site of this year's Final Four.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
