ID: 157	RANK: 35	SCORE: 5.086782
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880906-0180 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-06-88 1900EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>s a BC-APN--YoungGeorge ADV18-1stAdd   09-06 0788</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-APN--Young George, ADV 18-1st Add,0798</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv18</NOTE>
<HEAD>AGENCIES AND RADIO OUT</HEAD>
<NOTE>For Release Sunday, Sept. 18</NOTE>
<HEAD>ANDOVER: of attention.''</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   Shirley Flower Sedgewick, who married Howard Sedgewick, George's
classmate at Country Day, recalls the strong patriarchal presence
of Prescott Sr. when the dating game began for the Bush boys:
```Now don't you think it's time to take this young lady home?' he
would say, and immediately the family chauffeur, Alex, would be
called into action.''
   The word ``preppy'' had not been invented when 13-year-old
George went off to Phillips Academy here in Andover and became a
``prep,'' the campus word for newcomer. He wore a little blue
rowing cap topped with a white button, carried the luggage of the
lordly seniors to their dorms on the upper hill, burst immediately
into any song they commanded, could not venture near the flag staff
where upperclassmen were allowed to smoke, and was not to be seen
on Main Street until the football team beat Exeter, ``the hated
redmen from the north.''
   ``In those days Andover consciously imitated the English public
schools like Eton and Rugby, so a little hazing was in order,''
said retired English master Hart Leavitt. He remembers George as an
``indifferent scholar. In my class he was a nonentity, just sat
there and didn't contribute much. A nice guy but that's about all.
He looked like the cover on the Preppy Handbook that came out
awhile ago. I didn't have much contact with him outside class, but
I must say wimp is the last word I would apply to him.''
   Chemistry tutor and basketball coach Frank DiClementi, who knew
George better back then, has different memories. ``From the first
day I saw him, I knew he was something special. He came from a
family with the right priorities. Some kids aren't ready to come
here. He was. I never saw him down. Always hustling, but a good
loser although you couldn't be jolly about the damn thing.''
   Wearing the bow tie that is his trademark, ``Deak,'' as decades
of old grads call him, sat on the porch of the Andover Inn
summoning up the past from the background shouts of the playing
fields.
   ``Poppy was captain of baseball and soccer, played every minute
of every game, but I had to talk him into going out for basketball.
He was afraid of denying another kid a place on the team. He was a
good hacker, as we called regular fellows, always thinking of
others.
   ``There was a Jewish kid nicknamed `Ovie' _ dead now _ who left
school when he didn't get tapped for any of the Greek societies.
They talked him into coming back, and Poppy was the first to
befriend him, got him to come out for baseball. One day a fly ball
bounced off Ovie's head into the left-fielder's glove and Poppy
congratulated him on an assist.''
   George and his schoolmates trod the leafy walks in fear of the
righteous wrath of ``The Bald One,'' headmaster Claude Fuess, who
could ring down the thunder for violating 9 p.m. lights-out curfew
or after a bun fight in ``the beanery,'' as the dining rooms in the
student Commons were called.
   The boys often had a tough time keeping a straight face when
campus cutup John Uhler Lemmon III deftly mimicked the head's
portentous waddle. Jack, a year behind George, later made a career
of his comic skills on Broadway and in Hollywood.
   Coming of age in Andover, ``the inmates'' boasted of making the
most of the weekly tea dance to gratify the ``old B.U.,'' defined
in the 1942 Pot Pourri, George's yearbook, as ``the biological
urge.''
   ``The music is usually fair, but the girls are not,'' the class
social historian observed. ``By 8 p.m. the couples are to be found
mostly in the bird sanctuary or in the girls' cars, while faculty
wives attempt to police the affair.''
   As the decade of the '40s began, the outside world intruded on
the lovely wooded and landscaped campus where Oliver Wendell Holmes
first dabbled in verse and where Harriet Beecher Stowe, whose
husband taught here, lies buried in the little graveyard.
   ``Upper-middles,'' third-year boys like George, huddled under
blankets to listen to the war news from Europe on ``contraband''
radios.
   Besides morning chapel and nightly bed check, student activities
included air raid drills and drawing the blackout curtains. Younger
masters were leaving to join the Royal Canadian Air Force, and one
day at assembly a refugee named Heinz Langerhans told in a thick
accent about life in a Nazi concentration camp.
   By senior year, crew cuts were in fashion, and Petty girls
adorned the dorms of this academy founded in 1789 for ``the
virtuous pious education of youth.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>MORE</NOTE>
</DOC>
