ID: 157	RANK: 39	SCORE: 4.969634
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910430-0004
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910430-0004.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
   Jordan and the Bulls Flying High
   ----
   By Frederick C. Klein
</HL>
<DATE>
04/30/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A22
</SO>
<LP>
   Chicago -- This was supposed to be the year that Chicago's
professional sports teams found the keys to their trophy
cabinets, dusted out their insides and filled some of the
long-empty shelves, but now this outcome is a good bit less
than certain.
   First the Black Hawks, who led the regular National Hockey
League season on points, were a first-round KO victim to the
Minnesota North Stars in the playoffs. Then the highly touted
baseball Cubs, who in the off-season spent $30 million to
sign some 1988 All-Stars, lurched out of the starting gate in
familiar fashion, among other things recently blowing a
five-run lead in extra innings. The White Sox are doing fine
to date, thanks, but the date is early.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   So that leaves the basketball Bulls, and here the hopes
remain high. Last Thursday, they got their initial-round
National Basketball Association playoff series against the
New York Knicks off skippingly by winning a track meet,
126-85. In Sunday's second game of the best-of-five test, the
visitors made the going stickier -- about the consistency of
mud -- but the Bulls prevailed here again, 89-79. Call it
versatility.
   "It wasn't a classic, but we controlled the end result,
and that's what's important," said Phil Jackson, the Chicago
coach, about his team's 28-16 fourth-quarter margin, which
proved decisive on Sunday.
   "We showed we can play that style, too," noted star guard
Michael Jordan after cleaning the gunk off his celebrated
sneakers. "Hey, we play Detroit a lot. We're used to it."
   Chances are, the Bulls are going to see more slow stuff if
they continue to progress through the NBA's "second season,"
but off the evidence of their first six months of labor, they
could be up to it. This is a bunch that posted 61 wins during
regular hostilities, the highest total in the league's
Eastern sector and one surpassed by only eight other teams in
pro hoops history.
   In the doing, they got the right to hoist a Central
Division pennant from the dusty rafters of their Chicago
Stadium home. It will have company up there, but not much;
the 25-year-old franchise had previously captured but one
other such honor, and that was 16 years ago, when the league
deemed Chicago to be part of its Midwest Division.
Geographical clarity is not highly valued in the sports
business.
   Back in the wide-tie days, the Dick Motta-coached Bulls
built their victories laboriously, brick by brick, the way
masons raise a wall. The present club, led by the
winged-footed Jordan, prefers to slap 'em out quicker, prefab
style. Forty-three of its 1990-91 triumphs were by 10 points
or more, and 11 were by at least 25. Both were league highs.
   But this is the playoffs, where defense reigns, which is
another way of saying that Dr. Naismith's rule book is
jettisoned in favor of the one written by the Marquess of
Queensberry. If, as John Madden says, one knee equals two
feet in football, then in the NBA playoffs an elbow gets one
a head, and the free throws, if any, be damned. That may as
well have been the Detroit Pistons' motto during a
championship tenure that, so far, has encompassed the past
two campaigns.
   The Pistons' habits are pertinent to a discussion of the
Bulls, because the two teams are not only divisional rivals
but also once and, maybe, future playoff foes. In each of the
past three seasons, the Detroiters stepped on and over the
Chicago swifties en route to their division titles and
championship-round berths, chuckling all the while.
   But the Bulls did a bit better each time -- last year's
Eastern final went the full seven games -- and this season
the injury-weakened Pistons had to crane their necks to see
the Bulls atop the Central, 11 games ahead at the finish. For
public consumption, though, the champs profess not to be
impressed, and, healthier now, vow they'll be waiting for
Chicago when conference-final time comes 'round again. And
while various foes stand between both teams and that
showdown, that's the matchup most expect, and desire.
   The Knicks, the last team to qualify for the playoffs in
the East, are the Bulls' first obstacle. The Gothamites are
strong but slow, but for reasons best known to themselves
chose to run with Chicago on Thursday and were lapped by
halftime. On Sunday, they reverted to their muscle game and
did better -- so much better, in fact, that the game was tied
at 66 with less than eight minutes to play. Patrick Ewing,
their giant center, had scored 24 points, and the Knicks'
aggressive rebounding and tactic of holding the ball on
offense until the 24-second shot clock had all but expired
had thrown the Bulls' attack out of sync.
   But Chicago also was working hard defensively, keeping
hands in enemy faces, and in the end that sank the Knicks.
Worn down by Bill Cartwright, the Bulls' rough-hewn center,
Ewing would not score again, while Jordan finally got his
mates a lead by feeding forward Horace Grant for a layup and
threading the Knick defense for one of his own. The Bulls'
late predominance at the free-throw line (they got to shoot
34 times from there in all, to the Knicks' 16) set the final
margin.
   New York coach John MacLeod mentioned the free-throw
imbalance in his postgame remarks, but, manfully, gave most
of the credit to the Bulls' "D." "We got no easy baskets," he
said of his team's 40.5% field goal average. "It was a
struggle to score every time."
   That's been the idea of the Bulls' entire season, pointed
out Coach Jackson, a Knick in his playing days. "People know
who we are and the kind of game we like to play, but if they
stop us from doing what we prefer -- running -- we can
adjust," said he. "I think that's the major difference
between this team and our last few.
   "At least, I hope it is," he added. "That's what we'll
find out these next few weeks."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
