ID: 157	RANK: 57	SCORE: 4.693981
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911230-0107
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911230-0107.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
   Wildcats Preserve Holy Roman Empire
   ----
   By Frederick C. Klein
</HL>
<DATE>
12/30/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A7
</SO>
<LP>
   Lexington, Ky. -- They take their college basketball
seriously in this home city of the University of Kentucky.
Just how seriously came through to me Saturday evening while
I was waiting for an elevator at the Hyatt Hotel here. The
hotel is next door to Rupp Arena, where Kentucky soon would
play its in-state rival, the U. of Louisville.
   Waiting with me was a boy nine or 10 years old and an
adult who I assumed was his father. Both were obviously game
bound and wearing blue sweaters bearing the huge, white
Kentucky "K."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "Who're you rooting for?" I asked the kid, teasingly.
   "The Roman Empire]" he exclaimed, as Dad nodded
approvingly.
   The grandiosity of the kid's reply took the wind out of
me, so I didn't remind him of what finally happened to the
real Roman Empire. But if I had, he'd probably have told me
that it lasted 500 years.
   Kentucky hasn't been on top of the college hoops heap for
quite 500 years, but it sometimes seems that way. Kentucky
teams won national titles for "Baron" Adolph Rupp when
basketballs had laces, and at various times since. Anything
less than a 30-win season and the state legislature calls for
an investigation.
   I asked around, and was told that people hereabouts are
semi-serious about that "Roman Empire" stuff. I could have
deduced as much from UK's basketball media guide. According
to this remarkable document, Kentucky doesn't just have
coaches, it has coaching "eras." This is the third season
RPE. That stands for Rick Pitino Era.
   Pitino's Wildcats were 14-14 in the won-lost column in his
first year, and 22-6 last season. To say that expectations
are high for this campaign would be to put it mildly. "The
heat is on" for 1991-92, declares -- yes -- the media guide.
"The past two years have been fun, but everyone's saying your
honeymoon is over," the coach is reminded elsewhere in this
publication of the university that employs him.
   In truth, 22-6 in just two seasons might have seemed
unattainable anywhere but here when Pitino, now 38 years old,
arrived. The Roman Empire was looking holey at the time as a
result of a probation visited upon it by the NCAA. After
years of giving off enough smoke to cure every ham in the
South, UK basketball came to grief when a package bound for a
recruit's parent mysteriously came apart in an express-mail
office and cash tumbled out. The ensuing investigation
revealed various types of wrongdoing. Kentucky was barred
from post-season play and subjected to recruiting
restrictions for two years, and the ESE (Eddie Sutton Era) --
1986-89 -- ended.
   That Pitino has succeeded as well as he has is a tribute
to both his image and his philosophy. He's the very model of
the modern, go-getter college basketball coach. He's so
dapper that Gentleman's Quarterly magazine is featuring him
in a coming issue, so entrepreneurial that he already has a
Lexington restaurant ("Bravo Pitino") that bears his name.
   His philosophy is based on his observation that
long-range, three-point field goals are worth one point more
than the regular kind. His teams throw up treys at every
opportunity and play pressing defense when they don't have
the ball. The idea is to leave foes gasping, and in arrears.
   Pitino has done this at the other stops in his busy
career, the previous one being with the NBA's New York
Knicks. He's had five different jobs since 1983, but now
swears eternal fealty to the blue and white. The only flies
in the local ointment, he says, are news folks who speculate
that he might not stay here forever.
   The Wildcats were 7-2 in the won-lost column before
Saturday, and their date with Louisville seemed pivotal. Not
only were the visitors unbeaten in six starts, but if you
asked UK fans which one game they'd like to win most every
year they'd probably say the one against UL.
   The two schools are such hot rivals that from 1922 to 1983
they met only when forced to by the vicissitudes of
post-season tournaments. Louisville was hot to trot
throughout that period, but UK, traditionally the state's top
basketball dog, said no, reasoning it had more to lose than
to gain. It was only after UL rose to national basketball
prominence under Coach Denny Crum that the state's populace
and politicians insisted on yearly meetings.
   Crum, too, has had some hard times of late. His teams --
NCAA champs in 1980 and '86 -- often scored in triple digits,
but stories last year in the Louisville Courier-Journal
revealed that many players he'd recruited scored in single
digits -- of a possible 36 -- on the ACT college-entrance
exam, and that just six of the 37 young men who played for UL
in the 1980s got their degrees within five years. The school
declared itself behind Crum and recently extended his
contract into 1998. But with bonuses based on his players'
academic performance.
   Kentucky had won six of the nine games since the series
was renewed, but the perception of how far the state hoops
balance had shifted was reflected in a UK fan's sign at Rupp
Arena Saturday. "Move Over Denny, It's Rick's State Now," it
read. Time was when no UK fan would concede that Kentucky was
ever UL's domain.
   UK fans can rest easy for another year, because their boys
won on Saturday, 103-89. They did it as they usually do, with
three-pointers and the defensive press. They hit on 11 of 21
trey tries, and pressed the more-athletic but younger
Cardinals into 13 giveaways via steals.
   John Pelphrey, a skinny senior averaging 13 points a game,
scored 16 in the first seven minutes, including 4-for-4 from
three-point land, to give UK a 29-19 lead, and UL never got
closer than four thereafter. He led Kentucky with 26 points,
followed by 25 for sophomore Jamal Mashburn, a muscular New
Yorker who'll someday earn his living from the game.
   Crum, ever the educator these days, said that teams learn
when they make mistakes, and his boys created lots of
"learning situations." Said Pelphrey: "Coach likes for us to
start thinking about our next opponent right away, but this
was a big win. We can enjoy it for a whole day, maybe."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
