ID: 157	RANK: 73	SCORE: 4.551305
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910401-0044
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910401-0044.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Athletic-Shoe
   Industry Likely
   To Be Sluggish
   ---
   Analysts Don't See Jumps
   Of the Past as Consumers
   Spend Conservatively
   ----
   By Joseph Pereira
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
04/01/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B6C
</SO>
<CO>
   NKE RBK LA SRR
</CO>
<IN>
TEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX)
</IN>
<LP>
   Despite flat domestic sales in the athletic-footwear
industry, a number of manufacturers have managed to achieve
respectable results thus far this year, thanks in part to a
brisk international business.
   But analysts caution that U.S. sales in coming months will
be sluggish, as consumers continue to spend conservatively
and retailers tighten inventory.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Already, they note, industry leader Nike Inc. has
indicated that its domestic order rate from March to July
will be flat.
   "The industry has jumped from $1 billion to $6 billion a
year {wholesale} in about five years, with much of the recent
increases coming from price hikes," notes Willard Brown,
analyst for Dean Witter Reynolds. "But with a lot of folks
discounting due to the recession, sales gains come when a
company essentially gets the consumer to switch brands." That
means companies with bigger advertising budgets, like Nike
and Reebok International Ltd., stand to gain the most.
   For the first quarter, Reebok is expected to post an
increase in profit to $54 million, or 48 cents a share, from
$52.7 million, or 46 cents a share, a year earlier, said Gary
Jacobson, analyst for Kidder Peabody Inc. He estimates sales
increased 22% to $675 million from $554.4 million.
   The company's first-quarter profits will be hurt by higher
ad costs and expenses associated with Reebok's move to change
the pay structure of its sales staff from commission to
salary. As a result, the company in the long run should save
about $7 million a year, Mr. Jacobson says.
   Reebok's sales momentum could help the company in coming
months. Its Black Top shoe, marketed for outdoor basketball,
is expected to bring in more than $75 million for the
company; 1.5 million pairs have already been ordered by
retailers, Mr. Jacobson says. The shoe should be helped by a
national three-on-three outdoor basketball tournament
sponsored by Reebok. The championship game will be televised
by CBS in June.
   The company's Pump line, expected to double in sales this
year to $250 million, has a new offspring, the Dual Chamber.
A special feature on the shoe allows wearers to transfer air
from the ankle to the sole. Buoyed by some of these new
products, second-quarter earnings should increase 7% to $46.5
million from $43.4 million while sales are expected to climb
24% to $654 million from $527.2 million, Mr. Jacobson
estimates. "Reebok is accelerating while Nike is
decelerating," he says.
   For the third quarter ended Feb. 28, Nike posted a 12%
increase in earnings to $70.7 million, or 93 cents a share,
from $63.1 million, or 83 cents a share, in the year-earlier
period, after an adjustment to reflect a 2-for-1 stock split
in October 1990. Sales increased 38% to $802.2 million from
$577.9 million.
   Noting the company's flat domestic orders and a slowing
athletic market, Mr. Brown of Dean Witter estimates Nike's
fourth-quarter per-share profit will decline to 75 cents from
89 cents a year earlier, as revenue climbs 20% to $725
million from $609 million. The company's summer business
ought to pick up with promising back-to-school orders, adds
Alice Ruth analyst for Montgomery Securities.
   L.A. Gear Inc., continuing to grapple with excess
inventory, is expected to report a loss of $12.4 million, or
60 cents a share, for the first quarter ended Feb. 28, says
Ms. Ruth. That compares with a profit of $13.9 million, or 69
cents a share, in the year-ago period. Sales should decline
to $160 million from $187 million. The company's efforts to
clear old merchandise through discounts is shrinking gross
margins to 21%, down from 39.3% a year ago, Ms. Ruth notes.
   Analysts say that by getting rid of a substantial amount
of stale goods in the first quarter, L.A. Gear hopes to
improve second-quarter results. As much as half of L.A.
Gear's first-quarter sales "represent close-out merchandise,"
adds Jonathan Ziegler, analyst for Sutro &amp; Co. in San
Francisco. He expects L.A. Gear to narrow its loss in the
second quarter to nine cents a share. In the year-ago second
quarter, L.A. Gear had net of $10.2 million, or 51 cents a
share, on sales of $225.4 million.
   Stride Rite Corp., riding on the popularity of its Keds
sneakers, is expected to report earnings for the first
quarter ended Feb. 26 of $15.4 million, or 60 cents a share,
up from $13.7 million, or 51 cents a share, in the
year-earlier quarter, says Steven Frankel, analyst for Adams
Harkness &amp; Hill Inc. He anticipates the company will also
report a 20% increase in sales. Results for the quarter are
scheduled to be announced at the company's annual meeting
next Wednesday.
   Mr. Frankel attributes Keds popularity to the fact that
many "parents wore them as children and now they're buying
the shoes for their kids." The shoes are simple, clean, look
good and are affordable, he notes. Growth in Keds brand and
the company's children's division will more than offset
weakness in Stride Rite's Sperry Top-sider shoe division,
which, he says, is "in a transition year, gearing up to make
a comeback in 1992."
   He projects Stride Rite will report second-quarter
earnings of $19.1 million, or 75 cents a share, up more than
20% over the year-ago period's $15.8 million, or 60 cents a
share.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
