ID: 157	RANK: 77	SCORE: 4.535699
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910204-0004
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910204-0004.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
   Redmen Scalp Seton Hall
   ----
   By Frederick C. Klein
</HL>
<DATE>
02/04/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A9
</SO>
<LP>
   New York -- Lou Carnesecca posted his 500th college
basketball coaching victory here Saturday, after which he was
awarded the game ball, his St. John's U. players gave him a
ride around the Madison Square Garden floor on their
shoulders, and the school band played "Looie, Looie."
   It was a nice demonstration, and the honoree was properly
appreciative. "The season should end right now -- we should
put the balls away," said the bespectacled, besweatered
Looie, 66, face alight.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But reality swiftly reappeared, as it must in his
supremely realistic profession. "Forget the 500 -- we won at
home today, and that's what we have to do to keep in the
thick of things," he went on. "Stay away from the dogcatcher,
that's my motto. Figure that one out if you can."
   Ah, that isn't so difficult. In the Big East, Looie's
league, the dogcatcher always lurks, ready to pounce on the
unwary pooch. Saturday's 81-65 St. John's triumph, over
cross-river rival Seton Hall, meant that the Redmen would
finish the weekend snug in their kennels, tied with Syracuse
for first place in the loop with a 7-3 won-lost mark, 16-3
overall. Let the other mutts watch out for themselves for
awhile.
   Like Carnesecca says, though, it's dog-eat-dog out there,
and it wouldn't pay to get too comfy. At the dawn of last
weekend's action, places one through eight in the nine-school
conference were occupied by teams whose records ranged from
6-3 to 3-6, so a lapse or two could be painful.
   The other side of that coin is that that sort of exercise
helps in the long run; otherwise the Big East, the league
ESPN made, wouldn't fare so well in NCAA play. This, you'll
recall, is the bunch whose members won two national crowns
and furnished three runners-up during the past decade, the
first of its existence. It just seems it's been around
longer.
   St. John's has yet to wear an NCAA crown, but it hasn't
been for lack of recent opportunity: Redmen teams went to the
post-season tournament after 16 of Carnesecca's 22 full
seasons at the Vincentian institution, and visited the
National Invitational Tournament after the other six. If
you're scoring, that's 22-for-22 in the tournament-bids
column, and the same for winning campaigns. Even confreres
John Thompson of Georgetown and Rollie Massimino of
Villanova, who have won the Big One, can't match those stats.
   Whether this year's St. John's team, ranked No. 5
nationally, will be Looie's good-luck charm remains to be
seen, of course; at the moment, it appears that even the
Portland Trail Blazers might have their hands full with
Nevada-Las Vegas, the defending collegiate champ and current
national No. 1. But with the tourney still two months away,
there's time enough to dream.
   If NCAA crowns were awarded for poundage, St. John's would
be a shoo-in. The boys from Queens are king-sized, boasting
three big near-7-foot-tall centers, as opposed to your
ordinary seven-footers. The starter is junior Robert Werdann,
who goes 6-11 and 250 pounds and has a nice shooting touch to
boot. When he needs a breather -- or sometimes when he
doesn't -- Carnesecca can turn to senior Sean Muto (6-11,
235) or freshman Shawnelle Scott (6-10, 250).
   Billy Singleton, a senior forward, stands a mere 6-7, but
packs 235 pounds. He and the aforementioned three soften up
the other guys so that junior Malik Sealy, a skinny legged
6-8er, can zip around and over 'em. He's the Redmen's leading
scorer, with a 23-point average.
   Sealy, by the way, is no sleeper; a hotly recruited high
school All-American from the Bronx, he also led St. John's in
scoring last year. "About the only thing he hasn't done with
a basketball here is blow it up," says Looie. Rumor has it he
might bid goodbye to academe after this season so as to strut
his stuff in the NBA.
   All would be rosy if the Redmen's backcourt were better,
and hope dawned anew on that score Saturday. Jason Buchanan,
the team's 6-foot-2 playmaking guard, had struggled to a 42%
field-goal shooting average, but against Seton Hall he made
six of nine there, plus all 13 of his free throws, for 26
points, 19 of which came in the second half. "With the way
they {St. John's} get the ball inside on you, any decent
outside shooting is murder," noted P.J. Carlesimo, the Seton
Hall coach.
   In truth, Saturday's game was rough and ragged, and
decided more on the floor and free-throw line than above the
hoop. The two teams combined for 52 fouls and 36 turnovers,
and spent a good deal of time scrambling after loose balls,
most of which St. John's retrieved. The Redmen led by only
five points at the half, and by six with 10 minutes left, but
pulled away steadily from there.
   "We just got beat, mostly because we didn't match their
intensity," said the bearded Carlesimo, whose team's record
now stands at 13-6, 5-5 in the league. "I congratulated Louie
on the win and the milestone, but I told him I wished we
hadn't cooperated as much as we did."
   Wisecracks aside, Carnesseca used his post-game press
conference to dispense coachly wisdom gleaned from a 41-year
career that has encompassed high school and the pros, the
latter with the New Jersey Nets of the old American
Basketball Association. He praised his coaching predecessors
at St. John's, including Frank McGuire and Joe Lapchick, and
noted that five NIT titles, some of them coming when that
tourney outshone the NCAAs, ensured the school's place in the
history of the collegiate sport.
   He said his formula for success was simple: "Get good
players."
   When asked which of his St. John's victories stuck most in
his mind, he picked one against a touring Soviet national
team in the early 1970s that was decided by a buzzer-beating
shot.
   "And you know," he mused, "that was an exhibition game. It
didn't even count towards the 500."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
