ID: 157	RANK: 79	SCORE: 4.516381
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910301-0193
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910301-0193.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Free Throws Aren't His Forte
   ----
   By Frederick C. Klein
</HL>
<DATE>
03/01/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A6
</SO>
<LP>
   East Rutherford, N.J. -- I hate to watch people suffer, so
I tried to avert my eyes when Chris Dudley stepped to the
free-throw line during the first quarter of the New Jersey
Nets-Indiana Pacers basketball game here Tuesday night. I
steeled myself, though; it was my job, and I had to take the
bitter with the better.
   He bounced the ball once, then twice, bent his knees, and
proceeded to uncoil his 6-foot-11-inch body in sections,
finally letting fly. And -- hey] -- the shot went in.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Dudley took two more free throws in the second half of the
129-104 Nets win, and made them both. That's three-for-three
if you're scoring, which is as good as you can get. "You
picked a good night to come watch me," he smiled afterward.
   But, alas, Dudley's title of worst free-throw shooter in
the National Basketball Association remains secure for the
foreseeable future. Through Tuesday's tilt, his team's 55th
of the season, he'd canned 75 of 145 attempts, or 51.7%.
That's the lowest average for players with at least 100
attempts in a league whose players plop 'em in at an overall
rate of 76.4%. But it's been a big improvement for Dudley,
who in his previous three NBA campaigns had averaged a truly
awful 38.1%.
   "I've been practicing a lot," said the likable
26-year-old, this time with no trace of a smile. "I'd like to
become good enough so it's not the first thing people ask
about when they meet me."
   In fact, there are quite a few other things to ask Dudley
about, like how he made the unusual trip from Yale U. to the
pros, or what it's like to be emerging as one of the best
backup centers in a loop where one can make a long and
excellentpaying career in such a position. In this season,
his second in New Jersey after two with the Cleveland
Cavaliers, he ranks seventh in the league in blocked shots
despite averaging just 25 minutes of playing time a game, and
is close to the NBA's top-20 list in rebounding with an
8.3-per-game average.
   "Chris competes well and plays hard every night, and he's
been our most consistent defensive player," says Bill Fitch,
the Nets' coach. "Nobody could ask much more from him than
that."
   As for Dudley's free-throw woes, Fitch shrugs. "We want
him to be concerned with it, but not to the point where it
messes up other parts of his game," he says. "We understand
that free-throw shooting comes harder for some people than
for others. Always has been that way, always will."
   One fella for whom free-throw shooting always came hard
was Wilt Chamberlain, one of the best ever to play the
round-ball sport. The 7-foot-2 Wilt "The Stilt" averaged 30.1
points a game over a 14-season NBA career despite a 51.1%
free-throw average, the worst for any player of all-star
caliber. The poor guy shot 'em every which way, and from just
about every possible place, with the same lack of success.
   Boston's Bill Russell, Chamberlain's longtime nemesis,
almost matched his rival's difficulties at the line,
averaging 56.1% over 13 seasons. Both, however, looked like
sharpshooters compared with Kim Hughes, a tall U. of
Wisconsin product who in five NBA seasons ending in 1981,
plus an earlier campaign in the American Basketball
Association, sank but 154 of 388, or 39.7%. An NBA spokesman
says, as far as he knows, that's the league record for career
futility.
   Dudley had Hughes "beat" going into this season, largely
because of a stretch late last campaign in which he missed 34
of 39, including 17 of 18 in one memorable game. "It'd been a
long year, and the team wasn't going to the playoffs," he
recalls. "Guess I let my tiredness show."
   That was uncharacteristic of a player who got where he is
mostly by playing harder than the other guys. Dudley is the
rare hoops pro who wasn't all-everything in high school, and
is rarer yet because of his collegiate pedigree. He's one of
only two current Ivy Leaguers in the NBA (the other is Walter
Palmer of Dartmouth, a benchwarmer with the Utah Jazz), and
the league's third Yale grad ever, the other two being Earl
"Butch" Graves (Cleveland, 1984-85) and Tony Lavelli (Boston,
1949-50; New York, 1950-5l).
   Dudley went to Yale partly because of family tradition and
partly because, as a skinny high schooler in San Diego, he
wasn't recruited by big-time basketball colleges. After
filling out -- he's a broad-shouldered 240-pounder now -- he
was All-Ivy for three years and a fourth-round pick by
Cleveland in the 1987 pro draft. He was stuck as a backup
center there before being traded to the Nets last year.
   As Dudley's playing time has increased, his skills have
grown on a young Nets team whose general improvement can be
measured by the fact that its victory over Indiana was its
18th of the season, one more than it posted in all of
1989-90. He's had some big games this campaign, such as his
21 rebounds against Houston on Dec. 28 and his five blocked
shots in a single quarter on Tuesday. Some big paychecks,
too: His contract reportedly calls for him to receive $1
million a year over this season and the next two.
   He's a man of parts who reads widely (one of the last
books he read was "Liar's Poker," about Wall Street
bond-trading high jinks), likes to sail, and takes
photo-safari vacations to Kenya.
   It'd all be darned-near idyllic if it weren't for those
free throws, but Dudley has resolved not to fret unduly. His
problems, he avers, stem from too much advice rather than too
little, and he is seeking to return to former ways.
   "I got through high school, college and my first year in
the pros without being atrocious from the line, somewhere in
the 50%-55% range. Then I started listening to people who
wanted me to change my style, and things kind of fell apart,"
he says. "Now, I'm trying to keep my motion as natural as I
can, and not get hung up on it. The less you think about some
things, the better."
   That's a Yalie talking, sports fans.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
