ID: 266	RANK: 22	SCORE: 21.169579
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910521-0010
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910521-0010.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   International:
   U.N. Chernobyl Study Says Effects
   Are Overblown, Prompting Outcry
   ----
   By Richard L. Hudson
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
05/21/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A19
</SO>
<MS>
UTILITIES (UTI)
</MS>
<IN>
ELECTRIC UTILITIES (ELC)
ENVIRONMENT (ENV)
NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)
</IN>
<NS>
ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)
NUCLEAR POWER, ENERGY (NUK)
</NS>
<GV>
INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)
</GV>
<RE>
SOVIET UNION (UR)
</RE>
<LP>
   LONDON -- The Chernobyl nuclear accident didn't harm the
health of the Soviet population as much as experts in the
East and West initially thought, according to a study by
international radiation specialists.
   The controversial study, conducted by a United Nations
organization at the Kremlin's invitation, says Moscow
overestimated the radiation dose that the burning reactor
spewed over the Ukraine in 1986. As a result, it suggests,
the risk of cancer and other radiation-related ailments for
residents of areas affected by the radiation release may be
one-third to one-half the level originally thought, though
still slightly above the normal environmental cancer risk.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   What's more, the report says, far from dragging its feet
as many critics contend, the Soviet government is actually
being overzealous in protecting its citizens, needlessly
scaring them with evacuation plans based on the exaggerated
Kremlin radiation estimates.
   The report, commissioned by the Vienna-based International
Atomic Energy Agency and conducted by 200 radiation
specialists from 25 countries, stirred a hornet's nest among
Chernobyl scholars and anti-nuclear groups even before its
release today. The report will be debated this week in Vienna
at an international conference organized by the IAEA.
   "Scientifically incompetent," was the verdict of Friends
of the Earth, the international environmental organization
that, like many groups that track Chernobyl developments,
obtained an advance copy. The study, said Simon Roberts, a
Londonbased Friends of the Earth official, "builds very
concrete conclusions on the basis of very shaky evidence."
Among other things, the study didn't examine the
mostendangered groups, such as the 200,000 soldiers and
laborers who cleaned up the accident, he said.
   The report's authors acknowledge such limitations. "We had
a big enough job looking at the public," without also taking
on the task of monitoring the plant workers, said Burton G.
Bennett, a member of the study's planning committee and
secretary of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the
Effects of Atomic Radiation. The local citizenry, he said,
should take some comfort from the report. He summarized it as
saying that Chernobyl "was a very serious accident and local
{radiation} contamination was extensive. But the doses
weren't such that we would expect dramatic health effects" in
the general population.
   But in fact, the report's limitations appear likely only
to stir more controversy. Soviet authorities have reported 31
deaths and 203 radiation-related injuries from the accident,
all among plant workers and firefighters. But estimates of
future cancers, birth defects, cataracts and other long-term
consequences of radiation have varied wildly, often depending
on the pro- or anti-nuclear bias of the source. Commonly
accepted estimates assume 10,000 to 20,000 additional fatal
cancers from the accident in future years.
   The IAEA scientists didn't have enough data to make a new
cancer estimate, but their research suggests the figure may
be exaggerated. In October 1989, with unconfirmed tales of
radiation-induced birth defects frightening the local
populace, the Kremlin asked the IAEA to send investigators.
Because of limited time, the IAEA teams took fallout
measurements at 28 of the 2,225 villages known to be
contaminated by Chernobyl. In addition, IAEA teams ran 9,000
local residents through radiation-measuring devices, and gave
full physical exams to 1,356. The IAEA chose its own
subjects, without Soviet steering, Mr. Bennett said.
   The teams did find widespread obesity, high blood pressure
and bad teeth, but ascribed the conditions to poor Soviet
health care, rather than any radiation illness, the IAEA
report said. But because of sometimes-poor test equipment and
methods, the Soviets had also overestimated the amount of
local radioactive fallout from Chernobyl -- by a factor of
five in the case of one radioactive isotope, plutonium.
   Similarly, the radiation doses actually received by the
local citizenry had been overestimated. In the
most-contaminated zones, the IAEA said, doses ranged from 80
to 160 milli-Sieverts over a lifetime, far less than the
Soviet estimate of 150 to 400 milli-Sieverts. A milli-Sievert
is roughly equivalent to a half-year's exposure to such
natural radiation sources as cosmic rays and granite rock.
The IAEA's number means that people in the most-contaminated
regions got a radiation dose from Chernobyl about equal to
what they would get normally from background radiation. Any
statistical increase in most cancers beyond what would
normally occur will be too small to detect, the IAEA said.
   But the study's authors acknowledge numerous limits to
their conclusions. Besides omitting disaster workers at
Chernobyl, the team couldn't get enough information to verify
one key Soviet estimate, of thyroid-gland radiation damage
among children. Any thyroid damage would have come from
radioactive iodine, a short-lived isotope that had decayed by
the time the IAEA team arrived, and so couldn't be detected
by them. But based on the Soviet estimates of lifetime
thyroid doses of up to 16 times normal, "there may be a
statistically detectable increase" in future thyroid cancers,
the report said.
   "This isn't a definitive study," said Peter Waight, a
World Health Organization official and member of the IAEA's
study committee. "I'm expecting the anti-nuclears and the
Greens will say this is a typical IAEA whitewash. My response
would be: Read it, and read with an open mind, and then show
me where it's wrong."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
