ID: 214	RANK: 24	SCORE: 10.299243
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP881223-0176 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-12-23-88 2211EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u w AM-Crash-Investigation 1stLd-Writethru a0640 12-23 0937</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Crash-Investigation, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0640,900</SECOND>
<HEAD>Wreckage Likely to Yield Enough Clues to Find Crash Cause</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: SUBS 2nd graf to reflect changing information from Scotland
on
number of people missing</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By H. JOSEF HEBERT</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   While there may be no quick answers to the
tragedy of Pan Am Flight 103, the wreckage scattered across the
Scottish countryside has left enough clues to make it virtually
certain the cause will be found, aviation experts said Friday.
   As more information surfaced, specialists noted the similarities
between Wednesday's crash of the Boeing 747 in Scotland that killed
all 258 people aboard and leaving at least 17 people missing on the
ground, and the crash three years ago of an Air India jumbo jet off
the Irish coast.
   Indian officials after months of retrieving wreckage from the
ocean floor concluded that a bomb exploded aboard the Air India
jetliner. An explosion is widely believed to have caused the Pan Am
plane to crash, although no conclusive evidence of a bombing has yet
surfaced.
   Both the Pan Am and Air India planes were cruising routinely at
31,000 feet and suddenly disappeared from radar. In neither case did
the flight crew declare an emergency or make any radio contact with
air traffic control. In both cases, the planes broke up in the air,
scattering wreckage over five or more miles.
   In both crashes, the recording from the cockpit gave no
indication the pilots were aware of any unusual, but contained a
muffled sound in the final split second of tape.
   That sound became crucial in the Air India investigation. The
final report on the accident concluded: ``From the sounds found
recorded on the CVR (cockpit voice recorder) and the (air traffic
control) tapes it appears that an explosion had occurred on board
the aircraft.''
   Authorities in Scotland announced Friday that a preliminary
review of the CVR tape from Pan Am Flight 103 also ends with a
muffled sound a fraction of a second before the recorder went dead.
   ``There is nothing in the conversation (of the pilots) to
indicate anything was wrong,'' said a British spokesman, reminiscent
of the Air India findings.
   Paul McKie, spokesman for the Department of Transport, cautioned
that further analysis will be required before it can be determined
what the noise might be and warned not ``to jump to any
conclusions.''
   More sophisticated spectrographic examination of the tape likely
will provide a better clue as to whether the sound is an explosion
from a bomb, or a breakup of the aircraft because of a sudden
decompression. Similar sounds have been heard on CVR taps in other
accidents when aircraft experienced major structural failures,
officials said.
   U.S. aviation experts, including several who have been involved
in investigating scores of air disasters, are confident the answers
will be found.
   ``It will be a massive job to reconstruct the pieces,'' said
Ronald Schleede, chief of aviation accident investigation at the
National Transportation Safety Board. ``But they're going to solve
it because the evidence will be there.''
   ``We will know what brought down Pan Am 103,'' FAA Administrator
Allan McArtor said, but he cautioned ``it could take months.''
   Neither McArtor nor Schleede, who has been briefed daily by
telephone by NTSB officials at the crash site, would discuss
specifically the Pan Am findings so far.
   But Schleede and other experts noted in interviews that the Pam
Am crash investigators have some advantages.
   For example:
   _While the crash caused an inferno in the small Scottish farming
town of Lockerbie, destroying a row of houses, most of the aircraft
_ with the exception of a destroyed right wing whose fuel tank
exploded _ appeared to have escaped serious fire damage.
   In many crashes where a plane remains intact and burst into
flames, critical clues are lost because of the intense heat that
bends metal and destroys evidence.
   _The wreckage, although strewn across the countryside, is not _
as was the case of Air India _ in hundreds of feet of water and
exposed to elements that could destroy critical evidence.
   _The cockpit voice recorder and flight data recorder appear to be
in good shape.
   In the coming days, investigators will pay close attention to how
parts of the aircraft are bent, tangled and singed and whether there
is evidence of a chemical residue normally left by an explosive.
   They also will search for fragments that might have been used as
a detonator and closely examine luggage and parts of luggage as well
as aircraft wreckage holes left by flying fragments. Such holes
leave a distinctive pattern if caused by an explosion, one expert
said.
   Some of the wreckage will be reassembled as closely as possible
to the original aircraft and metallurgists will try to determine how
the pieces broke apart. Was it from metal fatigue or from being torn
apart. Which part of an aircraft broke first? Did the pieces break
apart along specific seams of the aircraft's skin?
   The flight data recorder, which monitors the performance of the
aircraft, and the cockpit voice recorder will be examined and their
times coordinated. A key question is whether all of the plane's
electrical systems were knocked out simultaneously, one veteran
investigator said.
   It is known that Pan Am Flight 103 in rapid order lost its radar
transponder, radio contact and both flight and cockpit voice
recorders, this investigator said.
   If all of these functions failed simultaneously, there is strong
evidence of a massive electrical failure, possibly cause by an
explosion near the forward baggage compartment, which is adjacent to
the electrical and computer systems on the Boeing 747, experts
suggested.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
