ID: 214	RANK: 53	SCORE: 9.178762
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890313-0020 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-03-13-89 0106EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a PM-Shuttle-Astronauts     03-13 1199</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Shuttle-Astronauts,1240</SECOND>
<HEAD>Thumbnails Of The Five Discovery Astronauts</HEAD>
<UNK>With PM-Space Shuttle, Bjt</UNK>
<DATELINE>CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Navy Capt. Michael L. Coats,
commander of Discovery, made his only previous trip into space 4{
years ago as pilot on the same shuttle's maiden voyage.
   On that flight, he and his five cremates earned the nickname
``Icebusters'' because they removed hazardous ice particles that had
built up on the shuttle.
   The 43-year-old astronaut was born in Sacramento, Calif., but
considers Riverside, Calif., his hometown.
   Coats received a bachelor's degree from the U.S. Naval Academy in
1968, a master's degree in science and technology administration
from George Washington University in 1977 and a master's in
aeronautical engineering from the Naval Postgraduate School in 1979.
   He flew 315 combat missions in Southeast Asia in the early 1970s.
He began test pilot training in 1974 and later became a test pilot
for the A-7 and A-4 aircraft. He also served as a flight instructor
at the U.S. Naval Test Pilot School.
   Coats and his wife, Diane, have a daughter, Laura, 15, and a son,
Paul, 10.
   When he goes into space aboard Discovery, Coats will be taking
along some jewelry, insignias and other small items for several NASA
workers who never get the chance to fly on a shuttle.
   He's hoping to have more time to observe the Earth's surface from
his lofty perch than on his first flight, when the crew had to shift
the shuttle away from the Earth during part of the mission to melt
the ice.
   ``You really do get this feeling, looking at the Earth, of how
alive it is with all the colors,'' he said. ``It's a living planet
down there and then you look off into space and it is the blackest
black.''
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   Air Force Col. John E. Blaha, Discovery's pilot, has been in the
astronaut corps nearly nine years awaiting his first shuttle flight.
   Blaha, 46, was born in San Antonio where his mother still lives.
His father, now deceased, also was an Air Force colonel.
   He graduated from high school in Norfolk, Va., and went on to
receive his bachelor's degree in engineering science from the Air
Force Academy in 1965. Blaha earned a master's degree in
astronautical engineering from Purdue in 1966.
   Blaha completed 361 combat missions in Vietnam. In 1971, he
attended the Air Force Aerospace Research Pilot School at Edwards
Air Force Base, Calif., where he piloted the NF-104 research
aircraft to 104,400 feet.
   Three years later, he became a test pilot and worked with the
Royal Air Force at the Aeroplane and Armament Experimental
Establishment in Boscombe Down, England.
   Blaha returned to the United States in 1976 to attend the Air
Force Air Command and Staff College. After graduating, he worked for
the Air Force at the Pentagon.
   He was selected as an astronaut in May 1980 and promoted to
colonel a year later.
   Blaha and his wife, Brenda, have three children, James, 23,
Steven, 20, and Carolyn, 15.
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   Space rookie James P. Bagian is the only crew member on the
Discovery mission without a military background.
   Bagian, one of three mission specialists on the flight, became an
astronaut in August 1981 after working as an engineer and a doctor.
He also is scheduled to fly on a shuttle mission scheduled to launch
in June 1990.
   The 37-year-old Philadelphia native earned a bachelor's degree in
mechanical engineering from Drexel University in 1973 and his
doctorate in medicine from Thomas Jefferson University in 1977.
   As an engineer, Bagian worked for the 3M Co. and the U.S. Naval
Air Test Center in Maryland. After receiving his medical degree, he
completed a year of general surgery residency and then went to work
as a flight surgeon and research medical officer at the Johnson
Space Center.
   A longtime space fan and avid follower of the Mercury program in
his youth, Bagian said he filled out an astronaut application
``never really thinking I'd get accepted.'' But while completing a
residency in anesthesiology at the University of Pennsylvania, he
received word he had been chosen for the astronaut program.
   His wife, Tandi, works at the Houston space center in the life
sciences projects office and understands well the risks of
spaceflight, he said.
   ``Does she like it, from the risk standpoint? No. She'll be glad
when I'm back safely, but she knows that I want to do it, and she
says `If you want to do it, you should do it.'''
   Bagian and his wife have a 4-year-old daughter, Krista Rose.
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   Marine Col. James F. Buchli, a mission specialist aboard
Discovery, is the most experienced of the current crew, a veteran of
two previous shuttle flights during nearly 10 years as an astronaut.
   The 43-year-old astronaut's first shuttle trip was on the first
Department of Defense mission, a classified flight of Discovery that
launched in January 1985.
   His second mission, which launched in October 1985, carried eight
crew members aboard Challenger _ the largest crew to fly in space so
far. The flight was called the West German D-1 Spacelab mission and
its scientific operations were controlled from the German Space
Operations Center near Munich.
   Born in New Rockford, N.D., Buchli grew up in Fargo, where his
parents still live. He received a bachelor's degree in aeronautical
engineering from the Naval Academy in 1967 and a master's in
aeronautical engineering systems from the University of West Florida
in 1975.
   He received a commission in the Marine Corps after graduating
from Annapolis and completed a one-year tour of duty in Vietnam
where he was a platoon commander, company commander and executive
officer.
   When he returned home, he began naval flight officer training in
Pensacola, Fla., and spent the next two years assigned to the Marine
Fighter Attack Squadron 235 in Hawaii. He also served with squadrons
in Japan and Thailand and back in South Carolina.
   He and his wife, Jean, have a son, James, 16, and daughter,
Jennifer, 11.
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   Marine Col. Robert C. Springer's presence aboard Discovery along
with fellow Marine Col. James F. Buchli marks the first time a
shuttle crew has included two Marines.
   Springer, a mission specialist, is making his first spaceflight.
   Springer, 46, was born in St. Louis and grew up in Ashland, Ohio,
where his parents still live. He received his bachelor's degree in
naval science from the Naval Academy in 1964 and a master's degree
in operations research and systems analysis from the Naval
Postgraduate School in 1971.
   He received a commission from the Marine Corps after graduating
from Annapolis and served at the Navy Air Training Command for
flight training at Pensacola, Fla., and Beeville, Texas.
   After receiving his wings in 1966, he flew F-4 aircraft at the
Marine Corps Air Station in Cherry Point, N.C. He next went to
Vietnam where he completed 300 combat missions.
   He will take several items into space including some jewelry, an
old pocketwatch and a T-shirt for Young Life, a Christian youth
organization. Springer also will take along a Texas A&amp;M University
flag for his 18-year-old son, Chad, who is a freshman at the school.
   Springer and his wife, Molly, have two other children, Kira, 17,
and Derek, 16.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
