ID: 214	RANK: 78	SCORE: 8.575285
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880503-0225 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-05-03-88 0906EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>a a PM-NASA'sLittleA Adv09-1stAdd   05-03 0703</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-NASA's Little A, Adv 09-1st Add,0712</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv09</NOTE>
<NOTE>For Release Mon PMs, May 9, and Thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>LANGLEY RESEARCH CENTER: the future.</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   ``There is tremendous potential for all kinds of vehicles
operating at high Mach numbers,'' says Douglas Dwoyer, manager of
hypersonic technology at Langley. ``The National Aerospace program
is aimed at an experimental aircraft to demonstrate technologies
for this family of hypersonic aircraft.''
   The speed of sound, which varies with temperature and density of
air, is represented by a Mach number. Airplanes that fly below Mach
1 are subsonic; those that fly faster are supersonic. Those that
fly more than five times the speed of sound, above Mach 5, are
designated hypersonic. To escape the atmosphere into orbit, a plane
must achieve Mach 25.
   So far the big airplane manufacturers have little interest in
building passenger aircraft that fly at Mach 25, no matter what the
president said. They do want, for the years 2000 to 2010, a
supersonic airplane capable of flying at Mach 2 to Mach 3.5. At
Mach 2.7, a trip from Los Angeles to Tokyo would take just under
four hours, compared with 12 to 14 hours subsonic. The ideal Mach
number is one of the big questions facing the engineers.
   The United States researched a supersonic transport, the SST, in
the 1960s, but dropped the program in 1970 because of costs. The
space shuttle had been designed, the Apollo moon program was
winding down and there seemed no need for space missions requiring
re-entry with the accompanying hypersonic speeds.
   In addition, the price of jet fuel, which had been 10 cents a
gallon when research started, jumped to $1.30.
   While American interest dropped, the British and French produced
the Concorde, a plane capable of twice the speed of sound. But its
birth coincided with heightened environmental concerns, and the
sonic boom scared people; many governments, including the United
States, barred it from flying over land.
   Moreover, the Concorde was designed with '60s technology and
carries barely enough fuel to make it across the Atlantic.
   ``Concorde is restricted to over-water flights under 2,200-miles
long, and there aren't many oceans that small,'' says Roy Harris
Jr., director of aeronautics at Langley. ``I think Concorde is
designed too small, it can carry only 100 people and it's cramped.
All our studies say you really want 200 to 250 passengers for an
economically viable SST.''
   Harris sees a real need for an SST. ``If you look at the
demographics of air travel, the Pacific rim is the fastest growing
international market,'' he says. ``It's growing at a rate twice
that of the market between the U.S. and Europe.''
   The United States is not alone in its SST interest. The British
have a project called Hotol that's vaguely similar to the X-30, and
the French are working on the Hermes space plane, which requires
hypersonic technology for re-entry. There is big interest in the
Soviet Union in the engines that will power hypersonic flight, and
the Japanese are talking about building a shuttle.
   Despite such competition, the United States treats its
aeronautics limb as a poor relative. In a $9 billion NASA budget,
the spending for this year's aeronautics R&amp;D is $430 million, with
$53 million of that earmarked for the aerospace plane.
   Harris says if the United States wants to develop a supersonic
transport to be ready in the first decade of the 21st century, it
will have to commit $800 million over the next five to seven years.
Current spending is $3 million a year.
   Money is a sensitive issue at Langley. Until 1970, the U.S. jet
transport industry had 90 percent of the long-range market. Now
that percentage is down to 70. Aerospace exports grew from $1.7
billion in 1960 to $25 billion in 1987, but imports increased from
$61 million to $7.9 billion _ in large part due to the success of
the French Airbus.
   Dwoyer says the aerospace type plane is a concept so
revolutionary that whoever gets it first will have a tremendous leg
up in the next century.
   And if the United States isn't in front, he says, we might be
flying the Pacific Rim in a Honda.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Mon PMs, May 9</NOTE>
</DOC>
