ID: 96	RANK: 47	SCORE: 19.192329
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880404-0170 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-04-04-88 1843EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-KingRdp 1stLd-Writethru a0674 04-04 0938</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-King Rdp, 1st Ld - Writethru, a0674,0956</SECOND>
<HEAD>People Remembering King Say Change Is Still Needed</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Inserts 6 grafs after the 9th, beginning ``As a local,'' to
update with other rallies in N.C., N.Y. Picks up 10th graf pvs,
`Religious leaders...'</NOTE>
<HEAD>With AM-King Anniversary Bjt</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   The dreams of the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. have not been
realized and people should renew their commitment to his struggle,
supporters of the civil rights leader said Monday during nationwide
memorials on the 20th anniversary of his assassination.
   ``To ignore the past, even if it is painful, is to deny the
hopes and dreams that Martin Luther King lived for and died for,''
said the Rev. Robert Willingham, president of the Little Rock,
Ark., chapter of the NAACP. ``To look back is critical to our
efforts to move forward.''
   In King's hometown of Atlanta, his widow, Coretta Scott King,
led an hour-long observance at his tomb and announced plans for a
march in Washington Aug. 27, the anniversary of a civil rights
march there in which King delivered his famous ``I have a dream''
speech.
   This summer's march, she said, will concentrate on developing a
legislative agenda aimed at ending poverty, racism, war and
violence.
   ``We're going to Washington to mobilize a national coalition in
support of a legislative agenda that serves human needs,'' she
said. ``They have slain the dreamer, but we're here to say that
they cannot slay the mighty dream.''
   Also at the ceremony was King's sister, Christine King Farris.
She recalled that on the day he was shot, ``I thought on that day
how long life would be without Martin ... and here it is, 20 years
later, and we're still trying to perpetuate his legacy ... and his
dream.''
   King was shot by James Earl Ray on April 4, 1968, while standing
on the balcony of the Lorraine Hotel in Memphis, Tenn. King was in
Memphis to lend support for striking sanitation workers who were
seeking increased wages.
   The Rev. James Lawson, president of the Los Angeles chapter of
the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, was in Memphis the
day King was shot.
   ``As a local pastor, I led the sanitation strike that brought
Dr. King to Memphis,'' said Lawson. ``Dr. King had a very strong
sense that danger was imminent but he proceeded in the interest of
economic justice and human dignity.''
   About 600 people gathered in Lumberton, N.C., to pledge to
continue the struggle for change started by slain Lumbee Indian
leader Julian Pierce in Robeson County.
   ``We know from history that a bullet ... can never slay the
dream,'' he said. ``The dream of Julian Pierce is the dream of
Martin Luther King Jr. And that dream lives,'' said the Rev. Ben
Chavis.
   Pierce, shot to death at his home on March 26 in what
authorities said was a domestic dispute, was running for a Superior
Court judgeship. Many Lumbees and blacks in the county say they are
discriminated against, and that they are not represented adequately
in local political offices. The county's population is 37 percent
Indian, 37 percent white and 26 percent black.
   In Albany, N.Y., the Rev. Al Sharpton was arrested for refusing
to move out of a road outside the state Capitol. Three people were
arrested with Sharpton and 10 others, including folk singer Pete
Seeger, were detained after refusing to leave a service road.
   Their rally was called to protest state handling of the case of
Tawana Brawley, a black teen-ager who claims she was assaulted by a
group of white men. Sharpton had threatened to shut down state
agencies on the anniversary of King's death. Sharpton and others
among Miss Brawley's advisers have refused to let her cooperate
with the state investigation.
   About 200 people representing various religious groups prayed,
shouted and sang outside the Mobil Oil Corp. headquarters in
Manhattan in an anti-apartheid demonstration coinciding with the
King observances. The group urged Mobil to stop doing business in
South Africa.
   Religious leaders in Los Angeles planned an evening service
titled ``Twenty Years Later, We Still Have A Dream.''
   ``Although we have accomplished much, it is not enough to honor
him with memories,'' said Mark Ridley-Thomas, executive leader of
the SCLC in Los Angeles. ``We must renew our commitment to the
struggle for social change for which he so ardently fought.''
   Some civil rights leaders weren't pleased with the progress made
by blacks in American society.
   ``The cup is not half full. It contains only a few drops,'' said
Ronald Hunter, president of the Erie County, N.Y., chapter of the
SCLC. ``If Dr. King were alive today, he'd be very disillusioned.''
   ``Some things are worse than 20 years ago,'' he said. ``In
addition to high unemployment there are more school dropouts, high
drug and alcohol abuse, more teen-age pregnancy.''
   The civil rights movement is almost at a standstill, and many
young blacks lack the perspective of older civil rights workers,
said Daniel R. Acker, president of the Buffalo, N.Y., chapter of
the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
   ``They never knew the humiliation of Jim Crowism, of `colored
only' drinking fountains, and being forced to ride in the back of
the bus,'' Acker said.
   At least one observance was held overseas.
   About 400 people marched through the center of Rome in a
commemoration organized by Italy's tiny, maverick Radical Party.
   Some of the demonstrators carried banners with King's picture
and others carried multilingual posters calling for an end to
racial discrimination worldwide, a solution to the Palestinian
issue, and the drawing together of nations in a United States of
Europe.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
