ID: 96	RANK: 58	SCORE: 18.800760
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900115-0164 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-01-15-90 2234EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-KingDayRdp 2ndLd-Writethru a0679 01-15 1259</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-King Day Rdp, 2nd Ld-Writethru, a0679,1293</SECOND>
<HEAD>Bells Toll King's Loss During Time of Strained Race Relations</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto AX4,NY29</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: UPDATES throughout with fighting in New Orleans, other
protests in Concord, elsewhere; march in Los Angeles, breakfast in
Boston; racist graffitti in San Diego; CORRECT that nearly 15,000,
sted 16,000, rallied in Phoenix and that about 200 sted 150
protested at Concord high school; CLARIFY clarify that Rushing is
state representative; minor editing; no pickup.</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By PATRICIA BIBBY</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Church bells across the country tolled the loss of Martin Luther
King Jr. on his birthday Monday, a ringing reminder of the racial
conflicts the slain civil rights leader struggled to overcome but
which still haunt the nation.
   ``With each ring we are called to an accountability, an
accountability of the soul and of the heart's conscience that asks,
`What have you done to let freedom ring?''' asked Pennsylvania Gov.
Robert P. Casey during a ceremony at the Liberty Bell.
   A moment of silence was called to reflect on King's lessons of
non-violence in his pursuit of racial equality. The
Washington-based Federal Holiday Commission said bells chimed at
12:30 p.m. EST in all 50 states and 144 countries. The New York
Stock Exchange paused for a moment at noon.
   ``Today, the sound of liberty is being heard all around the
world,'' said James Farmer, founder of the Congress for Racial
Equality, who pounded the Liberty Bell three times with his fist.
``Those who have been denied liberty love it most. Dr. King loved
liberty and he fought and died for it.''
   Most of the celebrations were peaceful, but the memory of King's
espousal of nonviolent resistance didn't prevent fights from
breaking out in New Orleans following a parade in his honor
attended by tens of thousands of people.
   Two whites were arrested after a fight in which a black man was
hit with nail-studded boards. A teen-ager was fatally stabbed and a
young black man was critically wounded by a stray bullet in
separate fights between groups of black teens, officials said.
   In San Diego, racist graffitti was sprayed on signs on a freeway
named for him,and demonstrations protesting non-observance of the
holiday took place in Arizona, New Hampshire and elsewhere.
   The observances followed church services, parades, and other
celebrations held during the weekend before the federal holiday,
which for the first time falls on King's actual birthday. He would
have been 61.
   Much of Monday's focus was on Atlanta, where King grew up as the
son of a Baptist minister.
   ``Now is the time to organize a global non-violent movement
based on Dr. King's teachings, to put an end to the scourges of
poverty, hunger, racism and bigotry, war and militarism,'' said his
widow, Coretta Scott King, at an annual ecumenical service at
Ebenezer Baptist Church, where her husband delivered some of his
most stirring orations.
   A ``March of Celebration'' also was held, despite bitter
objections from one of King's top lieutenants in the civil rights
movement who charged the parade trivialized the day and wasted
money that could serve the poor.
   ``This has been prostituted more than any other holiday except
Jesus Christ's birthday,'' the Rev. Hosea Williams said at a news
conference in front of an Atlanta housing project.
   About 25,000 people lined Los Angeles' streets for the fifth
annual King Birthday Celebration Parade down a boulevard named for
him, and 2,500 turned out for an annual breakfast in Boston.
   During his lifetime, King led non-violent marches and protests
in the South in the 1950s and 1960s in a quest to end
discrimination against blacks and other minorities.
   His first blow against racism came when he led a year long
bocott of segregated buses in Montgomery, Ala. From there he
established the Southern Christian Leadership Conference to set the
pace of working peacefully for equal rights for blacks. In 1964, he
received the Nobel Peace Prize.
   He was shot and killed on April 4, 1968, in Memphis, Tenn.
   But racial inequities and clashes still tear at America's
consciousness today.
   In the Southeast, there have been a series of bombings and
threats, apparently racially motivated, and in Boston race
relations were strained after an apparent hoax in which a white man
claimed a black mugger fatally shot his pregnant wife and wounded
him.
   Boston residents on Monday spoke of the racial implications of
Charles Stuart's grisly fraud.
   ``The Stuart case has shown how fragile race relations are in
this country,'' said state Rep. Byron Rushing. ``And it's become a
kind of metaphor for healing.''
   The day, however, came at a moment of gains for blacks, the
first day on the job for the nation's first elected black governor
in Virginia and the start of a new administion for New York City's
first black mayor.
   L. Douglas Wilder's victory in Virginia inspires, some said.
   ``Is it not poetic justice that the first day of Doug Wilder's
stay in office takes place on the birthday of Dr. Martin Luther
King Jr.?'' the Rev. Jesse Jackson asked at a prayer breakfast in
Washington, D.C.
   In New York, about 120 people who walked across the Brooklyn
Bridge to City Hall in the 10th annual march were greeted by Mayor
David Dinkins.
   In addition to the gala celebrations, King's birthday was marked
with protests.
   Several took place in Concord, N.H. About 150 Merrimack Valley
High School students walked out of morning classes to recognize
Martin Luther King Jr. Day, which their school did not observe.
   A school custodian hoisted the American flag half-staff as the
students recited the Pledge of Allegiance during the half-hour
ceremony.
   New Hampshire is one of four states without any form of King
holiday. The others are Arizona, Montana and Idaho. Some other
states keep workers on the job, but mark the day in other ways.
   Several hundred students and faculty members at St. Paul's
School, which announced Monday morning that it would observe the
holiday, marched from the private school's Concord campus to the
Statehouse.
   More than 200 students in Milford, N.H., staged a sit-in at the
high school library, and 125 in Wolfeboro staged a lunchtime
demonstration that kept them out of classes for two hours.
   In another Concord demonstration, about 150 members of the
anti-nuclear Clamshell Alliance marched from the Federal Building
to the Statehouse plaza to protest the Seabrook nuclear plant.
   They sang songs against the plant and such civil rights hymns as
``We Shall Overcome.'' Thirty-seven people who stayed inside the
Statehouse after closing time were arrested on criminal trespass
charges.
   In Arizona, where the King holiday has long been a bitter
controversy, a Phoenix crowd estimated by police at nearly 15,000
heard lawmakers and community leaders at the capitol urge them to
register and vote in a referendum this fall over whether to let a
King Day observance become law. Another 2,000 people marched in
Tucson.
   A bill to make the day a holiday was introduced in the Idaho
Senate, but an effort to win immediate consideration for a similar
bill was defeated in the South Dakota House.
   In Columbia, Mo., about 200 students sat down inside the
University of Missouri's administration building to protest the
school's decision not to cancel classes for the day.
   About 100 people in Monroe, La., demonstrated outside the
Ouachita Parish School Board to protest its refusal to observe the
holiday.
   In San Diego, two signs on 10-mile stretch of highway named for
King were painted overnight with swastikas and the letters ``SWP,''
thought to stand for ``Supreme White Power,'' said police Lt. John
Gregory.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
