ID: 96	RANK: 71	SCORE: 18.609118
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900404-0110 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-04-04-90 1548EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a AM-KingHoliday 1stLd-Writethru a0618 04-04 0792</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-King Holiday, 1st Ld - Writethru, a0618,0805</SECOND>
<HEAD>Three States Come Aboard, Three Hold Out on King Holiday</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: SUBS 2nd graf to CORRECT `it's' to `it'</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By HOWARD GOLDBERG</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Compromises have allowed Wyoming and Idaho to join the movement
toward national acceptance of a holiday honoring the Rev. Martin
Luther King Jr. and by Wednesday, 22 years after his death, only
three states were holdouts.
   ``I think it shows that we are making headway,'' Lloyd Davis,
executive director of the King Federal Holiday Commission, said
Tuesday.
   He expressed confidence that Arizona, New Hampshire and Montana
would not hold out much longer amid what he sees as dramatic
applications of King's non-violent philosophy as far away as the
Philippines, China, Poland and East Germany.
   ``What's happening around the world shows the universality of
King,'' Davis said in a telephone interview from Washington.
   King was assassinated April 4, 1968, at age 39, while leading a
non-violent movement for racial equality. In 1983, after
considerable debate, Congress created a holiday to honor King on
the third Monday in January, around his Jan. 15 birthday.
   Martin Luther King Jr. Day, first celebrated nationally in 1986,
is an official state holiday in some form in most states _ Idaho is
about to become the 47th.
   Wyoming, which calls itself the Equality State because it was
the first to give women the vote, had legislators who supported a
holiday commemorating equal rights but didn't want it in King's
name. A compromise created Martin Luther King Jr. Wyoming Equality
Day.
   Idaho legislators gave final approval Friday to an official
state holiday honoring King, but only after a compromise added
Idaho Human Rights Day to the designation. The bill has gone to
Gov. Cecil Andrus, who called for its passage in January.
   New Hampshire legislators have voted down holiday proposals
first introduced in 1979. After losing in 1989, supporters said
they would try again in 1991, the next time legislative rules allow
it.
   ``There are times when New Hampshire can feel pride in its
unique posture,'' state Rep. Deborah ``Arnie'' Arnesen, said
Tuesday. ``However, I feel that our unique status, vis-a-vis this
holiday, does not suggest a badge of courage but rather a badge of
intolerance and prejudice.''
   Edward Dupont, New Hampshire's Senate Republican leader, says
the proposal won't succeed if the holiday is meant to honor King
alone. He suggested a day to honor King ``as one of many civil
rights contributors,'' including Presidents Kennedy and Johnson,
rather than going along with national practice.
   ``We always have the distinction of being the last or the
first,'' he said. Montana's Legislature in 1987 approved a bill
making Jan. 15 a ``day of observance'' and creating Heritage Day, a
floating holiday to be designated by the governor. This year Gov.
Stan Stephens used it to create a long Thanksgiving weekend,
causing no controversy in a state whose black population was
counted at 1,786, or a fifth of a percent, in the 1980 census.
   Arizona is the most populous state without a King holiday, but
it hasn't attained that status without contortions.
   Former Gov. Evan Mecham, a conservative who opposed his
predecessor's creation of a limited paid holiday in King's honor,
proclaimed a Martin Luther King-Civil Rights Day for the third
Sunday in January instead.
   Last year, the Legislature approved King Day as a paid holiday
for state employees, and Gov. Rose Mofford signed the bill. But
opponents petitioned to prevent the law from taking effect unless
it's approved in a referendum in November.
   Some of the opponents were upset by revelations about womanizing
by King or were persuaded by the Ku Klux Klan's repeated efforts to
tar King as a Communist. Others had nothing against honoring King,
but were up-at-arms that the Legislature made room in the budget
for King Day by dropping Columbus Day as a paid holiday.
   The Legislature took that course because Republican members
didn't like two alternatives: 1) combining the Lincoln and
Washington birthdays into one Presidents' Day, as the federal
government did, or 2) springing for an additional holiday.
   While a holiday costs overtime pay for indispensable workers,
Mofford and other Democrats and some moderate Republicans argued
that not having one could also be expensive. The state has faced a
sporadic boycott, especially as a convention and meeting site.
   When the National Football League's owners awarded the 1993
Super Bowl to the Phoenix area March 13, Norman Braman, head of the
site selection committee, said: ``If there is a smear on the Martin
Luther King Holiday of any kind, I will personally lead the effort
to rescind the Super Bowl. We wouldn't want to go there.''
   Phoenix and suburban Tempe, where the game would be played, have
their own King holiday.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
