ID: 96	RANK: 85	SCORE: 18.386244
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900628-0033 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-06-28-90 0155EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-Mandela 6thLd-Writethru a0424 06-28 1153</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Mandela, 6th Ld - Writethru, a0424,1184</SECOND>
<HEAD>Mandela Pays Tribute to King, But Not Non-violence</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: SUBS 11th graf, `Martin Luther ...,' with 3 grafs to UPDATE
with details of Mandela's arrival in Miami. SUBS 26th graf, `Miami
Mayor ...,' to conform.</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos AX3, AX5, AX6</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By ROBERT BYRD</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>ATLANTA (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Nelson Mandela paid silent tribute Wednesday at
the tomb of Martin Luther King Jr., and the slain civil rights
leader's widow fervently upheld Mandela's right to depart from
non-violence in the struggle for black rights in South Africa.
   Mandela did not speak during the brief wreath-laying ceremony,
which included the singing of the anthem of the U.S. civil rights
movement, ``We Shall Overcome.''
   Later, the Rev. Joseph Lowery, president of the Southern
Christian Leadership Conference that King founded, told Mandela:
``We reject the constant nagging you have experienced about
violence. ... We respect the right of oppressed people everywhere
to seek their own liberation.''
   The audience of more than 1,500 people at Big Bethel AME Church
cheered wildly.
   Coretta Scott King said, ``Reverend Lowery has spoken for all of
us and he spoke well. We support you; we love you; we revere you.''
   Mandela told the audience, ``As a result of your support and the
hospitality you have shown us now, it is futile for the white
minority in South Africa to resist the people's demand for
one-person, one-vote.''
   Mandela later addressed a sold-out rally at 46,000-seat Grant
Field, praising King as a ``giant among giants.'' He quoted King's
famous ``I Have a Dream'' speech, which ended with the declaration,
``Let freedom ring.''
   ``Let us all exclaim, `Let freedom ring in South Africa,''' he
said.
   The stadium crowd stood and cheered, chanted and waved their
fists for 1{ minutes when Mandela took the podium, where he brought
the Georgia audience greetings ``from the fighting people of South
Africa.''
   The rally capped the fourth stop on Mandela's U.S. tour, after
New York, Boston and Washington. He arrived in Miami on Wednesday
just before midnight.
   Mandela was greeted at the Alexander Hotel on Miami Beach by up
to 200 supporters. But the visibly tired Mandela was hustled to his
hotel room.
   The crowd chanted ``Free South Africa'' and then ``Free South
Florida'' and finally ``Where is Suarez?'' The last chant referred
to Miami Mayor Xavier Suarez, who denounced Mandela for his support
of Cuba's Fidel Castro.
   In Atlanta, Martin Luther King III told a reporter that
Mandela's visit to the center named for his father showed that,
``Clearly, he does not support violence. I think Mr. Mandela wants
non-violent solutions, but the government has pushed him to that.''
   Some local civil rights officials had suggested Mandela should
follow King's philosophy and renounce violence. But upon his
arrival here Wednesday morning, the founder of the African National
Congress wasted no time reminding the group of his view that black
South Africans face a different battle than the one King led.
   ``Unlike you, we are still under the grip of white supremacy,''
Mandela said at the airport. To reporters he added: ``Non-violence
is a good policy when conditions permit.''
   King was assassinated in 1968, five years after Mandela began
his 27-year prison stay for plotting sabotage to overthrow the
minority white government of South Africa. The government released
him in February and negotiations are underway aimed at dismantling
apartheid.
   A scheduled midday break for the 71-year-old Mandela was
extended, delaying the wreath-laying ceremony by about three hours.
Mandela has at times canceled events to rest during his grueling
14-nation tour of Europe and North America. A downpour soaked the
1,300 people waiting near King's crypt. A carnival atmosphere set
in when the rain stopped, complete with popcorn vendors and music
from a military band.
   Mandela was cheered by about 5,000 people along Auburn Avenue, a
historic stretch of black businesses and civil rights landmarks, as
he arrived at the Martin Luther King Jr. Center for Nonviolent
Social Change.
   After a brief meeting with Mrs. King and other dignitaries,
Mandela and his wife, Winnie, placed the wreath at the crypt, which
sits above a reflecting pool at the King Center.
   Mandela also received honorary doctorate degrees from 40
predominantly black colleges at a convocation at Morehouse College.
Later he was to appear at a sold-out rally at the 46,000-seat Grant
Field.
   Mrs. Mandela received a standing ovation from a gathering of
1,500 people, mostly women, at a $100-a-plate luncheon benefiting
the ANC.
   ``I cannot tell you how touched I am by this warmth, your
kindness and your identity with our struggle,'' she said. ``We come
from racist South Africa. ... You are reminding us what it is to
belong to a family of mankind.''
   At Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport, Gov. Joe Frank
Harris, a white conservative Democrat, called Mandela an
inspiration, and welcomed him to ``the birthplace of equality and
justice for all of America.''
   Mayor Maynard Jackson joined Mandela and his wife, Winnie, in
raising a clenched fist salute during the playing of the ANC's
anthem.
   Security considerations kept the crowd at the airport to 200
invited guests, including a group of children from a city-run
interracial camp and a marching band. Along a nearby road, about
100 people strained to see the South African leader.
   There was no sign of protest over Mandela's refusal to repudiate
Libyan President Moammar Gadhafi, Cuban leader Fidel Castro and
Palestine Liberation Organization leader Yasser Arafat.
   But in the Miami area, where Mandela was scheduled to address a
labor meeting Thursday, no official welcome was planned and
Cuban-American groups planned rallies to protest Mandela's support
of Castro.
   Suarez and four area Cuban-American mayors have accused Mandela
for insensitivity to human rights in Cuba, and Mayor Alex Daoud of
largely Jewish Miami Beach condemned him for ties to Gadhafi and
Arafat.
   Black leaders vowed to take it upon themselves to welcome
Mandela.
   ``He is our brother,'' said Johnnie McMillian, president of
Miami's NAACP chapter. ``If they say he's not welcome, they're
saying we're not welcome, too.''
   Mandela's address Thursday to the American Federation of State,
County and Municipal Employees in Miami Beach isn't open to the
public, so black leaders planned shows of support outside the hall
and in a Liberty City park, where the speech will be broadcast over
loudspeakers.
   Meantime, leaders of various Cuban-American and anti-Castro
groups met Tuesday night to plan a protest at the convention center.
   The Atlanta crowd carried only pro-Mandela signs. The John Birch
Society bought a newspaper ad Monday condemning Mandela as a
criminal, but Wednesday's crowd regarded him as a persecuted hero.
   ``He's been in jail for 27 years for trying to help Africa
become a better place. That's not right,'' said 10-year-old Audrey
Durden.
   ``I'm completely overwhelmed. This is very historical not only
for Africa but for the world,'' said Ayesha Naji, 40, of Atlanta, a
former resident of Liberia. ``He represents a worldwide hero for
me.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
