ID: 96	RANK: 93	SCORE: 18.165710
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900417-0171 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-04-17-90 2133EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-Obit-Abernathy 2ndLd-Writethru a0703 04-17 1141</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Obit-Abernathy, 2nd Ld-Writethru, a0703,1172</SECOND>
<HEAD>Civil Rights Leader Ralph David Abernathy Dead at 64</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: SUBS grafs 11-12, `King's son ...,' with 5 grafs to UPDATE
with comment from Corretta Scott King and Benjamin Hooks; picks up
13th graf pvs, ``Abernathy was pastor ...'; minor editing to
tighten.</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos NY20, NY21, NY22, AX5</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By SONYA ROSS</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>ATLANTA (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The Rev. Ralph David Abernathy, who created the
civil rights movement with Martin Luther King Jr. but decades later
enraged the slain leader's supporters by writing about his alleged
infidelity, died Tuesday.
   Abernathy, who had cradled the fallen King's bloodied head after
he was struck down by a bullet in 1968, was 64.
   Abernathy's heart stopped while he was being prepared for a lung
scan at Crawford Long Hospital, said hospital spokeswoman Tisha
Burland.
   ``What they were trying to do was detect if there was a blood
clot in the lungs ... but they never got to see,'' Ms. Burland said.
   Abernathy was taken to an operating room, but he was pronounced
dead there at 12:10 p.m. before doctors could begin emergency life
support surgery, she said.
   Ms. Burland quoted Dr. Kenneth Scheidt, a nuclear medicine
specialist who was present for the scheduled lung scan, as saying
the test never began and could not have contributed to Abernathy's
death.
   Abernathy had been in the hospital since last month for
treatment of a sodium deficiency. He had suffered strokes in 1983
and 1986.
   Abernathy spent his last months under bitter criticism from his
colleagues for passages in his 1989 autobiography, ``And The Walls
Came Tumbling Down.'' He wrote that King had spent time with two
women and had a violent argument with one in the 24 hours before
his 1968 assassination.
   But the Rev. Joseph Lowery, who succeeded Abernathy as president
of the Southern Christian Leadership Council, described Abernathy
on Tuesday as ``a faithful servant of the cause of liberty and
justice.''
   ``I extend my love and support to his family,'' he said.
   ``I salute you Ralph (for) a life of great achievement and
merit,'' Coretta Scott King said in a statement from Harare,
Zimbabwe, where she was attending celebrations of that country's
10th anniversary of independence.
   ``When our home was bombed and our lives were threatened, he was
there,'' she said. ``His strength as a tactician and a counselor to
Martin during our struggle has been eloquently recorded in Martin's
own writings and in the annals of the American civil rights
movement.''
   King's son, Fulton County Commissioner Martin Luther King III,
called Abernathy's death ``a very tragic loss to our nation.''
   ``I know firsthand of the sacrifices he made for the civil
rights movement, and that should never be forgotten,'' said
Benjamin Hooks, executive director of the National Association for
the Advancement of Colored People.
   ``His total life and passion was his support of Martin Luther
King,'' said former Mayor Andrew Young, another key King aide in
the movement. Young said that if Abernathy had a weakness, ``it was
trying to fill Martin Luther King Jr.'s shoes after his death, and
that was an impossible task.''
   State Sen. Arthur Langford, who visited Abernathy's family
Tuesday night, said the family would probably not make a statement
until Wednesday.
   Abernathy was pastor of Atlanta's West Hunter Street Baptist
Church and president emeritus of the SCLC, which he founded with
King in 1957 as a vehicle for the movement they began with the 1955
bus boycott in Montgomery, Ala.
   Abernathy had said he had no desire to lead the movement,
preferring to leave that role to the more charismatic King. But two
days after King's assassination, the remaining aides picked him as
SCLC president, according to King's wishes.
   He was SCLC president for nine years, as the focus of the
movement shifted from voting rights and civil rights to economic
issues like employment and anti-poverty programs.
   He left the SCLC presidency in 1977, when he resigned to run for
Congress. He was defeated in the Democratic primary. In 1980, he
supported Ronald Reagan in his presidential bid.
   Abernathy suffered a stroke in 1983 and underwent brain bypass
surgery at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore. After he recovered,
he returned to preach at West Hunter, where he had been pastor
since 1961, and backed Jesse Jackson in his 1984 presidential bid.
   When Abernathy mentioned King's relationships with women in his
book, he became the first of King's inner circle to do so, even
though the matter had been chronicled by several noted biographers.
   Black leaders asked Abernathy to retract the passages, and
insinuated that his memory had been impaired by the strokes and
brain surgery. But Abernathy, whom King praised as his closest
friend and confidant, insisted the accounts were true.
   Abernathy, born March 11, 1926, in Linden, Ala., was King's
right-hand man for 13 years, sharing jail cells with him, traveling
with him and advising him.
   ``We were known as the civil rights twins,'' Abernathy once
recalled. ``We always sought to complement each other. I never
tried to be a copy of him and he never tried to be a copy of me.''
   It was Abernathy who comforted King as he lay dying of a bullet
wound on the balcony of the Lorraine Motel in Memphis, Tenn., on
April 4, 1968. He took care of various funeral details for Mrs.
King, and delivered the eulogy.
   Although he worked helped found the civil rights movement, stood
at King's side through the great battles and went to jail as often
as King did, Abernathy consistently found himself in King's shadow.
   And it bothered him.
   In a 1986 interview, he lamented that once, when he visited a
school in Connecticut, ``not a single student knew who I was.''
   In his autobiography, Abernathy said he felt other King aides
saw him as ``no more than an appendage to Martin, someone who
served as a part companion, part bodyguard, but who never played an
important role in the decisions that affected the direction of the
movement.''
   The book uproar tore a hole in the already fragile relationship
Abernathy had with his movement colleagues, a relationship that had
been rather cool after Abernathy's endorsement of Reagan.
   At a 1985 dinner, he was praised by top black leaders as an
``unsung hero'' of the civil rights movement. Four years later, he
was handed a telegram, signed by most of his movement
contemporaries, that said the accounts about King in his
autobiography could ``rob you of your rightful place in history.''
   Hosea Williams, who also endorsed Reagan, branded his longtime
friend a ``Judas'' for writing about King's relationships with
women.
   Abernathy never took back his allegations. ``I'm not Judas,'' he
said. ``I know who I am.''
   Abernathy is survived by his wife, Juanita; two sons, Kwame and
state Rep. Ralph David Abernathy III; and two daughters, Juandalynn
and Donzaleigh.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
