ID: 271	RANK: 51	SCORE: 14.883214
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910828-0107
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910828-0107.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   On Records: Repetitive Rock
   ----
   By Jim Fusilli
</HL>
<DATE>
08/28/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A6
</SO>
<LP>
   One problem for rock's metal mega-acts is that they are
defined, often by themselves, not by what they can do, but by
what they've done. Thus, they are led to self-imitation
rather than exploration and expansion, and when the
touchstone isn't musical achievement or artistic enterprise,
but volume and familiarity, the recordings that follow can't
be much more than repetitive and dull.
   A case in point: Van Halen and its new, lackluster album,
"For Unlawful Carnal Knowledge" (Warner Bros.). When the
quartet isn't quoting itself, it dips into the familiar Led
Zeppelin well, or cites its successors. Most of the 11 songs
smack of construction rather than composition, and the band's
playing, for all its customary bombast, is spiritless. Meant
to stir a sense of brazen naughtiness, the insipid lyrics
strain to be clever; the level of wit here is reflected in
the record's title, and by vocalist Sammy Hagar's smirking,
over-the-top posturing.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The shame of this is that Van Halen can play, and on
previous projects has been inventive. Eddie Van Halen, to
paraphrase Frank Zappa, reinvented the way rock guitarists
approach their instrument, and Alex Van Halen is a drummer
full of energy and authority. It would be interesting to hear
the group tackle challenging material, something quite
different from what it has played before, rather than
continue to surrender to the practicality of the music
business.
   Following formula isn't the province only of metal bands.
Bonnie Raitt comes close to doing it on her new album, "Luck
of the Draw" (Capitol), by invoking her 1989 Grammy winner,
"Nick of Time" (Capitol). In the end, she snaps up her sound
with a crisper, funkier group of backing musicians. Winning
numbers include "Not the Only One," by the Irish
singer-songwriter Paul Brady, and "Tangled and Dark," boosted
by the Tower of Power horn section.
   Richard Thompson's new album, "Rumor and Sigh" (Capitol),
has been compared to "Shoot Out the Lights" (Hannibal), the
1982 recording he made with his ex-wife, Linda. It's not that
good, but there are some terrific touches in mood and
instrumentation. Thompson continues to take traditional
Celtic, Scottish and country influences and tear them apart
with driving rhythm, a searing voice and a guitar sound that
falls somewhere between Mark Knopfler's and Neil Young's.
There's a bit of B-movie writer in him, too, as his lyrics
bludgeon and caress and his characters tilt and swagger. And
besides, he writes great song titles: "Backlash Love Affair,"
"Psycho Street" and "1952 Vincent Black Lighting."
Incidentally, Thompson is among the guitarists on the new
Raitt album.
   On the jazz side, "Bill Evans" (JMT) by Paul Motian
captures the innocence and gentility of the work of the late
pianist. That Motian is able to do this without a pianist on
board is a tribute to Evans's writing and Motian's
arrangements. The quartet -- along with Motian, it has Bill
Frisell on guitar, Joe Lovano on tenor saxophone and Marc
Johnson on bass -- plays with tenderness and passion on nine
numbers, several of which are among Evans's more interesting
compositions. Motian, who served in Evans's seminal '60s trio
along with bassist Scott LaFaro, nudges the group where it
needs to go. Listen to his whispering brush work and the
shimmering cymbals on "Time Remembered" and "Very Early."
   As for Frisell, by now his name on any project is its
imprimatur, and he is among the musicians saxophonist David
Sanborn and producer Hal Willner have brought together for
Sanborn's "Another Hand" (Elektra Musician). Frisell's moody,
rubbery guitar sets the tone for a project that permits
Sanborn to stretch beyond the saccharine jazz-pop for which
he is adored. (Sanborn is at the same time admired and
underrated: He is a powerful, versatile player, equally adept
at lyrical romance, fierce bop and, here, a dark sound
influenced by New York's downtown scene.)
   The influence of Willner, who worked with Sanborn on NBC's
"Night Music," extends not only to the presence of some of
his favorite players -- Frisell, Marc Ribot, Syd Straw,
Charile Haden and NRBQ's Terry Adams, who contributed two
songs -- but to the performance of such offbeat numbers as
Lou Reed's "Jesus" and songs from TV's "The Twilight Zone."
Amid the darkness, Adams's "Hobbies" bounces along like the
perfect summer hit. And the great Marcus Miller provides two
lovely, more conventional jazz numbers on which Sanborn
displays his skill.
   In 1988, Frank Zappa put together a killer band with a
five-piece horn section, and set out on a long tour of Europe
and the U.S. The band splintered before the tour was over,
but its work is captured on two new live albums, "The Best
Band You Never Heard" and "Make a Jazz Noise Here" (Barking
Pumpkin). The former finds Zappa and the ensemble in typical
iconoclastic form: Together with Zappa classics like "Penguin
in Bondage," "Zoot Allures" and "The Eric Dolphy Memorial
Barbecue," the band covers "Theme From Bonanza," "Purple
Haze," "When Irish Eyes Are Smiling" and "Ring of Fire," each
with wacky elan. On "Make a Jazz Noise Here," there's less
comedy and more straight playing. The group takes on
Stravinsky and Bartok as well as blistering versions of
Zappa's "Dupree's Paradise" and "Big Swifty." All this
complex material is executed with remarkable precision: The
horn section, particularly Bruce Fowler on trombone, is
stunning, and drummer Chad Wackerman is a powerhouse. Zappa
music is bold, off-center, absurd, serious, exciting, racy,
challenging and great fun. On these two recordings, it is
conveyed with expert force and flair.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
