ID: 202	RANK: 28	SCORE: 25.295267
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890713-0116 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-13-89 1248EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i PM-Bush-Paris 11thLd-Writethru a0573 07-13 1193</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Bush-Paris, 11th Ld-Writethru, a0573,1,200</SECOND>
<HEAD>Bush Arrives in Paris With Key to Bicentennial Celebration</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: INSERTS 1 graf after 1st graf with key being presented; inserts
new grafs 5-6 with Scowcroft briefing; past tenses lower reference to key
and deletes some now-extraneous material.</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By TERENCE HUNT</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP White House Correspondent</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>PARIS (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   President Bush, buoyed by his landmark visit to
Eastern Europe, joined dozens of world leaders today for a
spectacular Parisian party celebrating the 200th anniversary of the
French Revolution.
   Bush helped kick off the festivities by helping present to France
the historic key to the Bastille fortress, birthplace of a rebellion
against the French crown two centuries ago. The key, in U.S. hands
since 1790, is on temporary loan.
   On his way to the French capital, Bush voiced hope that his tour
of Poland and Hungary had ``given encouragement to those who want to
go the path of reform, political change, economic change'' in those
communist nations.
   The gala events preceding a summit meeting of the world's seven
largest industrial democracies contrasted sharply with the
president's trip to Poland and Hungary, where he promised to help
both communist nations with major economic reforms.
   Brent Scowcroft, the president's national security adviser, said
Bush would encourage the summit partners to formulate their own aid
programs for Poland and Hungary. He said the idea was to create sort
of a ``clearinghouse'' to avoid duplication of assistance by the
summit countries: the United States, Britain, France, West Germany,
Japan, Canada and Italy.
   Also, Scowcroft said the United States would consider giving food
and other commodities to Poland if austerity measures add to the
hardships of the Soviet bloc country.
   Bush was greeted by French President Francois Mitterrand at the
inaugural bicentennial event at the Place du Trocadero commemorating
the Declaration of the Rights of Man. That statement, issued in
August 1789, set forth the French Revolution's aims of liberty,
fraternity and equality for all people.
   The world leaders sat on a blue and white grandstand listening to
a young man and woman who took turns reading the 17 articles of the
declaration. A children's choir dressed in white sang a ``song of
joy,'' played games and threw peace laurels, flowers and children's
toys on the esplanade.
   At the end of the ceremony, the leaders burst into applause as a
flock of doves flew over the palace. Then, chatting amiably, they
left for a lunch given by Mitterrand, who sat next to Bush during
the ceremony.
   Security was tight with an estimated 30,000 police, including
rooftop marksmen, guarding the summit events. Police also towed away
about 1,000 vehicles as part of their ban on traffic in the main
thoroughfares.
   Before leaving Budapest for the French capital, Bush told
Hungarian leaders that ``as your economy modernizes, you will play
an even greater role in the evolution of a new Europe, a Europe that
is whole and free.''
   Bush told his Hungarian hosts, ``you are proving, here in the
heartland of Europe, that the Rights of Man are the proper
birthright of us all.''
   In an impromptu news conference on Air Force One during the
flight to Paris, Bush said his East European visit ``has been
watched by the people of other Eastern European countries and
hopefully given encouragement to those who want to go the path of
reform, political change, economic change.''
   Bush also dismissed a Moscow spokesman's statement that Soviet
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev is unable to meet a NATO target date
to reduce conventional military forces. And he said the United
States will not overhaul its Middle East peace policy in response to
political turmoil in Israel.
   He said that in Poland and Hungary, ``the thing that is so
impressive is the determination of all of these leaders to move
towards economic freedom and political freedom.''
   Bush said he had stressed publicly and privately that reforms,
including austerity measures, are essential to building strong
economies.
   ``There is no point going there under false colors and to try to
have everything sweetness and light,'' he said. ``It's a message
that it isn't going to be easy, but that's part of the message.''
   The president said no one expressed disappointment over the
relatively modest aid programs he proposed for Poland and Hungary.
``I think that they understand that we are restricted in what we can
do in terms of dollars ...,'' Bush said.
   In Paris, Mitterrand greeted each leader arriving by limousine at
the ceremony site near the Eiffel Tower. The crowd in the street
cheered when Philippines President Corazon Aquino appeared. Other
guests included Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi of India, President
Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe, President Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire and
other African leaders, U.N. Secretary-General Javier Perez de
Cuellar, Brazilian President Jose Sarney, Mexican President Carlos
Salinas de Gortari and Uruguayan President Julio Maria Sanguinetti.
   The French festivities features concerts, fireworks and parades.
   After a 40-minute meeting with Mitterrand, Bush took part in
ceremonies marking the return _ actually a brief loan _ of the key
to the Bastille, the site where the French Revolution began when the
fortress was stormed in an uprising against the crown on July 14,
1789.
   Bush planned to present the large iron key to Mitterrand for
display through July 22 at the new Bastille Opera house, adjacent to
the site of the famous fortress.
   The key was given to George Washington nearly 200 years ago by
the Marquis de Lafayette. Since 1797, the key has never left
Washington's estate in northern Virginia.
   Since 1858, the historic artifact has been in the possession of
the Mount Vernon Ladies' Association, the private, non-profit
organization that owns and operates Washington's home.
   When the bicentennial party reaches its peak Friday, the Champs
Elysee will be the site of a parade featuring Britons maching under
artificial rain, Russians dancing with a bear on ice and an American
band strutting backward all the way down the famed avenue.
   Amid extraordinary political uncertainty in Poland and Hungary as
they struggle with democratic reforms, Bush devoted the first half
of his 10-day European journey to encouraging advocates of change.
   Aside from strong messages of moral support, he left behind
packages of U.S. aid of $100 million for Poland and $25 million for
Hungary to spur development of private enterprise.
   ``Your challenge is enormous and historic: to build a structure
of political change and decentralized economic enterprise on the
ruins of a failed Stalinist system,'' Bush said in a speech
Wednesday at the Karl Marx University of Economic Sciences.
   Imre Pozgay, one of Hungary's four communist leaders, told Bush
the changes in his country were ``irreversible'' and added the
government would ``accept the results of free elections'' set for
next year and step down if defeated.
   Bush promised he will press for a coordinated plan of further
assistance for Poland and Hungary at the annual economic summit with
leaders of France, Britain, West Germany, Italy, Canada and Japan.
   The summit meeting begins Friday evening and concludes on Sunday
with the reading of a final communique.
   Aside from aid for Poland and Hungary, major topics are expected
to be environmental problems and Third World debt.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
