ID: 202	RANK: 52	SCORE: 20.838078
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890714-0104 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-14-89 1217EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i PM-SummitRdp 6thLd-Writethru a0594 07-14 1077</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Summit Rdp, 6th Ld-Writethru, a0594,950</SECOND>
<HEAD>World Leaders Mix Partying and Politicking</HEAD>
<HEAD>EDs: Inserts new 4th graf with US-Japan agreement, subs 5th graf
for transition.</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By TERENCE HUNT</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP White House Correspondent</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>PARIS (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Leaders of the world's seven richest nations,
turning from partying to politics, opened their annual summit today
with talks focusing on the economic struggles in Eastern Europe and
the harsh repression of human rights in China.
   The initial session of the 15th world economic summit began at
the new glass Louvre pyramid, now the main entrance and
architecturally controversial structure in front of the famed museum.
   The first order of business was a picture-taking session for the
``class photo'' of President Bush and the leaders of Britain,
France, West Germany, Japan, Italy and Canada.
   Even before the summit began, Bush won a victory on a contentious
trade issue with Japan. Reversing course, Japan agreed to hold talks
with the United States on a broad range of trade barriers, which the
administration contends are a major cause of the $52 billion U.S.
trade deficit with the Asian nation.
   On the other hand, Bush maneuvered unsuccessfully to obtain a
final agreement between Mexico and its commercial bank lenders on
restructuring Mexico's foreign debt of more than $100 billion.
   Mexican President Carlos Salinas de Gortari told Bush that no
deal is in sight, despite French President Francois Mitterrand's
warning that ``Mexico is on the edge of an explosion because of the
weight of its debt.''
   Today's first session of the Big Seven industrial democracies
coincides with the climax of three days of festivities marking the
200th birthday of the French Revolution.
   The salute to the July 14, 1789, storming of the Bastille, which
marked the beginning of the revolution, began with a military parade
down the Champs Elysees, the most famous thoroughfare in Paris.
   Heavy tanks rumbled past the VIP viewing stand as Mirage jet
fighters screamed overhead, trailing streams of red, white and blue
smoke _ the colors of the French flag.
   With more than two dozen heads of state and government invited to
the festivities, there was an extraordinary gathering of world
leaders from nations rich and poor.
   Bush, leader of the world's wealthiest nation, got a front row
parade seat next to President Hossain Mohammed Ershad of Bangladesh,
representing one of the world's poorest.
   Bush began the day with a hurriedly arranged meeting with Salinas
on his country's commercial lenders. Afterward, White House chief of
staff John Sununu reported there was no early prospect for a final
agreement.
   Sununu said Mexican officials want ``to get it done correctly
rather than trying to rush it,'' and the White House believes
``there is no requirement to leave the summit ... with an
agreement.''
   The United States offered a loan of $1 billion to $2 billion to
help Mexico seal an agreement, preferably before the economic summit
ends on Sunday, but Sununu said the negotiations remained snagged
over details.
   Mitterrand, who is pushing a rival plan for solving the Third
World debt problem, said in a French TV interview that Mexico's
foreign debt has carried that country to the brink of an explosion.
   ``No one has an interest in this explosion taking place, which
would mean more misery for a suffering people,'' he said. ``We are
contributing, I am contributing, as far as possible so that a
positive answer could be given in the coming days.''
   The 15th economic summit marks Bush's debut at the annual
gathering of the leaders of the United States, Japan, Britain,
France, West Germany, Canada and Italy. Leaders of some of the Third
World countries attending the Bastille celebration urged the
prosperous nations to hold a summit between rich and poor nations.
   Mitterrand has been harshly criticized in the press here for the
extravagence of the bicentennial celebration, as well as for holding
two separate dinners tonight for have and have-not nations.
   Bush, through a spokesman, rallied to Mitterrand's side.
   ``I don't think the president sees any difficulty at all in the
way the French have laid out their plans, their celebrations, or
their hosting of the summit meeting,'' said Sununu.
   Bush hoped the summit would let him assume the mantle of
leadership on economic and environmental issues, much as he did on
military matters in May with a troop reduction proposal at the NATO
summit in Brussels.
   Following his stops this week in Poland and Hungary, Bush planned
to press for a coordinated economic aid program to reward the two
East Bloc nations for democratic reforms. Among other steps, Bush
was expected to express support for new loans and debt rescheduling
to ease their financial woes.
   China's bloody crackdown on pro-democracy students in Tiananmen
Square and subsequent repressions also were on the agenda. It
appeared likely the leaders would approve a statement of concern
about events in China rather than endorse any collective sanctions.
   Sununu said Bush would welcome a summit statement reiterating
previously expressed condemnations and concerns about human rights
violations in China.
   ``We know of no specific proposals that go _ that even brings all
of the countries up to the levels that the president has gone, much
less going further,'' Sununu said.
   The United States has cut off military sales and technology
transfers to China, urged a freeze on international loans for
Beijing and restricted U.S. diplomatic contacts.
   The summit will turn to economics and other subjects on Saturday
and Sunday. Bush is seeking an international agreement on tackling
problems of global pollution.
   Other leaders had their own agendas.
   Attempting to overcome a sex scandal which has shaken his
government, Japanese Prime Minister Sosouke Uno came armed with
nearly $40 billion in aid to improve the global environment and
provide financial support to lessen the staggering $1.2 trillion
debt burden carried by developing countries.
   Mitterrand has his own rival plan for Third World debt. So does
Bush.
   Nicholas Brady, Bush's treasury secretary, unveiled a strategy
March 10 to encourage commercial banks to voluntarily forgive a
portion of developing nations' bad debt.
   Security problems of protecting the ``Big Seven'' summit leaders
were compounded by the presence of more than 30 presidents and prime
ministers who are Mitterrand's guests for the bicentennial
festivities.
   Fanning out over an 80-mile circle around Paris, 30,000 security
forces erected a protective cocoon around the leaders. While an
observation blimp hovered over the crowds, sharpshooters kept watch
from rooftops and troops armed with ground-to-air missiles kept an
eye on the skies.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
