ID: 202	RANK: 87	SCORE: 17.296196
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890714-0215 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-14-89 2045EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-SummitRdp 3rdLd-Writethru a0791 07-14 1073</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Summit Rdp, 3rd Ld-Writethru, a0791,1,010</SECOND>
<HEAD>For Bush, a Win and a Loss</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: INSERTS grafs 13-16: ``At dinner,'' on dinner discussions, political
communique</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By MARTIN CRUTSINGER</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP Economics Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>PARIS (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Leaders of the world's seven richest nations,
treated to the pomp and pageantry of the French bicentennial, got
down to business Friday as President Bush scored an early victory on
a contentious trade dispute with Japan but failed in efforts to
speed approval of a Mexican debt deal.
   Bush, making his first appearance on the world economic stage,
brought a full agenda of items for discussion with the leaders of
France, Britain, West Germany, Japan, Italy and Canada.
   In his opening remarks at the first session and later at a
working dinner, the president discussed his just-completed trip to
Poland and Hungary and sought agreement from the other countries for
a coordinated assistance effort to both nations, according to
presidential spokesman Marlin Fitzwater.
   The other leaders had their own agendas to present.
   French President Francois Mitterrand, who has built a reputation
as a champion of the developing nations, raised their demands that
the rich industrial countries convene a conference to discuss the
economic plight of the Third World.
   Mitterrand invited more than two dozen Third World leaders to the
celebration of the 200th anniversary of the French Revolution in an
effort to promote the idea of a conference between the world's rich
and poor.
   But the United States and Britain resisted these overtures.
   Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady said a case-by-case approach
was a better way to handle the Third World debt burden rather than
convening a giant international conference.
   ``You don't get solutions to problems by bunching up areas and
calling them North and South,'' as the rich and poor nations are
often reffered to, Brady told reporters.
   German Chancellor Helmut Kohl urged his summit partners to adopt
policies that would allow continued economic growth while reducing
trade surpluses.
   Kohl, maintaining that air pollution may pose the biggest threat
to future generations, said the environment should be a central
theme of the summit, according to his spokesman, Hans Klein.
   Fitzwater, briefing reporters after the first session ended, said
that there was general agreement on Bush's proposals to boost aid to
Poland and Hungary although questions remained on the specifics of
coordinating the assistance.
   At dinner, Bush briefed his summit partners on his trip to Poland
and Hungary.
   ``They spoke of objectives, the importance of the moment and of
the latest changes,'' French spokesman Hubert Vedrine told reporters
at a post-midnight briefing. The leaders also discussed ``the best
way to aid these countries and how to act in a way that this aid is
coherent and useful.''
   Though he declined to go into specifics, Vedrine said the
possible role of the International Monetary Fund, the Paris Club of
western creditor nations and other organizations was discussed.
   The leaders planned to put the finishing touches on their
political communique at their morning meeting Saturday. Vedrine said
the document would touch on four subjects _ human rights, East-West
relations, terrorism and China.
   The 15th annual economic summit, the third to be held in France,
began with the traditional show of harmony as the leaders posed for
their ``class photo,'' using the new glass pyramid of the Louvre
museum as a backdrop.
   British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, the dean of summiteers
with 10 years in office, was the first to arrive for the formal
greeting by Mitterrand.
   Even before the summit opened, the United States and Japan moved
to cool trade tensions, which flared this year after the
administration adopted a tough line targeting Japan as an unfair
trader because of barriers to the sale of American goods in Japan.
   The action, brought under the 1988 trade law, would allow the
administration to impose stiff sanctions on Japanese products within
18 months if negotiations failed to remove the barriers.
   While the Japanese reacted with outrage at being singled out,
both sides adopted a more conciliatory attitude Friday after a
private meeting between Bush and Japanese Prime Minister Sousuke Uno.
   The Japanese, after initially balking at the idea, agreed to
launch negotiations _ with a one-year deadline _ aimed at removing
barriers to sales of foreign goods such as the Japanese distribution
system.
   Bush was less successful, however, at breaking a deadlock between
negotiators trying to produce a debt-reduction plan for Mexico. The
president began his day with a hurriedly arranged meeting with
Mexican President Carlos on the debt question.
   U.S. officials announced later that the administration would be
willing to extend an emergency loan of between $1 billion and $2
billion to Mexico if the money would help break a deadlock in
current negotiations between Mexico and the commercial banks that
hold the bulk of its debt.
   Brady told reporters that the United States would ask other
summit countries to help with the emergency loan, known as a bridge
loan, which a country can use until it can get new money from its
creditor banks. But the bridge financing offer did not immediately
produce results in the Mexican debt talks, which remain stalemated
in New York.
   The first session of the Big Seven industrial countries coincided
with the climax of three days of festivities marking the July 14,
1789, storming of the Bastille.
   After an evening spent discussing weighty global issues over
dinner, Bush and the other leaders adjourned to a balcony to watch
the high point of the bicentennial celebration, a $15 million parade
featuring English bagpipers marching in artificial rain and Solviet
skaters dancing with a bear on ice as the crowd was sprayed with
confetti snow.
   Earlier in the day, Bush sat next to President Hossain Mohammed
Ershad, the president of Bangladesh, one of the poorest nations in
the world, for a morning military parade down the Champs Elysee, a
seating arrangement undoubtedly inspired by Mitterrand's desire to
prompt discussions between rich and poor.
   Still, Mitterrand has come under sharp criticism for the
extravagance in staging the bicentennial events and for having two
separate dinners Friday night for the rich and poor nations.
   The summit will devote a portion of Saturday's session to talks
on a global initiative to clean up the environment, the first time
an economic gathering has spent so much time on this topic. The
talks will conclude on Sunday with the reading of a final communique
and separate press conferences by Bush and the other leaders.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
