ID: 196	RANK: 6	SCORE: 23.215704
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911227-0079
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911227-0079.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
   A Sorrowful Master of the Macabre
   ----
   By Julie Salamon
</HL>
<DATE>
12/27/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8
</SO>
<LP>
   The sad facts of Edgar Allen Poe's life seem unremarkable
(in terms of tragedy or even weirdness) when compared with
the lives routinely paraded before us by Oprah or Phil or
Sally Jesse. The master teller of Gothic tales didn't claim
to be the product of satanic rape, or incest or any one of
the other horrors that have become staples of confessional
afternoon television.
   The sorrow that lay behind an extraordinary body of
literature of the macabre ("The Pit and the Pendulum," "The
Murders in the Rue Morgue," "The Raven") was "ordinary" by
today's sensationalist standards. Poe's mother died before he
turned three, after his father had already abandoned the
family. The writer's own brief life was a perpetual struggle
for money, recognition and against alcoholism. The most
potentially scandalous thing about it was his decision to
marry his cousin Virginia when she was only 13 (but no
scandal erupted).
</LP>
<TEXT>
   So as a character Poe was intriguing, but hardly
larger-than-life. But his childhood loss, his childish
marriage and his lifelong preoccupation with death have
continued to be of interest for almost two centuries because
of the sustained, morbid power of his poetry and prose. Now
literary historian Kenneth Silverman has illuminated the
relationship between Poe's life and art with a blend of
scholarly and biographical detail as well as Freudian insight
in a fascinating new book, "Edgar A. Poe: Mournful and
Never-ending Remembrance" (HarperCollins, 564 pages, $27.50).
   Mr. Silverman, a serious researcher and writer whose other
books have included a biography of Cotton Mather, clearly
doesn't want to be taken as a pop psycho-biographer. "This
biography is not an argument but a narrative," he writes, and
"no attempt will be made to `prove' that the psychoanalytic
prototype of the bereaved child applies to {Poe}." But he
also recognizes that the heart of Poe's work and its
continuing appeal lies in a lifelong preoccupation with his
mother's death, that this "prolonged mourning, an artistic
brooding-on" motivated the artist's fantasy life. Mr.
Silverman is, after all, chronicling the life of the man who
wrote: "I could not love except where Death/Was mingling his
with Beauty's breath. . . ."
   Edgar Poe was born in 1809 to itinerant parents. His
mother Eliza, an orphan, was a well-thought of actress who
played the East Coast circuit. His father David, son of a
somewhat prominent Baltimore family, wasn't successful
onstage or off; after he abandoned Eliza and their two young
sons, he was never heard from again. More than a year later,
Mrs. Poe gave birth to a third child, a daughter, and then
died at the age of 24.
   Edgar wound up in the care of John Allan, a merchant from
Richmond, Va., and his wife Frances. Their only connection to
him was their love of theater, and their desire for a child.
But their generosity was complicated by John Allan's
ambivalence. He was a self-made man who scorned dependence,
which put his ward Edgar -- a dependent by definition -- in a
difficult position. He was desperate to find a replacement
for the mother he'd lost, but the people who stepped in to
care for him would always keep him at a distance, even
refusing to officially adopt him.
   So Edgar repeatedly sought to annoy John Allan in all ways
possible. Eventually their only communications were through
Edgar's repeated attempts to wheedle money from Allan, to pay
the debts he repeatedly incurred. It seems that even Edgar's
literary drive was fueled by John Allan's disdain of
literature. At the very least, Mr. Silverman observes, Allan
proved to be a rich resource for his ward's fiction, the
model for more than one of Poe's unsympathetic characters.
   Edgar, a bright child who would never satisfy the yearning
left by his mother's death, turned to the world for the
solace he couldn't find at home (Frances Allan, though kind
to him, was sickly). His large ambition announced itself
early on, when as a young teenager he urged his teachers to
publish his poetry. He was obsessed with early success, and
was willing to lie and plagiarize to advance his own
interests.
   As Mr. Silverman chronicles Poe's struggle to establish
himself as a writer, he brings to life the intellectual world
of 19th century America. Poe set out to present himself as a
literary enfant terrible and he chose the right time to do
it. Mr. Silverman describes the years 1825-1850 as the
"golden age of periodicals," a time when 4,000 to 5,000 new
publications came into being.
   With no competition from radio or television or movies, a
brilliant writer of dark melodrama such as Poe could become a
celebrity. And he worked at it, both in his fiction and in
his provocative literary criticism. But his renown didn't
translate into financial success. He died -- at the age of 40
-- as he was born, in poverty.
   One would like to know more about Edgar's life with the
sickly young Virginia (Mr. Silverman hints that the marriage
was never -- or barely -- consummated). But the book does
full justice to the most prominent character in the writer's
life -- his work.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
