ID: 123	RANK: 13	SCORE: 7.022778
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910701-0124
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910701-0124.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Making a Difference -- Curricula of Color:
   Course Work Stressing
   Blacks' Role Has Critics
   But Appears Effective
   ---
   In Atlanta Schools, Teachers
   See Rise in Self-Esteem,
   Interest and Test Scores
   ---
   Africa as Wellspring of Science
   ----
   By Gary Putka
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
07/01/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<GV>
EDUCATION DEPARTMENT (EDN)
</GV>
<RE>
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA (DC)
GEORGIA (GA)
INDIANA (IND)
MARYLAND (MD)
MICHIGAN (MI)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
OREGON (ORG)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
WISCONSIN (WI)
</RE>
<LP>
   {One in an occasional series}
                                                                                                       

</LP>
<TEXT>
   ATLANTA -- Ollie Smith's third-graders are willing.
   "The number is 2,427," says Mrs. Smith, a teacher at
Cleveland Avenue Elementary School here. An eager volunteer,
one of 17 blacks in a class of 18, walks to the blackboard
beneath the U.S. flag in a scene familiar to anyone -- until
the chalk moves.
   Instead of the numeral 2, the girl draws two lotus
flowers, followed by four coiled ropes, two oxen yokes, and
seven vertical strokes.
   "Very good, Jeannette," says Mrs. Smith, praising a
perfect rendition of 2,427 in ancient Egyptian hieroglyphics.
"You can take your seat."
   Mrs. Smith's arithmetic lesson is part of a new
Africa-centered curriculum that is fast spreading in urban
schools. Atlanta, Baltimore, Detroit, Indianapolis, Portland,
Ore., and Washington, D.C., are in various stages of similar
course-content changes that stress, to a high degree, the
history and culture of black people.
   This approach, sometimes called "Afrocentric," claims that
typical school textbooks have played down or outright ignored
black scholars, writers and mathematicians. One of a set of
essays used in Afrocentrist curricula sees "the vision of the
African people as being the wellspring of creativity and
knowledge on which the foundation of all science, technology
and engineering rests, and draws continuing inspiration."
   Many prominent scholars say the claims of the
Afrocentrists are grossly inaccurate, as well as racially
inflammatory. According to the Afrocentric essays, for
example, Cleopatra was black and the rich culture of ancient
Egypt was largely African. That's why Mrs. Smith's students
learn hieroglyphics.
   But to say that Cleopatra was a black "is baloney," says
Frank Yurco, an expert on ancient Egypt at Chicago's Field
Museum, who says the record of her Greek and Macedonian
lineage is well established. Mr. Yurco adds that to suggest,
as the teaching guides do, "that Egypt derived from Central
Africa is a major distortion."
   Still, in Atlanta, the first black majority district to
introduce an African-oriented curriculum in all its schools,
there is mounting evidence of educational gains.
   Many principals and teachers say students are taking more
interest in school and raising their aspirations since the
African Infusion Project started. In 17 schools that piloted
"infusion" in the 1989-90 school year, the percentage of
students scoring at or above norms on standardized reading
and math tests rose by a higher rate than in the system as a
whole. Average attendance at the 17 schools rose by about a
percentage point to 91.5%, catching up with the overall
district rate after trailing it in 1988-89.
   "We have seen positive results," says Eunice Robinson, the
principal of Cleveland Avenue, where students at or above
reading norms shot up to 64% of enrollment in the spring of
1990, from 50%. Sherman Lofton, principal of Brown High
School in one of Atlanta's poorer black neighborhoods, adds:
"It really helps kids with their self-esteem. We've got more
saying they want to go to college and training school."
   Curriculum change is one of many new efforts aimed at
improving the education of black children, especially in the
inner cities, where traditional methods don't seem to be
working. In the 37 years since the Supreme Court struck down
segregated schools, blacks have narrowed the educational gap
with whites, but still lag badly in college-admissions and
other test scores, graduation and college-going rates.
   Proposed remedies are becoming more radical. Some blacks
favor vouchers they could use at private schools. Milwaukee,
New York and Detroit have considered schools exclusively for
black boys that would concentrate on providing role models
and other help. Ironically, they must overcome the legal
legacy of the desegregation decision to get them started.
   Proponents of Afrocentrism say it offers something for all
schools. In Portland, Ore., the first major system to endorse
increased African input, 74% of students are white. The
school board there plans to add American Indian, Hispanic and
Asian course plans to the African-American Baseline Essays,
or teaching guides, that already have been developed.
   Atlanta and other cities with African approaches haven't
focused on curricula tailored to other minorities. They are
merely trying to more effectively address large black
majorities.
   The mere notion, though, that any school would tailor its
curriculum to an ethnic group draws many critics. Diane
Ravitch, an educational historian and the new White House
nominee to head research at the Department of Education, says
much of what is being done under the Afrocentric banner is
"teaching racial antagonism." What's more, she says, "To say
you're going to make another continent the center of your
curriculum, and center science, math and English around this
continent, is pedagogically unsound."
   Rising test scores don't make her feel any better about
it. "White southerners used to say to me, `We get the best
test scores in segregated schools. Why integrate?'" she
observes. "If we discovered that apartheid produced higher
test scores, would that make apartheid a good system?"
   But Asa Hilliard, a Georgia State University professor and
consultant on Africa-oriented learning, says, "There is a
massive amount of validated non-trivial data about Africa
that is missing from schools, data without which the general
events in many areas of content can't be understood. I simply
advocate that the record be researched and the most truthful
picture possible be given in the curriculum. I don't think
that can be done without including African and black people
in every subject."
   In many ways, the Atlanta public schools are an ideal
crucible for the Afrocentric approach. Enrollment, now about
59,600, has been declining for years, first because of white
flight from desegregation and more recently because of a low
opinion by the public, both white and black, of school
quality. The system is as Afro-American as they come: 92% of
students and 93% of staff are black. Test scores,
college-enrollment and dropout rates are consistently among
the worst in Georgia. Alarmed, business and school leaders
have launched studies of the problem. Afrocentrism emerged
from one of them.
   Teachers participating in the Afrocentric curriculum in
Atlanta insist they are getting across the traditional
information all students need. In Mrs. Smith's class at
Cleveland Avenue, each drill in hieroglyphics also conveys
something about addition. When a student writes 214 as King
Tut did, for example, her classmates recite together, "200
plus 10 plus four."
   Similarly, in an African geography lesson at Sutton Middle
School, students demonstrate knowledge that might be useful
in a broader sphere. "What's a word for a high, flat land
mass?" asks Virginia Stanley, a sixth-grade teacher.
"Plateau," says one of many students with hands up.
Classmates quickly define arid tracts as deserts, find the
Strait of Gibraltar on a world map, and relate how sleepiness
induced by the bite of tse-tse fly kills both cattle and
people. Ms. Stanley's students, about a third of whom are
white, later get a lesson about a Medieval pilgrimage to
Mecca by Mansa Mussa, king of Mali.
   In teaching from a black perspective, though, the Atlanta
schools do cover material many white adults don't know. They
also prompt black students to consider racial questions they
might not otherwise ponder. When world history teacher Jill
Beracki guides her tenth-grade class at Frederick Douglass
High School through the Industrial Revolution, familiar
themes are explored. But the tour also goes by way of Africa
with a major stopover in the African diaspora.
   Mrs. Beracki wants to know "why Britain led the way" in
industrialization, and her students respond. "Skilled labor
force," says one. Government policies and naval prowess are
discussed. Then discussion turns to sources of raw materials
in British colonies and other matters. When, 10 minutes into
the period, Mrs. Beracki asks what role blacks played in the
Industrial Revolution, her students say it can't be found in
the textbook.
   "This book is written from a European point-of-view," says
student Emanuel Easter matter-of-factly. "It doesn't really
focus on black Americans." Classmate Tommy Phillips agrees.
Europe, he says, gets "two whole chapters" in this unit.
"Africa, Asia and the whole rest of the world is just one
little section."
   "For some reason," Mrs. Beracki tells the class, "black
Americans have been omitted from the history of
industrialization. As a compensation, I've asked you to do
some reports on black inventors." There is no lack of raised
hands when Mrs. Beracki asks for someone to start.
   Emanuel tells of Garrett Morgan, a Clevelander who created
the first traffic light and gas mask. Makila Sands did her
report on Elijah McCoy, possibly the namesake for the "real
McCoy," she says, because his automatic machine lubricator
was much copied but never replicated. A somewhat
self-conscious student gets up and turns to face the class.
"I want to tell you about James Matzeliger," he says with a
nervous stutter. "He was born in Lynn, Mass., in 1852. . . .
He made Lynn the shoe capital of the world. . . . They
couldn't make a machine to sew soles to last. People said it
was impossible to make such a machine."
   But James Matzeliger, a black man, did it.
   Much research shows that students do better when schools
involve parents and the community in education. One of the
goals of the Afro-based curriculum is to improve this
involvement in Atlanta, where the black community is the main
one served by public schools.
   One bright chilly morning, 17 community volunteers gather
in the library of Cleveland Avenue Elementary, making
preparations for a day of African storytelling and readings
of black American poetry. Some wear the colorful native garb
of Nigeria, but others sport a more conventional business
look. That's more important than middle-class people might
know, says Eunice Robinson, the principal.
   "We have children who don't usually see black males in
suits and ties," she says. "This give them a chance to see
that black males don't all shoot dope. These kids can tell
you what the dope dealer wears, and what he drives, but they
can't tell you how a black businessman is supposed to look."
   Dispersing to the classrooms, the volunteers read aloud
tales such as "Why Mosquitoes Buzz in Peoples' Ears" and "How
the Rabbit Lost His Tail." Brieu Madison, a local college
student, dons a housedress and head scarf to play a sarcastic
mother, rousing a lazy child from sleep in the Paul Laurence
Dunbar poem "In the Morning." Avid fifth-graders come forward
to act alongside her, and a tangle of hands shoots up when
Ms. Madison asks for comment on a Langston Hughes poem.
   After applauding, several students wonder aloud what it
might be like to be an actor. Nse Ufot, a fifth grade fan,
pens an acrostic to Ms. Madison, using her first name:
"Brilliant, Radiant . . . Important . . . Enthusiastic,
Unbeatable."
   Infusion has altered what goes on in many Atlanta
classrooms, but as with any major curricular change,
implementation has been spotty. In the 1989-1990 school year,
17 pilot schools were supposed to redesign their curriculum
at every grade, while five others were picked to introduce
the program in selected classes. For the year just ended, the
entire system was supposed to be "infusing" at every grade
level in every subject, but the district admits that outside
of math and social studies, implementation has been spotty.
   Afrocentrism isn't merely changing content, but methods as
well. In subjects like history and English, black and African
contributions can be included without much altering the way
subject matter is covered. It's merely a matter of changing
some of the people and literature studied.
   But in science and math, the fit is more difficult. At
Cleveland Avenue, Mrs. Smith's students learn Egyptian
numerals before Roman numerals. The system also wants
teachers to personalize math and science. Geometry is
traditionally covered with only a passing reference to Euclid
and Pythagoras; but Atlanta wants black mathematicians and
their contributions not only to be mentioned, but to serve as
a pivot for lessons.
   In a fifth-grade class, teacher Loretta Palmer readies a
special lesson. "We're going to take a lesson in math and
social studies together," she announces. "Our lesson is going
to be about time, with someone who was very concerned with
time" -- Benjamin Banneker, mathematician and maker of the
first clock in colonial America.
   At any opportunity, Mrs. Palmer strives to include a black
message. When subtraction exercises concern a boy who is
always late, she tells her children "Benjamin Banneker loved
to be on time." With the objective of the day -- "Solve a
problem involving time" -- on the blackboard, she tells the
class, "That's part of your great heritage, to be there on
time."
   After class, Mrs. Robinson, the principal, asks the
children to talk about their black and African-American
heroes and knowledge. Adrian, an irrepressible contributor,
says his hero is "King Tut -- he was king of Africa."
   Turning phrases like a practiced orator, young Daron
Walters says what he knows: "Africa has been going on for
millions and millions of years. I know this because of
stories I have read. I have learned about great men who ruled
1,363 years before Christ, and seen masks that men made
before Christ was born." When asked who some of these
pre-Christian kings were, he mentions "Shaka Zulu." It is an
error. Shaka was indeed a Zulu king, but of the 19th century
A.D.
   Returning to her office, Mrs. Robinson is beaming with
pride, but feeling somewhat apologetic. "When you hear my
children, you hear wrong answers," says Mrs. Robinson. "I
hear answers where there were no answers before."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
