ID: 123	RANK: 16	SCORE: 5.728961
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920130-0011
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920130-0011.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   For One Reagan,
   You Can Get Many
   Mikki Williamses
   ---
   She Is on the Speaker Circuit
   With Other No-Names
   Seeking Fees and Applause
   ----
   By Robert Johnson
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/30/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<IN>
BIOGRAPHY (BIO)
</IN>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   HOUSTON -- Mikki Williams stalks the gym floor in spiked
heels, microphone in hand, her audience of 80 exercise
instructors idly noshing carrots and cantaloupe.
   She scans the gathering and decides on a warm-up joke: "I
broke up with my fiance the other day," she says. "He asked,
`Is there someone else?' I said, `There just must be.' "
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Groans and laughs rise from the crowd; Ms. Williams seems
cheered. She moves quickly into her sermon about projecting a
positive attitude. She tells the instructors to put rubber
bands on their wrists, stretch them, let them snap, and then
chant, "I will stretch beyond my limits." She hands out
Play-Doh and advises to mold it "as you would your life."
   Ms. Williams, a former caterer and now a professional
speaker, admits she is no Abe Lincoln. Billing herself as an
"Enthusiologist," and relying on a mix of motivational
cliches, old jokes and personal anecdotes, the 47-year-old
widow scratches out a living on the rubber-chicken circuit,
landing about 80 appearances a year in front of small
companies and trade groups starved for a pep talk. "I get a
chance to impact peoples' lives," she explains. "That's a
great opportunity."
   For every Norman Schwarzkopf or Margaret Thatcher raking
in highly publicized speaking fees of up to $80,000 per
banquet, hundreds of low-budget lecturers like Ms. Williams
claw to be heard on everything from algebra-made-easy to Zen
dentistry. On any given night, up to 7,000 speakers step up
to podiums in the U.S. -- 60% of them for pay -- according to
estimates by booking agents. Some 70,000 would-be keynoters
are chasing those jobs, and 300 hopefuls sign up with local
speakers bureaus every week.
   "Most are incompetent, but they hear about the occasional
big money and want in on it," says John Palmer, who finds new
speaking talent for business groups in the Chicago area. He
recently scouted the speech of a rookie -- a farmer
addressing agricultural suppliers, all of whom seemed to be
dozing off. Suddenly, to regain their attention, the farmer
broke out into assorted bird calls. "Embarrassing," says Mr.
Palmer, who got in line for the exit.
   No-name lecturers like Ms. Williams are in a tough fight
for the after-dinner crumbs left by the likes of former
President Ronald Reagan, who still gets $50,000 a speech;
commentator Henry Kissinger at $20,000; and ex-Miami Dolphin
fullback Larry Csonka, at $10,000. Zsa Zsa Gabor's famous
cop-slapping incident more than doubled her speaking fee to
$25,000 a pop, agents say.
   In contrast, Ms. Williams speaks for a negotiable fee of a
few hundred dollars, plus expenses. True, her advertised
price is $3,500. "But anyone who says they get their fee
every time is lying," she says.
   Leslie Scott, who hired Ms. Williams to speak to the
exercise instructors, describes her as "inspiring and a lot
of fun." But best of all, she admits, Ms. Williams's talk is
cheap.
   Getting any fee is tough for some. Just ask Tony
Weissgarber, a retired Air Force fighter pilot who has
unsuccessfully advertised in this newspaper for lecture gigs.
"Can't Book `Stormin' Norman?' Then get `Big T]' " say his
ads, picturing him in Desert Storm fatigues even though his
war was Vietnam. Mr. Weissgarber, who lives in San Antonio,
Texas, says the ads have brought only a free speech to the
local Rotary Club. He did it to make contacts. When other
prospects learn his asking price is $3,500, "They say, `We'll
get back to you,' but they don't," he sighs.
   Booking agents say hiring unknowns in the raconteur racket
can be disastrous. Steve Finkelmeyer, who books speakers for
clients of Burson-Marstellar, a Chicago public relations
firm, says he unsuspectingly paid $10,000 for a recently
retired corporate chairman to talk to a group of travel
industry executives in Hawaii. "But he starts out with some
extremely off-color jokes painfully delivered, mispronounces
executives names and wishes the company a happy 30th
birthday, when in fact its anniversary was the previous
year," he recalls.
   Let's look at an after-dinner Who's Who of the
uncelebrated and the curious, all ready to address anyone at
the clink of a spoon on a wine glass.
   -- Gen. George Patton: Okay, so he's really just former
high-school principal Merlin James from Fort Myers, Fla.,
with a raspy-voiced impersonation of George C. Scott's 1970
movie role. But he brings his own huge American flag as a
stage prop, and his uniform is authentic right down to the
handmade tank boots. Like the late general, he's abrasive.
"I'm an egotistical S.O.B. and people who get to see me are
lucky." All for $2,500.
   -- The Hug Lady: Patricia Tice teaches workers how to
cooperate with outstretched arms. She has the audience stand
together "and pretend your hands are human brushes in a car
wash. It's relaxing." Later she will "hug everyone there.
It's their option of course," she says. She is a former Des
Moines elementary school counselor. Fee: $1,500.
   -- The Numerologist: "That's professional numerologist,"
corrects Kathy Bury, who reads the future in numbers the way
astrologists analyze the stars. "There aren't any bad
numbers. Just bad decisions," she says. Ms. Bury, of Golden,
Colo., says her methods are based on the theories of
Pythagoras, the Greek mathematician. One number she's
flexible on is her $1,500 fee. Special discounts for
cruise-ship gigs.
   -- The Dieter: "Love your fat away," proclaims Aliza
Guggenheim, a former cab driver in suburban Chicago who once
lost 176 pounds. True, she gained it all back. But that was
before she learned the "selflove" she now preaches for a
skinny $100 fee. Today she weighs 145, down 128 pounds. She
composes such poetic lines as, "Subconsciously hiding behind
this hideous fat; scaring people away like an ugly gray rat."
   -- The Hypnotist: Walter Garbisch of Milwaukee is both a
hypnotist and a Mark Twain impersonator. His fee for either
is $500. He will do Mark Twain as a hypnotist but cautions
that such a presentation "isn't authentic." Says he has
hypnotized more than 7,000 volunteers from audiences. His
surest way to get laughs: tell the hypnotizee "to pretend
he's at a funny movie."
   -- The Artist: Conni Gordon of Miami Beach has everyone in
the audience paint a landscape in just one hour to inspire
corporate creativity. But some pupils just don't get it. She
once told several International Business Machines Corp.
managers to paint the tops of their canvases sky blue. "They
painted the upper rim where the canvas fits into the frame,"
she says in frustration. Also teaches finger painting. Fee:
$3,000.
   -- The Coach: Ray Pelletier bills himself as "America's
Attitude Coach," but he's more of a cheerleader. When you
phone him in Coral Gables, Fla., his receptionist greets you
with, "Hi, have a better than terrific day." Then the on-hold
recording features Mr. Pelletier saying the same thing.
Finally, he comes on the line and tells you in real life that
he's still "better than terrific." An hour of this live:
$4,000.
   -- The Dental Hygienist: Patricia Burger, a 22-year
veteran of cleaning teeth in suburban Chicago, addresses
mainly dentists and their assistants on "dental career crisis
and burnout." She says, "After cleaning teeth for a while,
you start to wonder if that's all there is." Also lectures on
acupuncture. Fee: $300. Likes to be paid in advance:
"Dentists are cheap; I'm divorced from one."
   Speakers like this do, of course, have their fans. Gail
Bourne, an aerobics teacher who paid $49 to hear Ms. Williams
quote everyone from Confucius to singer Whitney Houston, says
she got a lift from the talk. "I have heard worse, with my
husband at a convention of accountants," she says. "They sit
through anything."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
