ID: 123	RANK: 2	SCORE: 14.853511
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910522-0124
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910522-0124.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
   Beauty in Numbers: Pythagoras Revisited
   ----
   By Jim Holt
</HL>
<DATE>
05/22/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   In ancient times, the mathematical mystic Pythagoras
proclaimed that the world was made of numbers. While this
seems slightly mad to us today, I have heard of people in
Paris and New Haven, Conn., who subscribe to the equally
barmy belief that the world is made of words or "texts." In
any case, the Pythagoreans were the first to discover the
numerical basis of harmony in music, and hence the link
between mathematics and beauty. They also thought, historians
tell us, that it was sinful to eat beans.
   I do not know whether John Allen Paulos abstains from
beans, but, as a self-avowed "numbers man," he does seem to
be a bit of a neo-Pythagorean. Two years ago Mr. Paulos wrote
a surprise best seller called "Innumeracy" that was both a
lament for the inability of Americans to think about the
world mathematically and an entertaining attempt to do
something about it. Now this Temple University professor has
produced a follow-up volume, "Beyond Numeracy: Ruminations of
a Numbers Man" (Knopf, 285 pages, $22), for those who would
like to be initiated into the higher mysteries.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   It is in essence a tour through 70 topics in mathematics:
some elementary (algebra, matrices), some advanced (topology,
platonic solids), some avant-garde (chaos theory) and some
philosophical (the fractal nature of consciousness,
mathematics in ethics, math and humor).
   His brief essays are arranged alphabetically by topic, and
as with one of its precursors, Voltaire's "Philosophical
Dictionary," it makes for an often-jolly little book. Also a
reassuring one: In his discussion of probability, Mr. Paulos
notes that if you add up the chances of being murdered by all
the terrorists, muggers, serial killers, drunk drivers and
other homicidal types in the world, the probability is
greater that you will kill yourself.
   The main point of any book such as this should be to
convince mathematical philistines of the keen pitch of
aesthetic pleasure the subject affords. Beauty, indeed, is
the paramount criterion of good mathematics; as the great
English number theorist G.H. Hardy once remarked, "There is
no permanent place in the world for ugly mathematics." This,
of course, will come as a surprise to the vast majority of
educated people who never got beyond calculus, for "school
mathematics" is extremely dull and is usually taught in the
most unimaginative possible way.
   Mr. Paulos does reasonably well in conveying the aesthetic
appeal of mathematics. He presents Euclid's proof that there
are infinitely many prime numbers, which exemplifies the
elements of economy, surprise and inevitability that go to
make up mathematical elegance. He also gives a nice, simple
account of the different orders of infinity, an awesome idea
that everyone really ought to know about -- although perhaps
not too much, considering that the man who discovered them in
the late 19th century, Georg Cantor, came to a rather sticky
and demented end.
   Several essays draw connections between mathematics and
the arts. The author explains the "golden section," a ratio
heavily exploited by the designers of the Parthenon and at
one time believed to be the universal key to beauty in nature
and art. He delves into the mathematical basis of music. And
he provides a much-needed -- for Americans, at least --
introduction to a French society of mathematically inclined
litterateurs called OULIPO (the French acronym for Workshop
of Potential Literature). Typical of their output is Raymond
Queneau's "Cent mille milliards poemes." Achieved by a
combinatoric sleight of hand, this sequence of one hundred
trillion sonnets -- which Mr. Paulos, in what one hopes is a
rare lapse for a numbers man, miscalculates as a mere 10
trillion -- dwarfs the rest of the world's poetic output.
   Where Mr. Paulos goes wrong, I feel, is in seeing
mathematics as a font of practical wisdom. It is true that
those who have some grounding in probability and statistics
are less likely than innumerates to be gulled by astrologers,
bureaucrats and other charlatans. But this is lowbrow
mathematics. Real mathematics has almost nothing to do with
the world of affairs. The theory of numbers, for example, is
perhaps the most daunting yet aesthetically gratifying area
of mathematics; it is also supremely useless -- "l'art pour
l'art."
   Moreover, those who spend too much time communing with
abstract mathematical entities tend to behave in an arrogant,
foolish, even mischievous manner when it comes to practical
matters. A case in point is one of Mr. Paulos's heroes,
Bertrand Russell. Of this sometimes pacifist, sometimes
atomic saber-rattler, full-time scourge of U.S. foreign
policy, the historian G.M. Trevelyan aptly remarked: "He may
be a genius at mathematics -- as to that I am no judge; but
he is a perfect goose at politics."
   If there is much to take issue with in "Beyond Numeracy,"
there is also much to be amused and enlightened by. The lore
has it that when Pythagoras discovered his great theorem on
right triangles, he was so transported that he sacrificed 100
head of oxen to the gods as a token of gratitude. On this
scale, Mr. Paulos's book is surely worth an ox or two.
   ---
   Mr. Holt, an erstwhile mathematician, is a columnist for
the Literary Review (London).
</TEXT>
</DOC>
