ID: 123	RANK: 5	SCORE: 11.066832
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910701-0200
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910701-0200.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   These Teaching Guides Credit Blacks
   For Math, Science and the Pyramids
   ----
   By Gary Putka
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
07/01/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A2
</SO>
<RE>
GEORGIA (GA)
ILLINOIS (IL)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
OREGON (ORG)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Much of the curriculum of the Afrocentric movement is
based on teaching guides called the African-American Baseline
Essays, published by the Portland, Ore., public schools. The
essays -- on art, language arts, mathematics, music, social
studies and science -- contend that much of their content has
been deliberately omitted by standard "Eurocentric" texts.
Yet many more-traditional scholars say the essays themselves
contain numerous inaccuracies and distortions. What follows
are some excerpts from the essays.
                                                                                                       

</LP>
<TEXT>
   From ART, by Michael D. Harris, Morehouse College,
Atlanta:
                                                                                                       

   "Egypt ca. 3100 B.C. was a Black nation. The first 1,100
years of Dynastic Egypt during the first six Dynasties was a
period of undisturbed Black rule, and was the period when
most of the pyramids (and Sphinx) were built. . . . The great
18th Dynasty re-established Black rule and brought many of
Egypt's most famous personages to power. Akhnetan,
Tutankhamun, Nefritari, Nefertiti, Hatshepsut, and Tutmosis
were among the familiar names. This all means that the art
forms and architecture we relate to Egypt are, in fact, forms
of Black art. . ."
                                                                                                       

   From LANGUAGE ARTS, by Joyce Braden Harris, director,
Black Educational Center, Portland, Ore.:
                                                                                                       

   "Black literature is manipulated and controlled by white
editors and publishers. . . . Black writers who are published
generally receive little or no promotion for their works."
   "The Ten Commandments . . . are very similar in content to
The Negative Confessions {of ancient Egyptian tombs}. . . .
The inscription of Nefer-Seshem-Re of the Sixth Dynasty
provides further evidence of the African origins of the Ten
Commandments."
                                                                                                       

   From MATHEMATICS, by Beatrice Lumpkin, associate professor
of mathematics, retired, Malcolm X College, Chicago:
                                                                                                       

   "Since Africa was the birthplace of the human race, it
follows that Africa was the birthplace of mathematics and
science."
   ". . . Specific examples indicate that ancient Egyptians
were conducting investigations that could have led to the
formation of the so-called Pythagorean theorem. There is hard
evidence that the theorem was known 1,000 years before
Pythagoras."
   "Euclid . . . lived and died in Egypt. There is no
suggestion that he ever left Africa. Yet he is pictured in
textbooks as a fair European Greek, not as an Egyptian. We
have no pictures of these mathematicians, but we could at
least visualize them honestly in costumes, complexions, and
features true to the people of their times."
                                                                                                       

   From SOCIAL STUDIES, by John Henrik Clarke, professor
emeritus, Hunter College, New York:
                                                                                                       

   "Non-Biblical history . . . indicates that the Hebrews
were not slaves in Egypt. Some of the Hebrews mistakenly took
sides with the enemies of Africa and were punished. This
punishment did not consist of slavery. The Hebrews, like the
Greeks, Romans, Hyksos, and other foreigners, benefited
religiously and intellectually from their sojourn in Africa."
   "Cleopatra . . . was of mixed African and Greek parentage.
If she were alive today, there is no way she could pass for
Caucasian. If living today, she would probably be living in
one of the Black communities in the United States."
                                                                                                       

   From SCIENCE, by Hunter Havelin Adams III, scientist,
Argonne National Laboratory, Illinois:
                                                                                                       

   ". . . The discovery of time, the control and use of fire
. . . tool technology, language and agriculture. Nothing in
the 20th century has touched humanity so totally as those
things which were first accomplished by Africans. . . ."
   "Today the science contributions of the Islamic-African
science tradition are relatively unknown in the Western world
because of the lack of humility of many Medieval European
scholars who diligently imitated, copied and plagiarized the
works of many Islamic scientists."
   (See related story: "Making a Difference -- Curricula of
Color: Course Work Stressing Blacks' Role Has Critics But
Appears Effective --- In Atlanta Schools, Teachers See Rise
in Self-Esteem, Interest and Test Scores --- Africa as
Wellspring of Science" -- WSJ July 1, 1991)
</TEXT>
</DOC>
