ID: 123	RANK: 68	SCORE: 2.846365
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910827-0088
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910827-0088.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Education:
   Concern Goes Up as SAT Scores Go Down
   ----
   By Gary Putka
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
08/27/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<GV>
EDUCATION DEPARTMENT (EDN)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Scholastic Aptitude Test scores declined despite increased
course loads and higher grades in U.S. high schools,
suggesting that efforts to reform education are being
hampered by falling academic standards.
   The score declines, which followed other downbeat school
indicators this year, increased calls for creation of a
national system of tests or other steps to enforce rigorous
standards.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The average composite score on the SAT, the most-taken
college-admissions test, fell to 896 from 900 out of a
maximum 1,600. The average score has fallen four years in a
row and is at its lowest point since 1983's 893. The verbal
score, which fell two points to 422, is the lowest on record
at the College Board, the New York organization that gives
the test on behalf of U.S. colleges. The score in
mathematics, the test's other part, slipped two points to
474, also the lowest since 1984.
   "The simple fact is that even our best students generally
don't know enough and can't do enough to assure success in
tomorrow's world," U.S. Education Secretary Lamar Alexander
said in a statement responding to the test scores.
   Other observers noted that the declines occurred against a
backdrop of strenuous efforts to improve the schools, funded
by a 30% after-inflation increase in spending during the
1980s.
   "You either have to say it's too early and reforms haven't
been in place long enough, or all the things we put in the
schools were wrong and we need a radical new strategy," said
Albert Shanker, president of the American Federation of
Teachers. "My own view is the latter is the case."
   Particularly troubling to Mr. Shanker and others is the
seeming ineffectiveness of stiffer course requirements
ordered by legislatures in nearly all the states during the
1980s. The average SAT taker this year had a total of 18.7
course years in high-school English, foreign language,
mathematics, science, social science and the arts, up from
18.1 in 1987. Grade-point averages have risen to 3.1 on a
four-point scale, up from 3.03 in 1985.
   The test-score declines and the higher course loads "are
the results of phony reform and a phony increase in course
requirements," said former U.S Education Secretary William
Bennett. Schools that now have stiffer math requirements, Mr.
Bennett contends, appear "to move over the same course
material in four years that used to take two years."
   Gerald Holton, who helped write "A Nation at Risk," the
1983 report that inspired many school-reform efforts, said
the SAT results "weren't that surprising given that the real
components of change haven't been adopted." Mr. Holton, a
Harvard physics professor, faulted the Reagan and Bush
administrations for failing to fund teacher training in
mathematics and science. Although teacher salaries are up
since 1983, he said they must be raised even more, especially
in math and science, to attract more competent instructors.
Mr. Holton also questioned the quality of the added time
students are spending on math and other subjects.
   Mr. Shanker said that his analysis of federal test scores
indicate that only 4% of high-school graduates "really know
algebra," although 96% of those who took the SAT reported
taking an algebra class. Ninety-three percent took geometry.
Yet on the math section of the SAT, which is largely a test
of algebra and geometry, students got an average of only 26
of 60 questions correct.
   Messrs. Alexander, Bennett and Shanker all said that the
SAT scores pointed to the need for a national testing system
that would enable all parents to see where their children
stand in relation to others. The SAT is taken by only
college-bound students.
   Although several groups are working on developing national
examinations, there is considerable political opposition to
such a move and internal bickering by advocates over what
kind of test should be given. The Bush administration favors
a voluntary test, while Mr. Shanker and others would like to
see a passing grade on the test be required for college
admission, enforced by a federal ban on financial aid to any
college that doesn't comply.
   Not all of the SAT data pointed to educational setbacks.
The total number of test takers, which stayed about flat at
one million, represented 42% of this year's high-school
graduates, up from 40% in 1990 and an indication of rising
educational aspirations. Participation of minority students
in the test edged up one percentage point to 28% of all
takers.
   Among minority groups, Asian-Americans scores rose by two
points in math and one point in verbal, for a composite of
941, tops for all the ethnic groups measured. The average
composite score of blacks, the lowest among the ethnic groups
at 736, stayed even in math and declined by one point in
verbal. White students, with a composite of 930, lost one
point in verbal and two points in math.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
