ID: 123	RANK: 69	SCORE: 2.841080
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891115-0224 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-11-15-89 1240EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>s a BC-The'90s-Promise&amp;Peril Adv19 1stAdd 11-15 0818</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-The '90s-Promise &amp; Peril, Adv 19, 1st Add,0833</SECOND>
<HEAD>$adv19</HEAD>
<HEAD>For Release Sunday, Nov. 19, and Thereafter</HEAD>
<HEAD>UNDATED: at the top.</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   In a two-year study that used mathematical models to project the
course of the plague, the Hudson Institute warned that acquired
immune deficiency syndrome is ``a catastrophe ... sweeping over
America.''
   The institute, a distinguished think tank, predicts that by the
end of the 1990s more than 1.5 million Americans will have died of
AIDS and that, unless new tactics are used, up to 14.5 million
Americans will be infected with the AIDS virus by 2002.
   ``Nothing can totally avert this coming catastrophe,'' the study
says. ``Medical science can ease the suffering and slow the
progression of the disease, but no `cure' is on the horizon. ...
Unchecked, AIDS will kill more Americans in the next decade than
have died in combat in all of the nation's wars.''
   AIDS has peaked in the homosexual community and is rampant among
people who inject drugs, but the study forecast that in the 1990s
the disease will surge among heterosexuals, becoming an
overwhelming plague of the young and poor.
   The study says that only through a major change in society's
sexual patterns is there hope of reducing the toll of AIDS, which
is caused by a virus spread mostly through sexual intercourse.
   Thus, AIDS, as with many other problems of the 1990s, can be
controlled by human will.
   Despite the litany of concerns for the new decade, the 1990s
also offer great promise.
   In medicine, scientists are beginning to crack the genetic code
and learn how to change the fundamental blueprint of life.
   Plant genes are being manipulated to improve yield and fight
insects and disease, promising more food untainted by pesticides in
the new decade.
   The complex human genome _ the complete set of genes _ also is
being mapped, and scientists are already finding specific genes
that cause or facilitate disease. Eventually, though probably
beyond the 1990s, medicine hopes to replace the defective genes of
illness with the normal genes of health.
   Improved techniques and new drugs even now in testing will
enable doctors in the 1990s to transplant virtually any organ and
to even more vigorously combat heart disease and cancer, ancient
killers already in retreat.
   A revolution in materials science is under way and is sure to
accelerate into the 1990s. Lightweight but strong plastics and
ceramics are replacing metals in airplanes, cars and construction.
Superconducters, composites that can carry electricity without
resistance, are being developed at laboratories worldwide, offering
the promise of more efficient power transmission, faster computers
and high-speed rail transport.
   In electronics, a new wave of scientists matured in the
generation of the silicon chip will apply their expertise to an
already flourishing field. They'll find new uses for the smart
chip, integrating it even more thoroughly into household gadgets,
automobiles and educational tools. Some experts predict that
personal computers will perform hundreds of new jobs and become as
essential to the home of the 1990s as the telephone.
   Supercomputers are being teamed with new mathematics to allow
scientists to model even the most complex and random events. This
may hold the key to a fundamental understanding of the weather, of
earthquakes and of economic trends. How does smoke from a stack in
Pittsburgh affect the weather in New Zealand? What does a change in
ocean currents near Peru mean to wheat harvests in Kansas? The
improved science of math modeling may yield answers in the 1990s.
   America's decade in space centers on construction of space
station Freedom, an orbiting laboratory that will give astronauts a
permanent place to experiment in weightlessness and to test systems
for a prospective voyage to Mars in the next century.
   Building the station still is an uncertainty, depending on the
determination of Congress. But the 1990s will still witness
American space spectaculars.
   Two space probes, Magellan and Galileo, are already on their way
to Venus and Jupiter, carrying new, more sophisticated instruments
to explore those distant worlds. In 1992, another probe will be
sent to Mars. The Hubble telescope, to be launched next year, will
be able to study star galaxies 14 billion light years away, looking
farther back in time than ever before was possible.
   Wise use of promising technologies can help overcome many of the
obvious problems of the 1990s, but Cornish said an international
effort, as never before, will be necessary.
   ``There are solutions for any of the problems, but not quick,
simple and easy solutions,'' he said. ``They require international
cooperation and we don't know yet how to get international
cooperation.
   ``We (human beings) are getting better at it,'' he added. ``And
I think there are good reasons for optimism for the future.''
   But that future, he said, may well turn, like a jeweled hinge,
on decisions made in the decade of the 1990s.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv Sunday, Nov. 19, and Thereafter</NOTE>
</DOC>
