ID: 123	RANK: 73	SCORE: 2.797967
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910621-0177
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910621-0177.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Letters to the Editor:
   Past Fanciful Flights
   Led Us to the Future
</HL>
<DATE>
06/21/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A11
</SO>
<LP>
   How pleasant it was to find a mathematics book reviewed in
your paper ("Beyond Numeracy," by John Allen Paulos, Leisure
&amp; Arts, May 22). While Jim Holt, the "erstwhile
mathematician" who reviewed the book, was for the most part
understanding and thoughtful, some of his comments do not
contribute positively. He loses touch completely in his
remark, "Real mathematics has almost nothing to do with the
world of affairs. The theory of numbers, for example, is . .
. supremely useless."
   Perhaps he should read "Industry Chafes at Limits on
Encryption Exports" in the same issue of the Journal. As that
article explains, encryption is achieved by "means of
mathematical formulas worked out with lightning quickness by
computers." And what branch of mathematics led to these
encryption formulas that so concern industry? Just that
"supremely useless" theory of numbers Mr. Holt speaks of.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   As an erstwhile mathematician myself, I learned long ago
that one cannot reject any mathematics as permanently
useless. Include here the works of Georg Cantor, whom Mr.
Holt seems not to appreciate. Fanciful flights of
mathematical imagination in the past, added to needs and
experiences that arose subsequently, have assisted us no end
in creating and developing our technology and many other
aspects of our culture. If all teachers of mathematics, and a
few well-placed media specialists, realized and understood
this, Mr. Holt would not have to remind us that "`school
mathematics' is extremely dull and is usually taught in the
most unimaginative possible way." Nor would so many media
attempts to present mathematical topics bring those same
words to mind.
   Robert E. Gaskell
   Monterey, Calif.
   ---
   Mr. Holt thinks the Pythagoreans "slightly mad," and cites
as apparent evidence that they thought it "sinful to eat
beans."
   It's a pity he didn't get beyond cultural illiteracy. A
common-enough medical problem in Mediterranean countries is
"favism," a genetic disorder of red blood cells. For
individuals with favism, fava beans, a not unknown commodity
even today in the Mediterranean region, could precipitate a
life-threatening dissolution of red blood cells. Since the
usual treatment is supporting kidney function and treating
infection, the simple prevention of the disease by
proscribing beans seems eminently sensible.
   R. Ivan Zbaraschuk, M.D.
   Puyallup, Wash.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
