ID: 123	RANK: 74	SCORE: 2.789804
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911018-0133
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911018-0133.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Mathematicians Race to Develop
   New Kinds of Trading Instruments
   ----
   By Craig Torres
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
10/18/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C1
</SO>
<CO>
   IBM
</CO>
<MS>
FINANCIAL (FIN)
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)
COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)
FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)
SECURITIES (SCR)
STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
</IN>
<NS>
BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)
FOREIGN EXCHANGE (FRX)
STOCK &amp; OTHER MARKET NEWS (STK)
SCIENCE &amp; TECHNOLOGY (SCN)
</NS>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   YORKTOWN HEIGHTS, N.Y. -- From the quiet cubicles at
International Business Machines Corp.'s central research
facility here to secretive research labs inside brokerage
firms, mathematicians are working on Wall Street's computer
revolution, part two.
   Over the past five years, Wall Street has spent enormously
to upgrade its computing horsepower. Now, researchers at IBM
and major securities firms are trying to harness that
computing muscle with a new generation of "analytics," or
sophisticated mathematical computer models that identify
hundreds of never-before-imagined trades in stocks, bonds,
and currencies.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "This trend is in its infancy," says Ron Dembo, president
of Algorithmics Inc., a Toronto concern that develops
mathematical systems for securities trading. He explains:
"Mathematics is being applied to finance because the big
money is no longer in using computers as fast calculators,
but as machines to create new trading opportunities."
   For example, Mr. Dembo's computers recently created a
synthetic option on the benchmark Nikkei Index of 225
Japanese stocks. Produced by the computer out of a
combination of Nikkei stock-index futures and exchange-traded
stock-index options, the synthetic Nikkei option cost less
than the real thing; this allowed traders at a Canadian
investment bank to make $500,000 on a single trade.
   Myron Scholes, who developed the widely used Black-Scholes
option pricing model in 1973 with Fischer Black, says
high-powered computers have extended the application of his
model greatly. "The people who don't have these {analytics}
are going to be relatively obsolete," says Mr. Scholes, who
recently joined Salomon Brothers Inc.'s high-tech bond
trading department as a managing director. (He is also a
professor of finance at Stanford University.)
   For years, Wall Street's computers were used for little
more than fast accounting programs, known as spreadsheets.
Now, some Wall Street firms are using mathematical formulas
that imitate how traders think about and look at markets --
but several hundred times faster than humans can. The next
generation of analytics, in development at IBM and other
research labs, seeks to apply elaborate financial theories --
such as the "Markowitz mean variance model," for instance --
to markets for up-to-the-minute use.
   The development of analytics is one of the most closely
guarded secrets inside Wall Street firms. Competition for
clients has never been more intense; the only monopoly
available to Wall Street now may be the proprietary
mathematics of analytical systems that ferret out profit
opportunities in markets that are ruthlessly efficient.
   "The first thing is figuring out what the right math is,
and the second thing is how to implement it on a computer,"
says Ramy Goldstein, managing director at UBS Securities Inc.
The mathematical formulas that can find a simple route
through a complex set of securities prices are "subject to
shrouds of secrecy," he says.
   The hot new trading math is creating investment
opportunities that never existed before. For example, Mr.
Goldstein recently created a 2-year option that gives an
investor the right to buy the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock
index at its lowest point of 1991 in Swiss francs. "Without
analytics, we could not devise such products," he says.
   So closely guarded are the mathematics at O'Connor &amp;
Associates, a Chicago futures and options trading firm, that
clients and even family members are barred from the trading
floor at O'Connor's headquarters. Visitors can observe the
firm at work only from a catwalk 20 feet above the trading
floor. An O'Connor executive says the firm has about 40
people developing analytical software for trading purposes,
and about 100 traders using these systems.
   Many big Wall Street investment banks, such as Morgan
Stanley &amp; Co. and Salomon Brothers Inc., develop their
high-tech trading systems in-house behind closed doors.
Salomon has about 35 software experts developing trading
programs. Morgan Stanley has 85 professionals working on
mathematical trading systems for the stock, bond and
commodity markets.
   Other Wall Street firms seek out computer specialists at
computer companies such as IBM, which has access to enormous
computer power and many top mathematicians. For several
years, IBM has invited Wall Street firms to present the
computer giant with complex financial questions that IBM's
T.J. Watson Research Center here might solve, free of charge.
   Shmuel Winograd, director of the IBM's mathematical
sciences department at the Watson lab, says he is bound by
confidentiality agreements that prohibit him from naming the
two investment banks with whom he is currently working.
   But Mr. Winograd provides a glimpse at IBM's front-burner
projects, which could be the next generation of mathematical
trading programs.
   Anticipating a constant 24-hour market for stocks, bonds
and currencies at some point in the future, Mr. Winograd and
an unidentified Wall Street firm have been working on a
mathematical model for two years that will scan the trading
pattern of a stock or bond around the world and around the
clock.
   "Time shouldn't be measured by how the clock ticks, but by
the level of {trading} activity," says Mr. Winograd,
asserting that a 9:30 a.m. to 4 p.m. Eastern time trading day
for a stock such as IBM is essentially a false concept.
Stocks, currencies and bonds frequently trade at all hours in
different world markets, he says. By developing a model that
uses trading activity as a measure of time, Mr. Winograd
hopes to create a new vantage point for spotting price
trends.
   Elsewhere, IBM is working on a mathematical model that
will allow investors to assemble hundreds of portfolios in
seconds that have various shadings of investment risk and
reward.
   But no matter how refined the mathematical models Wall
Street researchers build, the markets often prove elusive.
Unlike physics, Mr. Winograd notes, finance has very few
basic laws. "Economics hasn't had its Newton or its
Einstein," he says. "Basic statistical behavior is still in
question. Human beings are not molecules."
   But that's precisely why Wall Street firms seek out
mathematicians such as Messrs. Winograd and Dembo. Since
markets are run by humans, there will always be imperfections
that can be turned into profits. Or, in Mr. Winograd's words,
"that's why you can make tons of money; or lose tons of
money."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
