ID: 123	RANK: 75	SCORE: 2.766757
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910128-0169
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910128-0169.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Black Culture, the Latin Way
   ----
   By Edward C. Hoerr
</HL>
<DATE>
01/28/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10
</SO>
<LP>
   How to infuse a sense of pride and cultural identity in
younger minority students admittedly is a tough question, but
Beloit College has what we think are some unusual answers to
it: Pliny, Cicero, Homer, Euclid.
   This different -- possibly unique -- approach is rooted in
the classics and knowledge of ancient civilizations. It is
part of a larger, voluntary program called Help Yourself, now
in its third year of involving minority children ages nine to
13. Two afternoons a week at the end of their regular public
school hours and on Saturday mornings, these youngsters from
the city of Beloit gather on campus for a "trip" back in time
to the second century and the Egyptian city of Alexandria.
They travel with certified passports. And they speak Latin.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "Meet Us in Alexandria" is a curriculum based on the
Aristotelian premise that the best learning takes place when
all the senses are occupied. Add to this the Greek
observation that all knowledge begins in wonder, and you have
nearly 70 children whose curiosities are thoroughly aroused
in a relaxed and enjoyable context.
   No, they're not studying the Three R's (they've spent all
day in school doing that) or even African-American history.
Instead, they gain a sense of cultural identity and history
by:
   -- Speaking Latin, to learn the fundamentals of language
structure and critical thinking.
   -- Studying the development of philosophies, arts and
sciences as these emerged in Alexandria.
   -- Developing geographic skills through the use of maps,
both ancient and modern.
   -- Conducting scientific experiments derived from
Alexandrian technological achievements.
   -- Learning and practicing basic ethical precepts embodied
in four Alexandrian "reguli," or rules --
                                                                                                       

   Act with a kind heart and love what is good.
   Be of help to all.
   Learn to love truth.
   To do what is right is difficult.
                                                                                                       

   Why does Beloit focus its innovative program on ancient
Alexandria, the city of the wondrous lighthouse? In the days
of the Roman Empire, all trade between East and West passed
through Alexandria, a Greek city governed by the Egyptian
Ptolemaic kings. It was the wealthiest, most learned, most
diverse city of its time. People from all nations, ethnic
groups and religions lived and worked together in Alexandria:
Ethiopians, Greeks, Egyptians, Scythians (Slavs), Chinese,
Indians and Hebrews. Great thinkers such as Euclid and Philo
helped make Alexandria a center of scientific, medical,
philosophical and theological learning, drawing on many
intellectual, religious, ethnic and political traditions. In
short, Alexandria can be seen as a model for the cooperative
enterprise of diverse peoples.
   To hold the children's interest, Beloit College's John
Wyatt, professor of classics, and Elizabeth Tardola, program
instructor, have written a continuing narrative about the
adventures of a black, second century Ethiopian family. Their
life story, which unfolds when an ancient scroll comes to
light in modern-day America, is the vehicle that carries all
the various elements of this classical curriculum. This story
line is the only thing "fictional" about this unusual
program, which is firmly based on the principle of historical
accuracy.
   "What we're doing," says Ms. Tardola, "is presenting a
picture not only of black history, but of integrated history,
in which the blacks contributed to it on an egalitarian
basis."
   To have fun while further honing their Latin skills, the
children play word games with team competition (for one they
operate in the manner of Sherlock Holmes to "crack the code"
of the various parts of speech in Latin). They present plays
in Latin, and every May at Beloit College's commencement
exercises they sing several songs -- in Latin, of course --
to the delight of the assembled throng.
   Beloit's creative program for minority children is
producing noticeable results in short order. It quickly
awakens a sense of cultural identity, but it also fosters
crosscultural understanding and cooperation. And it doesn't
stop there. As the prospectus states: "To get to know
Alexandria is to get to know the use of the mind."
   ---
   Mr. Hoerr is interim president of Beloit College in
Beloit, Wis.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
