ID: 123	RANK: 83	SCORE: 2.679928
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910627-0153
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910627-0153.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Macroeconomics: The Enemy Within
   ----
   By Jude Wanniski
</HL>
<DATE>
06/27/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14
</SO>
<CO>
   TAXES
</CO>
<IN>
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
</IN>
<NS>
TAXES, ISSUES, LEGISLATION, ASSISTANCE, EVASION (TAX)
</NS>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Here we are in the last decade of the 20th century, the
Cold War behind us, Communism a failed experiment, and yet
around the world we see almost nothing but economic distress.
   Why is the U.S. in recession? Why are Canada, England,
Australia and Sweden in recession? Most of Europe is suddenly
struggling to stay on a growth track. Japan's stock market is
in steady retreat and its dizzy economic growth has slowed.
And how is it that so much poverty, unemployment, inflation
and debt plague the Third World countries of Asia, Africa and
Latin America?
</LP>
<TEXT>
   These questions lead to a larger one: With so many Nobel
laureates in economic science handed out in Stockholm in the
past generation, why does the economics profession have so
little to show for its skills? Reading these lines, these
distinguished gentlemen will huff, "These misfortunes
occurred because my counsel was not heeded." Regrettably, the
opposite is true: All this misery befell the nations of the
world precisely because they acted according to the advice of
the economics profession.
   Conventional macroeconomics is the most discredited branch
of the profession. Harvard's N. Gregory Mankiw apologized for
the macro model in a recent essay in "The Journal of Economic
Literature" by comparison to astronomy: "At the time it was
proposed and for many years thereafter, the Copernican system
did not work as well as the Ptolemaic system {showing the sun
orbiting the Earth.} For predicting the positions of the
planets, the Ptolemaic system was superior . . . . If you had
been an applied astronomer, you would have continued to use
the Ptolemaic system."
   Yet the influence of macroeconomics dominates the
policy-making of a majority of the world's governments.
American economic policy is now fettered to the macro model,
as surely as Marx's theory guided the Soviet Gosplan. As a
result of the budget agreement between the Bush
administration and the Democratic Congress, the macro
computers actually control policy. A tax rate can't be
reduced unless the computers predict positive revenue
effects. The most damaging error results from the computer
assessment of the president's proposal to cut the
capital-gains tax.
   The same model is responsible for most of the economic
misery in the Third World, thanks to the International
Monetary Fund. Faced with galloping inflation and collapsed
tax revenues, the IMF's macro model recommends devaluations
and tax hikes to reduce demand. In every case, these measures
have increased inflation and lowered tax revenues, as
individuals defy government attempts to steal their savings
and confiscate their income.
   Macroeconomics founders upon a grotesquely elitist
premise, namely that manipulation of aggregate demand or
money supply or some other "macro" variable can homogenize
the behavior of millions of individuals. The economics
profession, liberal and conservative, peddles this elitism
under the guise of "science." If we assume that individual
human beings behave as uniformly as hydrogen molecules, we
can write mathematical equations describing an economy. The
academic economics curriculum has become as mathematical as
the physics department. The further away economics strays
from reality, the better it can be sold as "scientifically
precise." We have been beguiled by the mirage of scientific
surety, giving up in exchange the free exercise of economic
policy.
   Throughout the past few centuries, up until the late
1940s, economics was thought to be, at best, a behavioral
science, no more precise than psychology or political
science. Indeed, men and women who practiced it thought of
themselves as "political economists," the two disciplines
inextricably linked. They could only guess at how human
beings would react under different economic circumstances
triggered by various political events.
   By liberating themselves from political science,
economists were free to convert economic behavior to
mathematical notation. In the 1940s, John Maynard Keynes's
Marxist students at Cambridge University attempted to deal
with the mathematician John von Neumann's proof that no
mathematical model could cope with innovation. Changing
technology, von Neumann proved, would collapse any possible
system of equations. Common sense tells us the same thing:
How does a mathematical model of vacuum-tube production
predict the future output of micro-chips?
   The economics profession, though, turned von Neumann's
argument inside out, and excluded consideration of innovation
in order to promote their mathematical model. In the early
1950s, a young American still in his Marxist phase, Lawrence
Klein, refined this work into the first econometric model of
the U.S. economy, for which he won the 1980 Nobel Prize. Mr.
Klein's work provided the foundation for Wharton's
econometric model, and altered the outlook of the economics
profession ever after.
   By treating individuals like identical hydrogen molecules,
macro models crank out policies that manipulate demand, while
destroying individual incentives to produce. Relying on their
equations, economists in the early 1970s confidently asserted
that the dollar could be devalued with predictable,
beneficial results. If the dollar could buy fewer Japanese
yen, the U.S. would import less. If the yen could buy more
dollars, Japan would import more from the U.S. Almost without
exception, liberal and conservative Ph.D. economists agreed
on the general outcome. In 1971, President Nixon was
persuaded to end the dollar's gold guarantee in order to
permit devaluation.
   People, though, are not hydrogen molecules. They did not
sit still in accordance with the economic assumptions built
into the computers, passively accepting the government's
manipulation of the currency. As they saw their hard-earned
dollars and dollar assets losing purchasing power against
gold and foreign exchange, they shed dollars for gold and
foreign exchange. The "velocity" of dollars, which the
monetarists assumed would remain constant, increased
dramatically as citizens tried to get rid of them in favor of
more reliable assets. None of the gains promised by the
economists was realized in the inflation that followed. The
world's central banks are now groping their way back to
monetary stability.
   Another massive failure of the econometric models is at
the heart of the current U.S. recession. This is because the
econometricians, unable to convert "risk-taking" and
"innovation" to mathematical notation, banish them from their
equations. Economic growth, though, results from individual
initiative and innovation. The U.S. now subjects policies
designed to foster innovation to computer models that
explicitly exclude innovation from consideration.While the
capital gains tax is not the only example, it is surely a
clear one.
   A lower capital-gains tax increases the after-tax reward
for risk-taking and innovation. The federal tax burden has
increased enormously during the past 20 years of inflation
and, in a micro-economic (or supply-side) analysis, has been
smothering economic growth and will continue to do so.
Cutting the rate to 15% and eliminating it entirely after a
three-year holding period would have dramatic effects on
economic growth and increase state and local revenues as well
as federal revenues. It would also revive American
competitiveness with Japan, where capital gains have been
taxed little or not at all.
   Yet when the computers are asked what happens to economic
growth with a lower capital-gains tax, they answer: "Not
much." They have been programmed to ignore the effects of
risk-taking and innovation.
   Perhaps some day a brilliant macroeconomist will find a
way to capture the divine, infinite variability of human
behavior in mathematical notation. We might then consider
turning policy making in the world economy over to the
computers. Until that day, they are a menace to us all. They
are the enemy within.
   ---
   Mr. Wanniski is president of Polyconomics, in Morristown,
N.J.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
