ID: 123	RANK: 87	SCORE: 2.630170
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910529-0124
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910529-0124.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Technology &amp; Medicine:
   Science and Math
   Education in U.S.
   Fails to Make Grade
   ---
   Study Finds Less Than 50%
   Of High-School Students
   Take Advanced Algebra
   ----
   By Bob Davis
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
05/29/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B2
</SO>
<GV>
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)
</GV>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- Despite a decade of federal and state
efforts to improve science and math education, more than half
of U.S. public high-school students still don't take
chemistry or advanced algebra before graduation.
   A report by the Council of Chief State School Officers
sketched a dismal portrait of science and math education.
About half the high-school teachers didn't major in the
subjects they teach, the report said. And some of the states
that have made publicized efforts to reform science and math
education have undercut those efforts by letting students
take simple courses to satisfy additional graduation
requirements.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Funded by the National Science Foundation, the report
found wide disparities in the 37 states and the District of
Columbia that it surveyed. Overall, 49% of public high-school
students take advanced algebra before graduating, the report
said, with the ratio ranging from 65% in Montana to 29% in
Wyoming. Similarly, about 45% of public high-school students
take chemistry before graduating, with the ratio ranging from
62% in Connecticut to 26% in Idaho. Among all high-school-age
Americans, the percentages are even lower because the survey
accounted only for high-school graduates, not dropouts.
   Education theorists consider chemistry and advanced
algebra to be part of the minimum curriculum students must
take as preparation for college-level science and engineering
courses. Luther Williams, the National Science Foundation's
associate director for education, contends that advanced
algebra teaches problem-solving skills that are crucial for
workers in a high-tech economy. He calls it the "gatekeeper
to the modern workforce."
   Since 1982, the percentage of students taking those
courses has risen, but not at nearly the speed educators
would like. In 1982, 35% of high-school students took
advanced algebra, while 31% took chemistry. The report didn't
contain any recommendations, but it is clear that the authors
and sponsors believe that all high-school students should
take those two courses as part of general strengthening of
high-school education.
   But the report showed that simply requiring more courses
for graduation wouldn't solve the problem. Arkansas, for
instance, is one of the states with the toughest graduation
requirements. But the state lets students fulfill science and
math requirements by taking introductory courses. As a
result, the state ranks last in the percentage of high-school
students taking upper-level science courses and near the
bottom in the percentage of students taking upper-level math
courses.
   The ability of some states to do well is baffling.
Consider North Dakota. Only 28% of the math teachers in North
Dakota majored in math, and 61% of the science teachers
majored in science. The state has more high schools -- 225 --
than it does chemistry or physics teachers. Nevertheless,
North Dakota is among the top 10 states in the percentage of
students taking advanced algebra, upper-level math courses,
chemistry and upper-level science courses.
   Neither the report nor the educators assembled to present
the report could explain why.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
