ID: 123	RANK: 93	SCORE: 2.601851
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910403-0110
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910403-0110.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
   The Decadent Decline of Ancient Greece
   ----
   By Donald Lyons
</HL>
<DATE>
04/03/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A18
</SO>
<LP>
   Greece's golden time had been Periclean Athens, midwife of
drama, philosophy, democracy and the Parthenon. But this
world slumped to an end with Alexander's death in 323 B.C.;
his generals founded military monarchies that were eventually
swallowed by Rome. The last successor monarch, Cleopatra, was
not defeated until 31 B.C.
   Gazing at these centuries, Peter Green, professor of
classics at the University of Texas at Austin, finds them not
only a brutal and tawdry comedown from the Parthenon but full
of parallels to our own desperate days. In his exhaustive,
erudite and unfailingly readable tome, "Alexander to Actium:
The Historical Evolution of the Hellenistic Age" (University
of California Press, 970 pages, $45), Mr. Green covers the
waterfront: history, politics, literature, art, philosophy,
religion, science, medicine, astrology.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The actual narrative history, a ceaseless tangle of
armadas and blockades and sieges and betrayals, is the least
engaging element. More important is the growth of the huge
conurbations at Alexandria and Antioch and Pergamon,
"governmental ghettos for a ruling elite" where the bloated
courts held sway and the pathologies of urbanism first took
hold. In Mr. Green's view, the Greeks were no selfless
missionaries of Hellenism but forerunners of the racist Raj,
oppressing native Egyptians and Asiatics. It all amounted to
"a rape of the East," he writes. The Greek gymnasium was but
"an exclusive club . . . designed to keep out undesirables .
. ." "Modern parallels suggest themselves," writes Mr. Green,
who is never able to say no to such a suggestion.
   In fact, his many gloomy, head-shaking comparisons to the
ills of today add a donnish, stuffy note to an already
pessimistic book. The outstanding writers of the time seem to
him as meretricious as the overt propaganda. Meander produced
"second-rate hackwork . . . escapism . . . a not-unfamiliar
phenomenon today." The mythological poet Callimachus is "at
once pretentious and faintly distasteful, a literary
exhibitionist with an unpleasant groveling streak about him,
a sycophant." The pastoral poet Theocritus is seen as an
early exponent of the bored urbanite daydreaming about a
make-believe countryside.
   The art of the times mirrors its sicknesses. Statues of
dying Gauls are "the beginning of that long, frequently
disastrous, at times ridiculous obsession with earthy,
primitive, peasant values that has bedeviled urban
intellectuals down the ages." Behind monumental sculptures
like the Altar of Pergamon lurk not the gods of the
Parthenon, but "a world of court patronage and academic
scribblers, of powerful merchant bankers . . ." and a
foretaste of the mobs of the Roman Coliseum. In the period's
portrait busts (handsomely illustrated) he finds "symptoms of
a deep and ultimately self-destructive malaise." One bronze
head that has been identified as a prince or a thinker looks
to Mr. Green's wry eyes like "a rentier whose father made his
millions in the slave trade."
   What moral or religious beliefs sustained these rentiers,
robber barons and warlords? Official religion degenerated in
Hellenistic times into the preposterous and cynical
deification of local monarchs. On the popular level there was
a poisonous chaos of spells and prostration before the
newfangled Mother Goddess Isis.
   New systems of thought and conduct flourished. There was
Cynicism, a facile and superficial rejection of establishment
values, mere "intellectual moonshine" -- an early example of
counterculture smoothly co-opted. Epicurus was a tyrannical
guru halfway between Big Brother and Sun Myung Moon; his
vaunted ideal of apolitical pleasure-seeking presupposed a
rentier class with time for "endowed leisure." As for
Stoicism, with its fundamental teaching that the way of the
world makes sense, "it was the most powerful and subtle
instrument of self-perpetuation that the Hellenistic ruling
class ever conceived." One and all, these philosophies strike
Mr. Green as designer drugs to tranquilize the subjects of
the warlords.
   Greek intellectuals disdained the manual and and the
experimental, and this attitude doomed Greek science to the
tyranny of often bizarrely ignorant theory. Technology was
despised and languished. Economics -- dominated, of course,
by languid intellectuals -- wasted its time fussing about
minute transactions and never conceptualized a market
economy. The role of trade was misunderstood; royal display
was mistaken for economic health.
   So Mr. Green's enormous mosaic is of a piece in judgment
as in erudition. I found him freshest on such subjects as
economics and science. But with very few exceptions, Mr.
Green is numbingly reductive; words like "rentier" and
"escapist" and "imperialist" fall like wet snow over the
landscape, obliterating outlines. It is as if the whole 18th
century of Swift and Pope, Johnson and Fielding was
pronounced a Whig/Tory fraud in contrast to the high old
times of Shakespeare. Mr. Green is, in fact, in thrall to
what used to be called "vulgar Marxism" -- the notion that
everything cultural is but a function of the income of its
makers and consumers.
   So he has finally elaborated a 1930s interpretation of the
years 323 B.C.-31 B.C. But despite these old-fashioned
attitudes, Mr. Green has painted a canvas that is brilliant,
crowded and animated -- a bustle of animated life.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
