ID: 123	RANK: 94	SCORE: 2.585454
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910422-0002
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910422-0002.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Hate Winter? Here's
   A Scientist's Answer:
   Blow Up the Moon
   ---
   Prof. Abian Says It's Time
   To Rethink the Cosmos;
   Others Say That's Lunacy
   ----
   By Judith Valente
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
04/22/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<IN>
ENVIRONMENT (ENV)
</IN>
<LP>
   AMES, Iowa -- Oh, sure, the moon seems nice enough. It
illuminates dark nights, makes a wonderful backdrop for
lovers and has inspired some fine poetry. "What is there in
thee, Moon, that thou shouldst move my heart so potently?"
pondered Keats.
   But there's a definite dark side to the moon, too, says an
Iowa State University mathematics professor named Alexander
Abian, and he's not just talking about werewolves. According
to the professor, the moon is the source of lousy weather on
Earth. So, he says, we should blow it up.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   That's right. Blow it up. If the moon's a balloon, we
should pop it. No more moon over Miami. No more moonlight
serenade. No more moon hitting your eye like a big pizza pie.
   Clearly, there's no amore lost between Prof. Abian and the
moon. He says he's making this suggestion with the utmost
gravity. In fact, he says that's exactly the problem. The
moon, he says, exerts a pull on earth that helps tilt the
globe on a 23-degree axis. That, in turn, alters the angle
that rays from the sun hit earth, causing scorching summers
in one part of the world and stormy winters in another. If
the moon were gone, earth would rotate more evenly, the sun
would warm the planet more evenly and the world would bask in
what Prof. Abian calls "eternal spring."
   Mr. Abian is no lunatic. He's a respected 68-year-old
mathematician who has three theorems named after him,
including Abian's Order Relation and Orthogonal Completions
for Reduced Rings. He has taught at Iowa State for 24 years
and has published more than 200 papers. He says it's time to
question the existing order of the solar system and wants
scientists to start devising computer models on how to
rearrange the universe.
   "From the earliest traces of primate fossils some 70
million years ago, no one, but no one, has ever raised the
finger of defiance to the celestial organization," he says.
"We have been like blind slaves obediently being rotated
without our consent." A reduction of the mass of the moon,
splitting the moon into two or more pieces or what he calls a
"controlled total elimination" of the moon would have
immediate effects on earth's weather, he says.
   How to accomplish this? Shoot the moon, quite literally.
Blast it with nuclear-powered rockets. The moon's distance
from earth, about 240,000 miles, would keep any nuclear
fallout from contaminating the planet, Prof. Abian says. Plus
it would make a great show for a few minutes.
   Wouldn't blowing up the moon melt the polar ice caps and
cause massive flooding? No, the professor says; ice at the
North and South Poles would simply melt more evenly. What
would happen to the tides, which the moon governs? They would
be "more predictable, with much less fluctuations," he says.
   And, most important, what about love? Prof. Abian brushes
off the notion that a moonless earth would be a less romantic
one. "In some cultures, the moon is associated with ugliness
and plainness," he says. "In Russian, there is even an
expression: `To be as dull as the moon.'"
   Anyway, he says, once human beings learn the secrets to
rearranging the universe, scientists will be able to pluck
moons from other planets and bring them closer to earth --
but not so close that they interfere with weather. "To those
romantics, I say, `OK, you love the moon? I will give you
two.'"
   Outlandish as this may be, his ideas are actually sparking
interest in scientific circles. "The task seems to be
feasible and we have many reasons to take it up," beams Jan
Kadrnoska of the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences, one of
several foreign scientists who has written seeking more
information from Prof. Abian.
   But while scientists concede that Prof. Abian's "eternal
spring" theory may have some theoretical validity, they also
say it's a bad idea to fool Mother Nature. "We all know what
are the consequences of many other projects when a man tried
to intervene in the natural course of events," warns Soviet
Professor E.M. Drobyshevski. Still, Prof. Drobyshevski says
he would be willing to pursue Prof. Albian's ideas "with
great pleasure" because Soviets suffer some of the worst
winters on Earth.
   There are other problems, too. "I'd hate to write the
environmental impact statement on this one," says Bevan
French, a lunar expert at the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration and the author of a book all about the moon
called "The Moon Book."
   Mr. French thinks several aspects of Prof. Abian's
proposal are a bit out of this world. He disputes whether the
technology exists to eliminate even a portion of the moon.
Even if it did exist, it would first have to be tested
somewhere closer to home, he says, "and I don't think the
people on earth would like that much."
   And what if a large chunk of the moon ending up hitting
earth, Mr. French asks. "Sixty-five million years ago, a mere
asteroid hit the earth and wiped out the whole dinosaur
population," he notes.
   Not only that, but Lowell Smith, a senior scientist with
the Environmental Protection Agency, worries that the use of
nuclear force to blow up parts of the moon would probably
violate treaties between the U.S. and the Soviets.
   Environmentalists are also concerned about what would
happen to living things such as the poor Palolo worms of the
South Pacific. The worms rise from the ground to mate only
during full moons in October and November. And what about the
grunions, those sardine-shaped fish that live in the seas off
California? They spawn their eggs on sandy beaches during
certain lunar cycles.
   Prof. Abian, who has also taught at Oxford and Ohio State,
dismisses such concerns. "It has never been proven that our
life on earth depends on the presence of the moon," he says
with an agitated wave of the hand.
   An intense man with a half-moon of wispy white hair, Prof.
Abian is no stranger to contrariness. He once considered a
career as a classical pianist, but refused to play musical
pieces the way their composers intended. "If a passage called
for "pianissimo" {very soft}, I'd want to play it
"fortissimo" {very loud}. I knew I'd never succeed."
   But the reaction to his proposal, from an angry public
that seems positively moonstruck, eclipsed anything he could
imagine. He first published his ideas in Abstracts of the
American Mathematical Society. Since then, he was interviewed
by a German television station and two London newspapers and
was featured in a supermarket tabloid with the front-page
headline: "Scientists Plot to Blow Up the Moon."
   Karen Clute, a teacher at Mound Elementary School in
Miamisburg, Ohio, took up the issue with her fourth graders
after reading about Prof. Abian's ideas in Omni, a science
magazine. Their overwhelming response: To the moon, Alice. "I
don't want to hurt your feelings, but the moon is by my
window every night. My little sister loves the moon and so do
I," Danielle Sugarman wrote to the professor.
   She also suggested that having nice weather all year long
could get a bit boring. "If a child was born and had never
seen snow in his or her life, how do you think they'd feel?"
she asked.
   But among older students -- Prof. Abian's -- the tide
seems to be turning in his direction. "His theory has been
widely misrepresented," says Paul Hertzel, a doctoral
student. "He's not simply suggesting 20th-century man blow up
the moon. He's saying don't be stagnant. Consider everything.
Question everything."
   Indeed, "they laughed at Galileo and Copernicus in their
day too," Prof. Abian likes to remind others. "The fact of
the matter is, the genius of mankind will not tolerate being
hostage to the earth's existing orbit forever."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
