ID: 158	RANK: 10	SCORE: 6.442961
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911113-0059
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911113-0059.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
   Lear in Iowa: Family Farm, Family Trouble
   ----
   By Julia Just
</HL>
<DATE>
11/13/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14
</SO>
<LP>
   Jane Smiley's latest novel, "A Thousand Acres" (Knopf, 352
pages, $23), is set in Zebulon County, Iowa, where the
farmland is "thicker, richer, more alive with a past and
future than any soil anywhere." The land is also layered with
long-festering intrigues among jealous neighbors, and poisons
blamed for miscarriages and cancer. This is the novel's
overriding metaphor -- a rich but deceptive topsoil yielding
up secrets of the buried past.
   Initially, the story's calm, inviting surface recalls Joan
Chase's lyrical portrait of a family farm in "During the
Reign of the Queen of Persia," as well as Ms. Smiley's own
previous works of fiction, with their almost uncannily
precise depictions of daily life. In her widely praised books
"The Age of Grief" and "The Greenlanders," Ms. Smiley made
the very ordinariness of things the most compelling substance
of her narratives. But "A Thousand Acres" turns out to be
closer in spirit to her ambitious recent novella, "Good
Will," in which seemingly innocent beginnings lead to dark
revelations and unexpected violence.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The novel, set in the late 1970s, is narrated by Ginny,
whose father, Larry Cook, owns the biggest and most
profitable farm around -- a thousand acres. Ginny is an
accommodating, even malleable, sort, although at 36 she has
been bitterly disappointed by a series of miscarriages with
her husband, Ty. She's appealingly levelheaded, but not
immune to deeper impulses; she confesses to harboring vague
desires, "secret, passionate wishes."
   While the youngest sister, Caroline, went to college and
became a tough-talking lawyer in Des Moines, Ginny and her
sister Rose stayed behind on the farm. It is soon apparent
why. After their mother died, when they were teenagers, their
father became an abusive tyrant who kept the entire family
under his thumb. Later, Rose will force Ginny to remember
just how abusive "Daddy" was; as time goes on, that word
comes to have chilling, Sylvia Plath-like overtones.
   When the father suddenly decides to cede the farm to his
three daughters, it brings the hidden past to the surface and
winds up setting each family member against the other,
irrevocably. Another catalyst is Jess Clark, a neighbor's
prodigal son, back from Canada, where he had been since
Vietnam. For a while, he's the answer to Ginny's "passionate
wishes" -- and he convinces her that the farm's runoff in the
groundwater is to blame for her miscarriages.
   Ms. Smiley can describe compounding strains in a marriage
better than anybody, and the confrontations between Ginny and
Ty -- quiet but devastating -- are among the best scenes in
the book. She's superb at depicting the surface effects of
feelings "too complicated . . . to name," the way trust can
"disappear into formality," and she plays off this life of
the emotions beautifully against the daily necessities of the
farm.
   Wonderfully evoked, too, are the pressures of keeping up
appearances in a small town. Ultimately, Ginny concludes,
putting the best face on things in front of the neighbors is
the "broken plank you are left with after the ship has gone
down." Still, as the sisters confront their old father and
his tainted bequest, the unending string of disasters that
follows seems more than strictly necessary, while the
characters' motivations sometimes hover on the outer edges of
plausibility.
   It's pretty clear early on to the reader, for example,
that the erratic old farmer is in the initial stages of
Alzheimer's disease, but Caroline never seems to figure it
out. This is overly convenient, since it's essential to the
story that she blame the rest of the family for everything
that happens. As for Ginny, our sympathetic companion, the
ever-present litany of her household chores ("I spent the
morning shampooing the carpet . . .") will eventually include
preparing a jar of poisoned sausage. We've come a long way
from the stewed pork chops and kitchen-table confidences that
open this book.
   Still, the novel's center holds firm. Its narrative
momentum is undeniable, as is the psychological truth (with
its deliberate nod to "Lear") underlying the mortal combat
between Larry Cook and his daughters, and among the newly
estranged sisters. Indeed, if the grim patriarch dominates
the first half of the book, Rose -- grabby and manipulative
and iron-willed -- dominates the second. Of all the other
illusions of past and future, Ginny's adoring love for Rose,
her conviction that they were a team "united" against their
father, proves the most traumatic to give up. It is a point
of no return, but also exhilarating:
   "The strongest feeling was that now I knew them all,"
Ginny says of her divided family. "Rather than feeling `not
myself,' I felt intensely, newly, more myself than ever
before." It is the beginning of a new life, far from the old
"ordered, hard-working world."
   As for the thousand-acre farm in Zebulon County, one
notices right away that Ms. Smiley's novel begins in 1979 --
on the brink of the Midwestern farm crisis, with its falling
land values and rising suicide rates. The timing is an apt
and melancholy touch -- as though Larry Cook foresaw it all,
and wanted no part of it.
   ---
   Ms. Just is on the editorial staff of the New York Review
of Books.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
