ID: 158	RANK: 41	SCORE: 5.144620
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910528-0097
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910528-0097.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Gnarlatious Novels: Lurid Thrillers for the Teen Set
   ----
   By Amy Gamerman
</HL>
<DATE>
05/28/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A20
</SO>
<LP>
   Christopher Pike is understandably edgy about seeing his
real name in print. When his true identity was revealed in a
trade magazine article several years ago, the results were
disastrous.
   "A bunch of kids found out where I lived and I had to
move," said Mr. Pike, the pseudonymous author of some 20
thrillers for teens. "It spread like a rumor where I was . .
. It got weird. I have very intense fans."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Thanks to novels such as "Slumber Party" and "Scavenger
Hunt," Mr. Pike, a 35-year-old former computer programmer who
took his nom de plume from the first captain of the Starship
Enterprise, has a cult following that would do any MTV rocker
or sitcom star proud. Some 100 fan letters choke his mailbox
each week.
   Mr. Pike is one of the unsung, un-Pulitzered celebrities
of today's literary scene, one of a handful of writers who
churn out wildly popular spooky tales and murder mysteries
tailored for teenagers.
   Teen thrillers are the biggest thing to happen to the
young-adult book market since Nancy Drew drove on the scene
in her blue roadster.
   Publishers are tight-lipped on the subject of sales. Mr.
Pike's publisher, Pocket Books, would reveal only that more
than two million copies of the highly popular writer's
paperbacks would be shipped to bookstores this year.
Apparently, a lot of them will sell: Teen thrillers make
regular appearances on the weekly best-seller lists
circulated by trade bookstores.
   Head for the young-adult section of any chain bookstore
and you'll see them: rows of luridly jacketed paperbacks with
titles such as "The Cheerleader" ("She would do anything to
be popular"), "Blind Date" ("It wasn't a date. It was a
nightmare"), and "Final Exam" ("If you fail . . . you'll just
die"). No teen-related stone is left unturned. "Prom Dress,"
reads the jagged orange title on one Lael Littke book, over
an eerily glowing white gown. "It's a dress to die for . . ."
   These books aren't Newbery Award contenders, but even
librarians find them hard to dismiss. "Well, my personal
philosophy is, if they're reading anything at all that's
wonderful," said Molly Kinney, a librarian with the
Miami-Dade Public Library system, who reviews young adult
thrillers for School Library Journal. "They're also a way to
get involved with something . . . evil without ever acting on
it."
   Certainly they don't get much more evil than Christopher
Pike, who is hailed as the Stephen King of teen fiction. Mr.
Pike's novels feature an assortment of stalkers, psychos and
killer co-eds that would make Nancy Drew's pageboy flip stand
on end. Take Alexa, the homicidal cheerleader and cocaine
fiend of "Die Softly":
   "She just knelt right in front of me, kind of like a
sacrifice," Alexa says, describing how she offed her ex-best
friend Lisa. "I brought the bat down on her head quickly. The
wood cracked -- so did her skull . . . The blood gushed over
her blond hair. It was much darker than I thought it would
be."
   If Mr. Pike's novels are gorier than most, they also boast
some of the more inventively sexy plots. In "Die Softly," an
amateur photographer sets up a camera in the girls' showers
to get shots of naked cheerleaders, only to end up with
photos of a murder. In "Remember Me," a vapid high school
co-ed returns from the dead to find out who pushed her off a
balcony at a party -- taking time out to spy on her boyfriend
with his new squeeze.
   "Teenagers are very fascinated by the subject of life
after death," Mr. Pike said. "I got very beautiful letters
from kids who say they were going to kill themselves before
they read that book."
   Despite his apparent hot line to the teen psyche, Mr. Pike
never set out to write for young adults. A college dropout,
he spent years writing science fiction that no one would
publish. Then his agent suggested he try his hand at a teen
thriller. "Slumber Party" -- about a group of girls stalked
by a killer on a ski weekend -- came out in 1985, and he
hasn't stopped writing thrillers since.
   "They kept offering me more money," Mr. Pike explained.
"But I enjoy it . . . teenage characters are so extreme."
   Nightmare-prone readers may find Mr. Pike's characters a
little too extreme: The evil Alexa kills the photographer
hero of "Die Softly" by forcing him to snort a lethal amount
of cocaine.
   Not all publishers permit this kind of brutality. "Nobody
actually dies in Scholastic thrillers," said Lenora Todaro, a
senior publicist for Scholastic. "People appear murdered, but
they usually show up at the end."
   Safe scares are part of the appeal of R.L. Stine. He draws
the 10-to-12-year-old crowd with his popular "Fear Street"
series -- set in the creepy town of Shadyside -- and with
novels such as "The Baby-Sitter" and "Beach Party." Although
they have their share of spooks and stalkers, these stories
are as safe as a roller-coaster ride in a kiddie amusement
park -- with more false alarms than a semester's worth of
fire drills.
   "With a hideous ear-shattering screech, something leaped
out of the darkness at them," ends one chapter of Mr. Stine's
"Party Summer," in which four teens are stranded in the
lonely Howling Wolf Inn. Scared? Don't worry. It's only a
bat.
   "Kids love the cliffhanger chapter endings," Mr. Stine
explained.
   Although he has written nearly 100 books for children --
including many joke books under the moniker Jovial Bob Stine
-- the 47-year-old author seems a little mystified by the
popularity of his 20-odd thrillers, which he now turns out
about once a month.
   "It's creepy," he said. "I ask kids all the time, `Why do
you read this stuff?' . . . I get letters saying, `I was
screaming so loud my parents came running into the room.' I
love that. It's being scared and being safe at the same
time."
   Mr. Stine's books are particularly teen-friendly because
he makes a serious effort to pepper them with current
Teenspeak gleaned from MTV and his 10-year-old son, Matthew.
   "For sure, dude. Gnarly," observes one of the characters
in "Party Summer." "Gnarlatious]" her ponytailed male admirer
responds.
   If Mr. Stine does firsthand linguistic research, at least
one teen thriller author claims to base her stories on
firsthand experience with the supernatural. "I had a haunted
childhood," said Richie Tankersley Cusick, author of seven
thrillers. "We did have a ghost in our house. He was there
for years. He was very mischievous . . . he would throw all
the Christmas ornaments in the middle of the floor."
   The evil-doers who haunt Ms. Cusick's fiction do more
damage than that. "Don't call for help," a blurb on the cover
of "The Lifeguard" warns. "He may just kill you." In fact,
this psycho in swim trunks just about ruins Kelsey's
vacation, leaving clumps of seaweed in her bedroom and the
odd dead body on the beach.
   But that's nothing next to the nasty surprise that the
heroine of "April Fools" finds in her mailbox: "The scream
she'd been holding back rose into her throat and stuck there,
the awful hideous thing in her hand looking back at her
beneath a smeared coating of mashed entrails. It was a head."
A doll's head, that is.
   In order to write such scary prose, it helps to be a
little bit spooked yourself. To get herself in the mood, Ms.
Cusick works at an antique rolltop desk that once belonged to
a funeral director (she thinks it may be haunted), as
soundtracks from horror movies play in the background.
   They help ward off the biggest nightmare of all. "When you
have writer's block it's good to put them on," Ms. Cusick
said. "I use them for inspiration."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
