ID: 158	RANK: 75	SCORE: 4.766510
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910426-0098
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910426-0098.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Virginia's Pension Plan Earmarks
   $100 Million for Futures Trading
   ----
   By Stanley W. Angrist
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
04/26/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C1
</SO>
<CO>
   LABOR
</CO>
<MS>
FINANCIAL (FIN)
</MS>
<IN>
COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)
MUTUAL AND MONEY-MARKET FUNDS (FND)
SECURITIES (SCR)
</IN>
<NS>
COMMODITIES MARKET (CMD)
MUTUAL FUNDS (FND)
LABOR, PERSONNEL ISSUES, TRENDS, MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES (LAB)
</NS>
<RE>
VIRGINIA (VA)
</RE>
<LP>
   The $12.5 billion Virginia Retirement System is allocating
$100 million to trade in commodity markets, beginning next
month.
   It's believed to be one of the largest amounts ever
committed to futures by a public employee pension fund,
though a few other such funds have experimented with
commodity trading.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   People familiar with the Virginia system's move say that,
depending on how initial commodity trades turn out, the
pension fund might eventually place as much as 5% of its
assets -- a whopping $625 million -- in the futures markets.
   John McLaren, director of alternative investments for the
retirement system, said any increase would require approval
of the pension fund's directors.
   Pension funds that invest in futures are in a distinct
minority, as most pension-fund trustees still consider
commodities to be too risky for retirees' money. In addition,
laws in many states restrict public employee pension funds to
making only certain types of investments, which most often
exclude commodities.
   The Virginia system, however, has been one of the most
adventuresome state retirement funds in the country. In
addition to its planned foray into commodities, the fund has
been one of the first to use short-sale stock strategies.
Short sales involve selling borrowed shares of stock
expecting the share prices to decline, after which they can
be replaced at a profit.
   The Virginia Retirement System has been studying
futures-market trading for more than two years, according to
Mark Finn, chairman of the investment committee. Mr. Finn,
president of a small money-management firm in Virginia Beach,
said it wasn't prospects of higher returns that prompted a
serious look at futures. Rather, he said, it was "the ability
to diversify in an uncertain world." The system's studies
showed that adding futures to its big investment portfolio
would provide an "incremental increase in returns while
lowering {portfolio}-risk," he said.
   The retirement system recently completed an elaborate
selection process in which 28 investment advisers were
scrutinized as potential managers. The three finalists will
be responsible for choosing the commodity trading advisers --
the people who make the actual trading decisionsand firing
them if necessary.
   More than half of the investment advisers under
consideration were invited to Richmond to make presentations
to the board's advisory committee; five were asked back for a
second presentation, from which the investment committee
selected three apparent winners.
   Contracts are understood to be signed next week with
Kenmar Holdings Inc. of New York; Hart-Bornhoft Inc. of
Denver and Pegasus Partners Inc. of Chicago. They will each
take charge of a roughly equal share of the Virginia system's
$100 million.
   Kenmar Holdings, the largest of the three, has been
managing money since 1984 and currently has about $110
million that it allocates among trading advisers. The
principals at Hart-Bornhoft, which has $25 million under
management, have been selecting trading advisers for others
for about 10 years, though the firm itself is only six years
old. Pegasus Partners didn't return phone calls.
   Once the Virginia system became serious about moving
assets into futures markets, it hired an independent
consultant, Richard Pike, a former officer of Elders Futures
Inc., a now-defunct futures broker. Mr. Pike's firm, RP
Consulting Group Inc. of St. Petersburg, Fla., helped prepare
the initial list of investment advisers and the selection
criteria. In addition, Mr. Pike's firm will monitor the daily
performance of the investment and trading advisers, as well
as the brokers, dealers and clearing firms through which
trades are funneled.
   The futures investment advisers will be compensated only
with a share of the profits in the futures portfolio that
exceed 8.5% annually, after all commissions and fees to the
trading advisers. Of net profits above 8.5% but not more than
25%, the investment advisers will get a 20% share; on returns
in excess of 25% the investment advisers will receive 30%.
   All profit-sharing done by the investment advisers will be
calculated after the commodity trading advisers collect their
fees. Typically, such costs consist of an annual asset
management fee of 1% to 5%, plus a 15% to 20% share of the
profits.
   This plan is intended "to eliminate as many conflicts of
interest as possible, and to provide a competitive
environment that will bring out the best of everyone
participating," said Mr. Pike, the consultant.
   One goal of the plan, he added, is that the trading
advisers wouldn't be aware they were trading with the
Virginia Retirement System's money. But an investment adviser
who wasn't selected said he thinks such a goal "is more than
a little naive."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
