ID: 158	RANK: 77	SCORE: 4.750862
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880320-0041 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-03-20-88 1325EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r w AM-StarWars Bjt   03-20 1023</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Star Wars, Bjt,1,020</SECOND>
<HEAD>Star Wars Expected To Be One of Reagan's Chief Legacies</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By TIM AHERN</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   After five years of debate about futuristic
space weapons, both supporters and critics of President Reagan's
Star Wars system agree that the program will remain one of Reagan's
chief legacies after he leaves office next year.
   ``There is no way this program will die when Reagan leaves
office, regardless of who is elected in November,'' said John Pike
of the Federation of American Scientists, a chief critic of
Reagan's program.
   ``There's a constituency for the program now and that means it
is here to stay,'' Pike said. ``The next president, whether
Republican or Democrat, is going to have limited options. He won't
be able to significantly raise it because of budget restrictions,
but he won't be able to cut it deeply, either.''
   Rep. Les Aspin, D-Wis., chairman of the House Armed Services
Committee and another critic of the missile defense system, agreed.
``Politically, the Star Wars issue is here to stay. It's not going
to go away,'' Aspin said.
   And on the other side, retired Air Force Gen. Daniel Graham, who
is one of Reagan's strongest supporters, said, ``I believe that it
is almost inexorable that the program will continue to grow. The
debate has been changed.''
   ``We are making progress. The debate now is about what kind of
system, not whether any defense at all is a good idea,'' said Air
Force Lt. Gen. James Abrahamson, head of the program.
   The debate began almost as soon as Reagan proposed the idea five
years ago at the end of a nationally televised speech. In the
speech, Reagan referred to the current nuclear doctrine of mutual
assured destruction, which holds that each superpower is deterred
from a nuclear attack against the other because of the threat of
devastating retaliation.
   Science, Reagan said, should be devoted to defense, not offense,
and he laid out his dream of building a defensive system that would
``free the world from the threat of nuclear war.''
   Reagan dubbed his plan the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI),
although Pike and other critics began calling it ``Star Wars,''
after the hit movie, a name that stuck.
   One of the strongest supporters of the program was Graham, head
of a private foundation known as High Frontier, and the chief
advocate of deploying a system of orbiting ``garages'' full of
rockets that could be readily fired at attacking Soviet missiles.
   The United States had been devoting hundreds of millions of
dollars to defensive research before Reagan's speech, but the
president's interest changed the program and set off a national
debate about whether such a system could be built and what it would
cost.
   Originally, Pentagon officials said the program would look at a
variety of exotic, futuristic weapons, such as neutral particle
beams, electromagnetic rail guns and electron lasers.
   But many of those technologies have not panned out and while
research on them is continuing, the program is now concentrating
almost half its $4.2 billion budget on a so-called ``phase one''
defense that would, at best, be able to knock out less than half
the Soviet land-based nuclear missiles.
   That would still leave hundreds of land-based rockets to attack
the United States, along with submarine-based missiles and Soviet
bombers.
   ``They haven't really come up with a successful technology
yet,'' Pike said. ``In fact, they've had a lot more success
eliminating some things, such as the rail guns and the really
exotic stuff.''
   Among the chief critics of Star Wars have been a succession of
Soviet leaders, particularly Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the current
Soviet leader.
   Gorbachev has warned time and again that Star Wars is the major
hurdle to a U.S.-Soviet treaty eliminating half the thousands of
atomic weapons each side has aimed at each other. But Reagan has
adamantly refused to agree to any limits on Star Wars research.
   Gorbachev has also warned that the Soviets are working on a
system to counter SDI. At last December's summit meeting in
Washington, he said, ``If the Americans have a lot of money, let
them squander it on SDI. We will look for a response along other,
asymmetrical lines that will be less expensive.''
   U.S. officials no longer talk about the possibility of
eliminating nuclear weapons. Instead, they say SDI will make it
more difficult for the Soviets to be sure of knocking out American
weapons in any attack, thus making it harder for the Soviets to
attack.
   Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci, in his annual report to
Congress, said, ``the deterrent value of strategic defenses derives
from the effect these defenses would have on Soviet calculations on
the costs and benefits of launching an attack.''
   ``This type of defense would enable us to influence the Soviet
decision-maker's calculus by diminishing his confidence in the
ability of his forces to execute an effective attack, rather than
by increasing the severity of our retaliation,'' he said. ``A
strategic defense need not be `leak-proof' to achieve this
objective.''
   Star Wars also has been the subject of annual congressional
fights over spending. The Democratic-controlled Congress has
consistently reduced SDI spending.
   Reagan took aim at Congress last week, when he said Capitol Hill
``should realize it's no longer a question of whether there will be
an SDI program or not _ the only question will be whether the
Soviets are the only ones who have strategic defenses while the
United States remains entirely defenseless.''
   While the debate goes on, so does the research, particularly on
the so-called ``phase one'' system.
   The plan is based on a system of 200 to 400 orbiting satellites,
each of which would have 10 so-called ``kinetic kill vehicles,'' or
rockets, that would destroy a target by slamming into it at high
speeds.
   The Pentagon declines to estimate the cost of phase one, but the
Congressional Research Service recently said the bill could come to
more than $200 billion.
   Pike said one of the main obstacles to SDI eventually will be
the budget. ``You've already seeing intense competition for Defense
Department dollars and that will only increase in the future,'' he
said.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
