ID: 248	RANK: 77	SCORE: 8.944809
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910909-0140
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910909-0140.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Television:
   A Sharp-Witted Drama, a Witty Comedy
   ----
   By Dorothy Rabinowitz
</HL>
<DATE>
09/09/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A9
</SO>
<LP>
   With "Never Come Back," a three hour thriller involving
World War II political skullduggery, (Friday, Sept. 13, 8-11
p.m. EDT), Arts &amp; Entertainment gets its season off to a
solid if violent start. A BBC import set in the wartime
London of 1939-1940, this film, be warned, takes its time to
get moving. First we have to get past the large red herring
of a sub-plot involving an assassin and various attempts on
the life of the film's hero, Desmond Thane. By the time this
diversion has ended -- and it isn't a short time -- one cat
has been murdered, one man been found dead in his tub, and
Desmond Thane has survived a number of extremely earnest
attempts on his life. In due time we learn just what, if
anything, this has to do with the real villains of this story
or with its main plot.
   Still, there is much to be said for the diversionary
mayhem and the sort of violence it involves. A little
homicidal malice goes a long way, this story, as others of
its era, reminds us. Here attempted murder takes
non-ballistic forms: breakfast milk is poisoned, open razors
are sent in the mail, and mysterious assassins (who are not
muggers) creep around in the fog on blacked-out streets --
all simple, homey stuff, but blood-curdling nonetheless.
Blood-curdling, it hardly needs saying, in ways that hi-tech
murder and James Bond weaponry never approach.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Things do get rougher as the main plot unfolds -- when it
finally does -- around the amours of hero Desmond Thane.
Thane is an upper class wastrel fallen into newspaper work
and novel-writing -- a faintly cynical sort with an eye for
the ladies and no great sense of mission about the war with
Germany in which his country is now engaged. As played by
Nathaniel Parker, Thane is attractive, if a trifle too jovial
in the role of a man hounded by pursuers who want to kill him
for reasons he can't fathom. But roles like this aren't easy.
To get victimization, pure terror, and debonair charm in the
right mix in one character, it is probably necessary to have
been born Cary Grant. Nor does the film have much in common
with the works of Hitchcock or John Buchen, the claims of the
publicity release notwithstanding. It is, nevertheless, a
sharp-witted tale of incipient treason and intrigue within a
certain segment of England's upper class set. It is also one
that has a factual basis in its depiction of the pre-war
political sympathies of various eminences in British society
who were inclined to a tolerant -- if not outright approving
-- view of Adolf Hitler. Who the film fingers as leading
members of that set will come as no great surprise. The canny
viewer will be able to figure this out fairly early, as the
cameras linger on a photo of the Duke and Duchess of Windsor
merrily disporting themselves on a visit with der Fuhrer and
other Nazi friends.
   The real suspense begins with the introduction of the
beautiful Anna (Suzanna Hamilton) a stone-hearted mystery
woman of -- needless to say -- ravenous sexual appetites and
a particularly unquenchable desire for the hulking body of
Desmond. Desmond is thus led into the thickets of a
treasonous plot that becomes more and more interesting as it
focuses on a diary everyone is desperate to find. The drama
is based on a 1942 novel by John Mair which George Orwell
admired as politically astute. There may not be much that is
especially astute about this BBC film, but between its bouts
of heavy breathing the political point is clear and cutting.
   ---
   There are few descriptions more likely to cause a sinking
heart among the sane than "innovative" -- as in innovative
comedy. Fox, for example, is offering an innovative comedy
entitled "Herman's Head" -- a title that can only magnify the
natural loathing that the civilized feel in the presence of
the innovative, or what's advertised as such nowadays. That
said, it's time to report the good news. The new Fox comedy,
(Sundays, 9:30-10 EDT), titled as it is titled, is more than
a little clever. Endearing and well cast, the concept very
nearly borders on the complex -- at least by prime time
standards -- which probably means it won't be around long.
The main characters are the various parts of one psyche
belonging to Herman, a young would-be writer toiling in the
research department of a publishing house packed with
upwardly mobile louts. An upmarket lad as played by William
Ragsdale, and played charmingly, Herman is a sort of young
male character we don't get a chance to see much of on prime
time these days -- a modest, mannerly sort with just a touch
of the good private school about him, and a WASP. It's good
to see you Herman.
   The various agents of Herman's psyche take the stage to
argue tactics when Herman has to make decisions, face a moral
issue, deal with a woman, or any other character testing
crisis. All this works out a lot better than it sounds. The
inhabitants of Herman's mind consist of Angel, the voice of
virtue (Molly Hagan), Wimp, the voice of anxiety (Rick
Lawless), Genius, the voice of intellect (Peter Mackenzie)
and Animal, the voice of natural lust (Ken Hudson Campbell).
Mr. Campbell's Animal and Mr. Mackenzie's voice of intellect
are particularly entertaining as they spar over whether
Herman should take advantage of a girl and deceive her, or as
they toss around ways to get him out of trouble over a lie
that may have endangered his job.
   Everyone stays entirely in character, and the characters
are thoroughly defined. The producers (Paul Junger Witt and
Tony Thomas) and writers were on to something when they
conceived of building characters around psychological
concepts. Such characters, after all, have natures that need
no inventing-since it is already established how anxiety
talks and thinks and what virtue worries about. At the very
least it's clear that "Herman's Head" is fun and smart. It's
also clear why. A show whose personalities are based on the
perceptions of Freud, rather than on a sit-com writer's
notions of character creation is starting off way ahead of
the game.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
