ID: 173	RANK: 44	SCORE: 15.163358
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890107-0015 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-01-07-89 0140EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r w PM-Reagan-Hirohito     01-07 0430</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Reagan-Hirohito,410</SECOND>
<HEAD>President Lauds Japanese Emperor For Role In Ending WWII</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   WASHINGTON _ President Reagan mourned the death of Emperor
Hirohito of Japan, saying he played ``a truly heroic role'' in
ending World War II hostilities between his country and the United
States.
   ``On behalf of the people and government of the United States, we
extend our deepest condolences to His Imperial Majesty, the Emperor,
to the Imperial family, and to the People of Japan,'' the president
said in a statement released by the White House shortly after the
annoucement of the emperor's death Friday.
   Reagan said the emperor's 62-year reign ``spanned one of the most
tumultuous, and yet at the same time constructive eras in the
history of mankind _ an age of unprecedented economic collapse, a
most vicious war, astonishing scientific acheivement, and dramatic
political and social changes throughout the world.''
   ``It was also an era of unprecedented reconciliation. His majesty
played a truly heroic role in bringing hostilities between our two
peoples to an end and leading the Japanese people through a period
of reconstruction and reconciliation that has resulted in both the
prosperity the Japanese know today and in the close relations our
two nations and peoples now enjoy,'' Reagan said.
   The president recalled the late emperor had visited the United
States in 1975, and that he and his wife Nancy had ``enjoyed several
meetings with him, most recently in Tokyo'' in 1986. The statement
also noted the first couple had entertained the former Crown Prince
Akihito and Crown Princess Michiko at the White House in 1987.
   ``While we mourn the passing of His majesty, we shall long
remember him for his contributions which strengthened the United
States-Japan relationship and set a future course of continued close
and friendly relations,'' the president said.
   Presidential spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said that because there
will be a waiting period before Hirohito's funeral, the decision on
whom to send would be up to the incoming administration of George
Bush.
   Bush sent letters of condolence to both Hirohito's son, Akihito,
and the prime minister of Japan, Noboru Takeshita, said Sean Walsh,
a press aide in the vice president's office.
   Bush met the late emperor once on a 1982 visit to Japan. Akahito
visited Bush at his home during a trip to the United States last
year. The two played tennis together on that occasion.
   Bush's office did not release the text of the letters. Walsh said
Bush conveyed ``his sincerest condolences'' to Akahito on the death
of his father, and expressed similar sentiments in the letter to the
prime minister.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
