ID: 205	RANK: 2	SCORE: 45.581669
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890303-0120 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-03-03-89 1831EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-ComputerSpy 1stLd-Writethru a0637 03-03 0953</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Computer Spy, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0637,0979</SECOND>
<HEAD>Officials Warn Of Dangerous New Espionage Threat</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: SUBS 21st graf, `Norddeutsche Rundfunk ... to CORRECT spelling
of Rundfunk; picks up 22nd graf pvs: `According to ...</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By GIRARD C. STEICHEN</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>BONN, West Germany (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Officials on Friday said a West German
computer spy ring that sold stolen data to the Soviets represents a
new and dangerous dimension in international espionage.
   ``The illegal entry into hundreds of data systems is an extremely
dangerous new threat,'' federal Interior Minister Friedrich
Zimmermann said.
   ``Governments and businesses must now become extremely
vigilant,'' Zimmermann said a day after officials said they had
penetrated a ring of ``hackers'' who sold thousands of passwords and
codes from military and research computers in the United States,
Western Europe and Japan to Soviet intelligence agents.
   Zimmermann, whose ministry is responsible for counterespionage
and domestic intelligence-gathering, called the hackers' operations
``a new dimension of Soviet bloc spy agencies.''
   Although he said it was too soon to assess the full extent of the
damage, he added the investigation had ``succeeded in dealing a
major blow against the KGB Soviet secret service.''
   Juergen Schmid, a spokesman for the federal Justice Ministry,
called the incident ``extremely serious, but not drastic.''
   ``The hackers were able to gain entry, but failed to penetrate
deep into the secret areas of the databanks,'' he said.
   Security officials Friday said three men were in custody and
another five were under investigation.
   Alexander Prechtel, a spokesman for the federal Prosecutor's
Office, said the suspects range in age from 25 to 35.
   He said several were involved with illegal drugs, but did not
elaborate.
   Prechtel said police in Hanover arrested two hackers on
``suspicion of espionage activities for an Eastern European
intelligence agency.'' Another suspect was arrested in West Berlin,
he said.
   Officials of the federal Criminal Investigation Office in
Wiesbaden said more than 100 state officers and federal agents were
involved in making the arrests and in subsequent searches of
apartments in West Berlin, Hanover and Hamburg.
   A West German broadcast network, Norddeutsche Rundfunk, said
Thursday the computer networks infiltrated by the hackers included
the U.S. Defense Department's general databank, known as Optimus; a
NASA and a Strategic Defense Initiative, or ``Star Wars,'' research
computer; and computers tied to nuclear weapons and energy research
at the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico and the Fermi
National Accelerator Laboratory in Illinois.
   The network said attempts were made to gain access to the
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory at the University of California, which
it called a key link in efforts to break into other U.S. computers.
   Clifford Stoll, an astrophysicist who did research at the
laboratory, said up to 50 military computers were broken into
through an astronomy computer, but that the hacker did not have
passwords for classified information.
   ``We were amazed. Here's some guy breaking into an astronomy
computer in Berkeley, reaching out into military computers trying to
search for information about SDI, about nuclear warheads,'' Stoll
said in an interview Thursday from his home in Cambridge, Mass.
   Stoll, who works at the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory at
Harvard University, said he and other researchers helped break the
spy ring. He said someone linked to East bloc groups wrote the lab
asking for related information, leading authorities to the hackers.
   William Bardeen, head of the theory group at Fermilab in Batavia,
Ill., said Soviets participate in research there.
   ``So there are Soviet scientists living at Fermilab and using the
computers. There isn't anything confidential or strategic in the
computers,'' Bardeen said.
   Jeff Schwartz, spokesman for Los Alamos National Laboratory, said
he knew of no evidence a foreign intelligence agency had gained
access to its classified computer system. He said none of the lab's
findings were secret.
   Norddeutsche Rundfunk said the three suspects were detained
following searches of at least six apartments in West Berlin and
Hanover.
   According to Norddeutsche Rundfunk, authorities believe the three
hackers were recruited by the KGB in 1985 and ``were paid with cash
and drugs ... and were later forced to provide the codes and
passwords to the Soviets.''
   The network said the three handed over information from the
United States, Japan, Britain, France, Italy, Switzerland and West
Germany at a 1985 meeting with two KGB agents in East Berlin.
   The hackers obtained information that would allow the Soviets
themselves to gain access to the computers and develop technology
based on the information, the network said.
   The information would also give the Kremlin access to U.S.
military supply depot statistics and to computers belonging to
several European institutes that deal with atomic and aerospace
research, the network said.
   Officials at the European Laboratory of Particle Physics in
Geneva said attempts were made in 1986 and 1987 to gain access to
the lab's computers. A laboratory offical, who asked not to be
identified, said Soviet and other specialists have been visiting
researchers at the facility for years.
   In Brussels, European Economic Community officials said the West
German hackers had penetrated a European Space Agency computer in
Paris.
   Willy Helin, a spokesman for the EEC's Research and
Telecommunications Commission, said specialists are trying to
determine whether suspected Soviet agents had also gained access to
other EEC computer networks.
   In Tokyo, a lab official said unknown West German hackers broke
into a computer system in a Japanese government research lab in 1985.
   The National Laboratory For High Energy Physics discovered that a
research project was penetrated in mid-1985, said lab spokesman
Shinichi Watanabe. He said no sensitive information was stolen, and
the lab has since heightened security by changing passwords and
other measures.
   He said it was not known if the intruders were part of the
alleged West German ring.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
