ID: 205	RANK: 32	SCORE: 21.041420
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910315-0028
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910315-0028.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Technology:
   Hackers Open Voice-Mail Door to Others' Phone Lines
   ----
   By John J. Keller
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
03/15/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<IN>
TELEPHONE SYSTEMS (TLS)
COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)
</IN>
<GV>
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)
TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)
</GV>
<LP>
   Those friendly electronic voice-mail systems that take
messages at many offices are being put to a more sinister use
by computer hackers.
   In the past six months, computer hackers in the U.S. and
Canada have been systematically stealing phone records and
using local and toll-free 800 phone numbers to gain access to
office voice-mail systems around the country, allowing them
to use the office phones for their own purposes.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The size of the intrusion is still being gauged by the
Secret Service and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, but
it certainly involves "hundreds of companies and government
offices," says Earl Devaney, special agent in charge of the
Secret Service's Fraud Division. "If it continues increasing
at the rate we're seeing," Mr. Devaney adds, "it could run
into the tens of millions of dollars in losses" in fraudulent
phone bills for business and agencies.
   Current voice-mail systems are vulnerable because their
access codes are relatively easy to crack. Once hackers
calling from outside an office break a code and take control
of an extension, they have several options. They can use the
line to make long-distance calls, at the company's expense.
They can leave and receive messages.
   "The hacker calls on our 800 line for free," says Wes
Winchester, a data-processing systems coordinator at the U.S.
Postal Service Center in New Brunswick, N.J. "He creates a
mailbox for himself, say on extension 5001, and then tells
the system to forward the messages {for him} by calling his
house. Our system gets charged for those calls."
   Some hackers even change the company password, rendering
the voice system inaccessible to employees trying to retrieve
their messages. "I pushed my access code in, and the system
wouldn't accept it," says Phillip Cassidy, finance and
leasing manager for U-Save Auto Rental of America Inc.,
Hanover, Md. "The hacker had locked it up."
   Vincent Howley, U-Save's executive vice president adds:
"They're giving out company phone numbers across the country,
in Jersey, California. They have the capacity to cause major
problems."
   This isn't the first time that hackers have penetrated the
nation's phone system. Last November, two teen-agers from
Staten Island, N.Y., allegedly gained unauthorized entry to a
computerized voice-mail system owned by International Data
Group, Framingham, Mass., then changed recorded greetings to
lewd messages, made bomb threats and erased customers'
messages. Earlier last year, a group of California hackers
allegedly breached computer systems at Pacific Bell and a
secure computer system used by the U.S. Army to intercept
phone information.
   Long-distance phone companies, long victimized by phone
fraud, began moving aggressively against crooks a few years
ago. The phone companies lengthened the authorization access
codes used to charge calls to more than 10 digits, making
them harder to crack. They also worked with law enforcement
authorities to raid offenders' homes and businesses. Now a
problem that cost the industry tens of millions of dollars in
revenues seems to be subsiding, according to Robert Fox,
assistant vice president of security at U S Sprint
Communications Co., a unit of United Telecommunications Inc.
   Computer hackers, however, are finding new victims. "They
have migrated away from the long-distance carriers and find
it safer to attack a company's phone system, which usually
uses four- to seven-digit access codes," Mr. Fox says. "It's
a lot easier to get a dial tone through that kind of phone
system."
   Hackers gain access to corporate voice-mail systems in a
variety of ways. The toll-free 800 numbers supplied to
corporate and government phone customers by long-distance
carriers, plus other sensitive phone records, are stored in
data banks owned by local phone companies. A hacker using a
personal computer and modem can break into these data banks
through phone lines and steal customer records showing phone
numbers and voice-mail access codes. The hacker can then use
this information to manipulate voice-mail systems.
   Once inside a system, hackers may use a stolen password to
get a dial tone from the company's phone line, and then "the
real trouble begins," says the Secret Service's Mr. Devaney.
"They make long-distance calls around the world, and the
company doesn't find out it has a problem until 30 to 60 days
after the intrusion, when it gets its phone bill."
   Hackers can also change passwords or create mailboxes in
phantom phone extensions. Mr. Winchester noticed the problem
at the Postal Service office when its phone system's
data-storage unit became overloaded. "We also saw phony boxes
for extensions that didn't exist," he says.
   Some of the messages left by hackers are downright nasty.
At Health Management Strategies International Inc.,
Alexandria, Va., a hacker took over a mailbox and left a
message that identified a Las Vegas, Nev., man by his name,
age and Social Security number and told fellow hackers to
inflict punishment on the man and his son. "I really want his
kid nailed," said the hacker. "Call up the utilities, give
his name, age and Social Security number and tell 'em you
want your electricity shut off. Then call the phone company
and do the same thing. Toast the dude."
   Another hacker left Visa credit card information for a
woman in Huntington Beach, Calif.
   Mr. Devaney recalls one hacker who "called a company and
said, `I am in control of your phone system. If you don't pay
me, I'll bring it crashing down.'" The hacker didn't make
good on his threat but wasn't caught.
   "Their boldness is fostered by their anonymity," Mr.
Devaney says. "They're sitting in a bedroom somewhere, not
robbing a bank where everyone can see them."
   The hackers themselves have taken names such as Ice Cube,
Tall Man from the Ministry of Fear and Uppercut. There's even
a guy named Techno, from Ultralogic, a group of Canadian
hackers who use Hewlett-Packard computers. "If you're
Canadian and know hacking, leave a message or call Global
Genocide," says Techno, leaving a number in Ontario.
   U-Save's Mr. Howley and others are having a hard time
figuring where to turn for help against phone fraud. The
Secret Service targets high-dollar, high-volume fraud, Mr.
Devaney says. The FBI usually doesn't investigate until the
local phone company asks it to. And long-distance companies
can't do much about people who dial phone numbers and reach
private phone systems that long-distance carriers don't
control.
   The real solution, says Richard Petillo, manager of
corporate security for American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Co., is
for a company to beef up its own security. Hackers, he says,
"look to the most available and least protected of systems."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
