ID: 205	RANK: 35	SCORE: 20.504038
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890124-0258 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-01-24-89 1346EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>s f BC-APN--Hackers-I Adv29-1stAdd   01-24 1055</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-APN--Hackers-I, Adv 29-1st Add,1082</SECOND>
<HEAD>$Adv29</HEAD>
<HEAD>AGENCIES AND RADIO OUT</HEAD>
<HEAD>For release Sunday, Jan. 29</HEAD>
<HEAD>UNDATED: think tank.</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   Dave Flory tracks down computer malfeasance as head of the fraud
squad for the San Jose police. Although 50, he hacks in his spare
time but was not amused when someone, possibly a nerd, filched his
password and ran up an $80 bill on his phone playing computer games
long distance.
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   ``I was never popular, just a loner,'' Mark Duchaineau, a former
high school hacker, told Levy. ``You feel a oneness with the
computer. (Without it) there would have been this great void...like
you didn't have your sight or hearing.''
   ``There are a lot of bright kids, not socially well-developed,
who are miserable in junior high,'' says Mark Crispin, an author of
``The Hacker's Dictionary.'' ``They are naturally drawn to computer
hacking, something where they have complete control over the
results. Humans have basic needs and, if they don't get them out of
society, they'll get them elsewhere, and computers seem a better
answer than drugs.''
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   Tenney is hacking in his basement in San Mateo. It looks like the
command module of a space capsule the morning after a Saturday night
linkup with some vodka-toasting Russkies:
   ``Computers are my hobby and my living. Hackers do it because
they enjoy it. That doesn't mean you can't think about money.''
   He speaks from experience with a wife and kids upstairs and a
diesel Cadillac with a blown head in the driveway. He programs
professionally to keep them respectively fueled.
   ``Hacking is the key to Silicon Valley. Woz (Steve Wozniak, the
legendary hacker who created the first Apple computer in a garage)
did it because he was interested in the challenge. Steve Jobs (Woz's
partner who turned the Apple into a multibillion-dollar orchard) saw
where it could go from the garage. That happens all the time out
here.'' A sum greater than its arts: synergy.
   ``If any company tells you they don't have any hackers on their
staff in the Valley, they're lying,'' says Leo Schwab, a young
hacker-programmer near San Rafael, Calif., a reputed wizard at
computer graphics.
   In hackerese, a wizard is a person permitted by the gods to do
things denied ordinary mortals.
   ``Hacking is a proud culture and rightly so,'' says Don Ingraham,
somewhat surprisingly since his job as assistant district attorney
for Alameda County (Oakland, Berkeley) is to track down computer bad
guys. ``These hackers working all night in their garages in Silicon
Valley and basements at MIT have pulled off miracles. They may well
be the salvation of our technology.''
   Japanese trains run on time but not because they've been hacked.
Nippon, collectively, makes great robots. America produces great
tinkerers, although a Japanese did ski down Everest, a most
celestial hack.
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   Tenney is an anomaly, like a banana tree in Labrador. He emerged
not from the Valley or MIT but Chicago where hackers were ``computer
bums.'' By the time he was a high school senior, he had his own
office at the Illinois Institute of Technology. That was to make it
easier for him to tutor math teachers in computer familiarization
seminars, a child lecturing the pharisees at the temple.
   Even then something had evolved that Levy calls the Hacker Ethic.
This posited that access to computers and the data that fed them
should be free (keep in mind these were the '60s) and that hacking,
in and of itself and for the pure freedom of it, should be unimpeded
by the high priests of The Real World. Big Business. Big Brother.
Big Anybody. Computers promised a brave new world and all should
romp unhindered in Elysium.
   This has inevitably produced a gray, indeed very, very gray area
as to where hacking leaves off and the increasingly essential
networks of the nation's computers begin.
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   He is called Captain Crunch, after the breakfast cereal. His real
name is John Draper.
   About 1970, while a soldier overseas, Draper found that the toy
whistle that came with each cereal box blew at 2,600 cycles, exactly
the pitch the phone company sang to. He began calling home _ free.
   Hacking Ma Bell became a challenge with electronic ``blue
boxes.'' Woz used to sell them dormitory-to-dormitory at Stanford.
(He could also arrange things so friends' computers would suddenly
light up with off-color Polish jokes.) You could ring up Sydney,
Australia, for nothing to get the Top Ten Tunes, try and give
Brezhnev a wakeup call.
   (Crunch, to whom Ingraham is a personal nemesis, finally went to
jail where he gave seminars to inmates on blue boxes. His back was
broken, Ingraham says, because his fellow cons felt he was
withholding technology. Draper, subsequently in the toils of the law
again, rigged Ingraham's computer to receive his legal bills.)
   Crunching _ and Morrising, if you will _ are deeds that have put
hacking in disrepute in The Real World. Stuart Brand, the
Californian who brought you ``The Whole Earth Catalog'' and now
provides a computer bulletin board in the Bay Area, is among many of
the old school who think everything, including copyrighted software,
should be free. But what of those, including numerous hackers, who
have devised brilliant software and then copyrighted it if only to
buy their groceries?
   ``When an artist produces art, he doesn't hang it in the
closet,'' Tenney reasons. ``He wants it to be seen.'' For nothing?
   ``A radical leftist hacker would say it's bad to let
establishment NCRs and IBMs use your stuff,'' says Poskanzer. ``A
radical leftit hacker would say you should not have sold it to IBM.
I say if they want to use it, fine. So I guess I'm a
middle-of-the-road hacker.''
   The Valley's annual Hacker Conference, which Tenney organizes and
Mandel attends as one of the 5 percent of ``necktie'' members
allowed to join, argues about free access at every meeting.
   Hackers agree the word ``hacking'' badly needs a euphemism. Their
fertile minds have added to the mother tongue such coinages as
gronk, to clear up, sort of; frobnicate, to adjust, as ``please
frobnicate the TV;'' dwim, forget it, move on to...; foo or bletch,
disgusting; moby foo, very disgusting; kluge, something that
shouldn't work but does; snarf, to snatch. But hackers have not come
up with a kinder, gentler term for what they do.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>MORE</NOTE>
</DOC>
