ID: 205	RANK: 70	SCORE: 17.470629
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910422-0129
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910422-0129.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Manager's Journal:
   As Red Menace Cools, Spies Go Corporate
   ----
   By James M. Lamont
</HL>
<DATE>
04/22/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<CO>
   HWP
</CO>
<MS>
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)
</IN>
<GV>
ENERGY DEPARTMENT (ERG)
</GV>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
EUROPE (EU)
SOVIET UNION (UR)
</RE>
<LP>
   Mythology may have no place in corporate and governmental
hierarchies, but one management cadre surely suffers from the
Cassandra's Curse of being able to foretell the future, with
nobody believing you: security officers in charge of security
awareness training programs. Their mission has become far
more difficult because of a double paradox that has developed
in the wake of the revolutionary changes in Eastern Europe.
   First, the very collapse of the Eastern Bloc has actually
led to intensified hostile intelligence activities, with
agents and operatives taking advantage of lowered barricades
to haul buckets -- full of secrets from West to East and
elsewhere on the compass.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Second, spies now operate within an expanding aura of good
will and trust, with East-West distinctions becoming blurred
if not eradicated outright.
   The net result is that as the flames of espionage blaze
all the hotter, the fire bell clangs on deafer ears. And
Americans, because of their openness, are especially apt to
get scorched.
   What to do? In the August, 1990, issue of Security
Awareness Bulletin, top-level security professionals from
government and private industry concluded that security
awareness training programs need to reassess "The Threat," as
the Soviet Union's KGB-directed activities have come to be
termed. One author suggested that the term itself may be
obsolete. The reasoning has to do with The Threat's source.
After all, how threatening can security trainers expect a
threat to be taken when its natal nation faces collapse?
   Nevertheless, The Threat is still very much with us; it's
just that rather than springing from a single country or even
a bloc of countries, it is now generic -- a pervasive force
that owes its allegiences not to a flag but to the highest
bidder. A glance at The Threat's practitioners bear this out.
Once gainfully employed spies now hustle their unique skills
as freelancers in true entrepreneurial fashion.
   While exact figures are difficult to pin down, an article
in the March 13 Washington Times reported that spying in
Europe is on an uptrend, with especially heavy activity in
computer systems and telephone networks -- fertile ground for
"hackers" and communications whizzes.
   An example of how this New Age espionage works comes from
California's Silicon Valley, where agents posing as
recruiters dangle (often outrageous) incentives to lure
employees to "job interviews," where they are then pumped for
information. So rampant has this practice become that
Hewlett-Packard, for one, slapped distribution clamps on its
company phone books to shortstop hostile interests from
learning employees' names, phone extensions and department
affiliations.
   Security awareness programs should reflect the more
corporate targets of today's espionage. Instead of showing
missiles being paraded through Red Square to frighten
employees, better to dramatize a single former Stasi
operative purveying his resume to a competing company.
   With The Threat re-defined, security officers can next
concentrate on "targets" of espionage. Once predominantly
political in nature, spy targets also have changed. In order
to compete with the West and Pacific Rim nations, governments
and newly formed private companies from Eastern Europe must
play a high-stakes game of technological catch-up: In such
fields as robotics and computer sciences they are as much as
20 years behind. Because intense R&amp;D efforts of their own are
both time-consuming and dearly expensive, many may find it
more expeditious to steal technology.
   A Midwest company recently experienced just such a close
call, when a disgruntled employee from Eastern Europe (a U.S.
citizen but with strong homeland ties) tried to flee the
country with classified data on a system under development.
He was nabbed moments before he was to board a Europe-bound
flight.
   Before a company's targets can be safeguarded, they must
be defined. Data classification is a critical area of
security that needs immediate reassessment. Here, the concern
is not so much about obviously classifiable subjects, over
which proper scrutiny generally is exercised. Of greater
concern is the great, gray area of so-called "sensitive"
topics. A U.S. Government term, it applies to data that are
not individually classifiable, but in the aggregate can add
up to a classified subject.
   As best-selling author Tom Clancy proved in his research
for "The Hunt for Red October," many of these bits of
information are openly available, especially in university
and research libraries. Others find their way to the
technical and even general media as a result of the
"publishor-perish" dictum in American academia. Closely
allied to sensitive topics are "dualuse" technologies;
meaning they can be applied both to civilian and military
programs.
   One of the best programs for handling sensitive and
dual-use materials comes from the Department of Energy -- far
and away the major sponsor of classified research in the U.S.
The Department's new OPSEC (for "Operations Security")
provides for "working groups" to review technological
achievements being considered for release. These are composed
equally of security personnel and a candidate's peers -- a
courtesy that is both tactful and practical, given the
high-level intellects involved. It also provides for an
annual workshop to which researchers and security personnel
can come to share lessons, exchange ideas and, supposedly,
air grievances.
   Even if private companies engaged in high-level security
work -- whether under government contract or for their own
purposes -- don't adopt the OPSEC model, traditional program
format dogma should be eschewed. For while it may be true
that The Threat still threatens and the Red Menace menaces,
it's equally valid that you're not going to win over a new
and skeptical generation by replaying "Big Band" film clips
to an audience weaned on MTV.
   ---
   Mr. Lamont is a Deerfield, Ill.-based writer and designer
of security training programs.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
