ID: 205	RANK: 73	SCORE: 17.235687
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890123-0236 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-01-23-89 1434EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>s a BC-APN--Hackers-II ADV05-1stAdd   01-23 0906</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-APN--Hackers-II, ADV 05-1st Add,0929</SECOND>
<HEAD>$Adv05</HEAD>
<HEAD>AGENCIES AND RADIO OUT</HEAD>
<HEAD>For Release Sunday, Feb. 5</HEAD>
<HEAD>MENLO PARK, Calif.: that technology.</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   Hackers resent guilt by association with computer viruses. They
call people who spread them or commit evil computer deeds
``crackers.'' They think crackers deserve jail as an example.
   Most computer crimes are done not by hackers but by company
insiders, according to BloomBecker's last survey in 1986. ``And they
were far less sophisticated than hackers,'' he notes.
   Nonetheless, there may be as many as 8 million personal computers
in the United States. Worldwide sales of PCs in 1986 were $50.9
billion. So a lot of people have new toys.
   ``Technology draws people to play with it,'' says Don Ingraham,
an assistant prosecutor in Alameda County, Calif., who specializes
in computer crime. And a lot of kid hackers ``gum up the works''
because they don't know any better, Mandel says.
   Morris, a hacker whose father was at Bell Labs and is now a
computer security expert with the National Security Agency, may have
had only an elegant prank in mind. But he made a mistake with his
worm, and it ate up disks.
   Hackers who sign off on computer bulletin boards as Crimson
Death, Phantom Phreaker, Nightstalker add a darker dimension. Dave
Flory, who heads the fraud unit for the San Jose police, cites
studies and experience that indicate that 2 percent of the
population are sociopathic and 1 percent of them criminally so. They
tend to be brighter than average and younger males, as are those
intrigued by computers. Flory leaves the inference standing.
   But when does hacking become cracking?
   A hacker has been breaking into Flory's police bulletin board and
says he won't leave unless the cops pay his phone bills to play
long-distance computer games.
   ``That's extortion,'' says Flory. San Jose cops caught two
teen-agers in a phone booth trying to hook up a laptop to a phone.
   ``They were in it for the sexual thrill of knowing secrets,''
says Flory. But it's also attempted theft from the phone company.
``They'll probably get three months at the most.''
   ``Generally, the punishment does not fit the crime,'' Donn Parker
believes.
   There are a great many gray areas. When a 15-year-old Cupertino
boy got into the Stanford University computer to change grades
Stanford stored for high schools as a community service, what's
that? A prank? Illegal entry?
   What is it when somebody has invaded your computer so that a nude
woman begins appearing as you're doing your income tax, leaving you
with the message: ``You should be doing something better than
looking at this trash''? Or the Cookie Monster that stopped your
computer until you wrote out ``C-O-O-K-I-E'' to its request ``I want
a cookie?'' Are these viruses jokes? Invasions of privacy?
   ``Hackers know where the line is,'' says Jef Poskanzer, a
30-year-old Berkeley hacker and software programmer.
   ``Maybe,'' says Flory, ``but a guy who wouldn't come at you with
a knife may harm you with a computer because it's impersonal. He
won't see blood.''
   ``Someone could pirate your technology, and it's not valuable to
you for eight years until the research pays off. How do you quantify
the loss?'' asks Koenig. ``What is the value of intellectual
property? We're still struggling with this.''
   If a hacker in Ithaca, N.Y., does damage to computer data in
California, has he violated California criminal laws against
unauthorized access? ``It's like a guy upstream dumping pollutants
in a creek,'' says Ingraham. ``The guy downstream who waters his
stock in the creek has a case. But our national laws are
inadequate.''
   Computer technology moves so fast the laws lag behind. It's like
the early days of the Old West. Cattlemen moved in and grazed their
herds on open range just as hackers used to browse unhindered in
computerland. Then the sheepmen arrived and put up fences. Range
wars resulted until the law could set guidelines.
   ``We don't teach breaking and entering in architectural school.
Don't teach aspects of cracking in grade school,'' says Ingraham.
``It's the same thing.''
   Parker believes schoolchildren should be taught computer ethics
just as they are taught computer use.
   ``We teach driver education because there is an obligation to
tell kids what the law is before we send them out on the road.''
   For the criminal, to whom ethics are immaterial, the computer has
been a bonanza. ``Today you can commit a crime in Berkeley from Oslo
if you wanted,'' Ingraham says. Jesse and Frank James had to have
horses and Colt .45s and a bag for the swag to rob a bank. Today you
don't even have to be present at the bank. The loot's on tape.
   The technology has exploded to the point, Parker says, where the
thief is confronted with a new problem: how much to take. ``The
smart criminal steals below the pain threshold of the victim. To
avoid embarrassment, the company may just say take your money and
go. But the thief still has to take enough to get to Rio or hire a
good lawyer if he doesn't make it.''
   Computers save prostitutes the cost of a pimp. They book
customers via bulletin boards. Ingraham rarely sees a drug bust
where the dealers don't keep track of business on computers.
   The only secure computer is one still in the box it came in or
one that never talks to another. Any further security is manmade
and, therefore, fallible.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>MORE</NOTE>
</DOC>
