ID: 128	RANK: 50	SCORE: 5.578906
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910412-0025
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910412-0025.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Chrysler's Dauch Quits After Friction
   With Executive Likely to Succeed Iacocca
   ----
   By Bradley A. Stertz
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
04/12/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A4
</SO>
<CO>
   C TRW WNEWS
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
AUTOMOBILES (AUT)
DIVERSIFIED TECHNOLOGY (DTC)
</IN>
<NS>
PERSONNEL ANNOUNCEMENTS, PROMOTIONS, APPOINTMENTS (PER)
</NS>
<RE>
MICHIGAN (MI)
OHIO (OH)
</RE>
<LP>
   HIGHLAND PARK, Mich. -- Chrysler Corp.'s top manufacturing
executive is leaving the company after prolonged friction
with the man who is most likely to succeed Lee A. Iacocca as
the auto maker's chairman.
   Richard E. Dauch, 48 years old, who led improvements in
Chrysler's assembly operations, is departing after a
difficult relationship with Chrysler President Robert A.
Lutz. Mr. Lutz, age 59, is campaigning hard to succeed Mr.
Iacocca, and Mr. Dauch's departure is a sign that Mr. Lutz's
position inside the company is gathering strength. Mr.
Iacocca has never publicly stated his retirement plans, but
many at Chrysler expect him to retire sometime next year.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Chrysler also said it is reorganizing its Acustar auto
parts subsidiary. Acustar's engine, transmission and auto
trim businesses are being blended into Chrysler's
manufacturing operations, leaving Acustar with businesses
that Chrysler has been trying to sell or run with outside
partners.
   Mr. Dauch has been Chrysler's executive vice president in
charge of manufacturing for the past six years. Many of his
duties, but not his corporate rank, will go to Dennis K.
Pawley who has been with Chrysler for two years. Mr. Pawley
previously was at Mazda Motor Corp.'s first U.S. factory in
Flat Rock, Mich., and before that he ran a General Motors
Corp. assembly plant. Mr. Pawley will become vice president
of manufacturing for Chrysler after Mr. Dauch leaves on May
31.
   A former football player at Purdue University, Mr. Dauch
conducted business with a rah-rah tone and an iron handshake
kept firm by the frequent use of grip-building exercise
devices during meetings. When Mr. Dauch jumped to Chrysler in
1980 from Volkswagen AG's U.S. operations, Chrysler was
struggling to avoid insolvency and improve the quality of its
products. In his first autobiography, Mr. Iacocca credited
Mr. Dauch with helping to implement changes that "brought
integrity to our manufacturing system."
   Mr. Dauch had rapport with blue-collar workers, and was
instrumental in sharply boosting productivity and quality at
the Jeep assembly plant in Toledo, Ohio, after Chrysler
purchased American Motors Corp. in 1987.
   His style earned him the nickname of "Coach," but it
wasn't always used with respect. While many of Mr. Dauch's
subordinates responded to his aggressive methods, with many
of them following him in jobs, several in Chrysler's
executive ranks found them irritating.
   One was Mr. Lutz, the heir-apparent, whose strained
relationship with Mr. Dauch stood in sharp contrast to the
manufacturing chief's close ties to Mr. Iacocca. Mr. Dauch
hinted at the situation in a telephone interview yesterday by
saying, "I have immense respect for Mr. Iacocca, but there is
an end of an era coming and it is time to move on."
   Mr. Dauch declined to say what he'll do after leaving
Chrysler. Rumors have surfaced that he may take a job with
TRW Inc.'s automotive operations. However, a TRW spokesman
said the speculation is "unequivocally not true."
   Mr. Dauch said he'd been trying to expand his
responsibilities inside Chrysler for the past two years, but
was repeatedly rebuffed. The two executives that preceded him
as the head of manufacturing had seats on Chrysler's board,
but the company never made Mr. Dauch a director.
   Mr. Dauch's opportunities seemed particularly limited as
Mr. Lutz climbed the auto maker's ranks. A former executive
vice president with Ford Motor Co., Mr. Lutz found his own
advancement there blocked and jumped to Chrysler five years
ago. Since then, he has made no secret of his ambition to
eventually run the company, and has moved to the forefront as
other, higher-ranking contenders have departed.
   The resignation of Mr. Dauch is only the latest sign that
Mr. Lutz is confident that he's closer than ever to succeed
Mr. Iacocca. One sign of the developing pecking order:
Chrysler's proxy report, which is scheduled to be released
today -- is expected to show that Mr. Lutz's compensation is
higher than that of Robert S. Miller Jr., Chrysler's
49-year-old vice chairman, and second only to Mr. Iacocca's.
   Also, Mr. Lutz isn't being shy about insisting that his
No. 2 status be recognized. When the company's just-released
annual report listed his name beneath Mr. Miller's, Mr. Lutz
was said to have expressed indignation. And Chrysler
underlings who send memos to both men are told that it's
politically correct to list Mr. Lutz's name first.
   The Acustar move formalizes steps Chrysler has recently
taken to shed assets and find joint venture partners in order
to relieve its cost burden. Chrysler officials, however,
insisted that the changes aren't an effort to dismantle
Acustar. An attempt to sell all of Acustar three years ago
met fierce union resistance.
   Altogether, Acustar had revenue of $2.5 billion last year.
Chrysler has started seeking buyers for at least three of
Acustar's subsidiaries. Until they are sold, each of the
three will stay under the Acustar umbrella, which comprises
the electronics, wiring harness, glass and plastics
divisions. The reorganization also means that Acustar's
finance, legal and production control operations will be
handled by the parent company.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
