ID: 128	RANK: 52	SCORE: 5.517117
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891205-0190 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-PX-12-05-89 1431EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>s w BC-NixonBiographers Adv10   12-05 1167</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-Nixon Biographers, Adv 10,1196</SECOND>
<HEAD>$adv10</HEAD>
<HEAD>For Release Sunday, Dec. 10, and thereafter</HEAD>
<HEAD>Biographers Praise Nixon Accomplishments If Not Ethics</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By W. DALE NELSON</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Herbert Parmet once vowed to help keep Richard
Nixon from becoming president. Stephen Ambrose says that in 1974
all he wanted was to get Nixon out of office. Roger Morris was so
appalled by the invasion of Cambodia that he resigned from the
Nixon White House.
   Now all three have written books on the 37th president, and all
say the experience has increased their respect for Nixon _ even
though none of the three exonerates him for ethical failings.
   ``I think it was very important to see him as the very
sensitive, intelligent human being that he is,'' Parmet, a
historian whose previous books include a definitive work on
President Kennedy, said in a telephone interview.
   Ambrose, now at work on an account of the onslaught of criticism
that drove Nixon from office in the Watergate era, said, ``I can't
help but have a no-longer-secret admiration for his ability to
stand up to it, and fight back.''
   Morris is critical of Nixon's ethics, but says his book is an
even-handed portrait.
   Parmet, a professor of history at Queensborough Community
College in New York, worked six years on his one-volume biography,
``Richard Nixon and His America,'' scheduled for publication Jan.
15 by Little Brown.
   Ambrose, a historian who teaches at the University of New
Orleans, is writing the final volume of a three-volume biography.
The second volume, ``The Triumph of a Politician,'' was published
recently by Simon and Schuster.
   Morris, who has forged a reputation as an investigative
journalist since quitting the National Security Council staff in
1970, recently completed the first of a projected three volumes:
``Richard Milhous Nixon: The Rise of an American Politician,''
published by Henry Holt and Co.
   Thus, with four living ex-presidents on the scene for the first
time in more than a century, the one who is getting the lion's
share of the attention is the one who was driven from office. Nixon
resigned on Aug. 9, 1974, after revelations stemming from a botched
burglary at Democratic headquarters during his 1972 re-election
campaign.
   Nixon himself is putting finishing touches on the seventh book
he has written since his resignation. ``In the Arena: A Memoir of
Victory, Defeat and Renewal'' is scheduled for mid-April
publication by Simon and Schuster.
   Nixon's spokesman, John Taylor, said he does not believe the
former president has read any of the books about him. Nixon said in
a television interview last year that he never does.
   Nixon granted five interviews to Parmet, but declined to be
interviewed by Ambrose or Morris. Morris, who has written critical
books about Henry Kissinger and Alexander Haig, both top White
House aides in the Nixon years, said, ``I am sure he regarded me as
a critic and as an adversary.''
   Taylor said Parmet was recommended to Nixon by mutual friends
and the former president was ``aware of his high ranking in the
scholarly community.''
   Parmet, a Democrat whose works include ``JFK: The Presidency of
John F. Kennedy,'' said he thinks it was the interviews more than
anything that burnished his view of Nixon.
   ``I, for one, as many Americans, grew up with a view of Nixon
that was really based on a Herblock caricature,'' he said. The
heavy-jowled, stubbly and glowering figure portrayed by the
Washington Post editorial cartoonist ``was an unmitigated force of
evil,'' Parmet said.
   ``I promised my daughter once that he would never become
president; she still holds that against me,'' the historian said.
   ``I feel that I have gotten to understand Nixon based on the
research I have done and probably more emphatically on the
one-to-one personal encounters,'' he said. ``I began to see the
basis for ... how he felt himself in a constant underdog role.
   ``This has nothing to do, or very little to do, with policy. It
has a great deal to do with the understanding of the man.
Understanding does not necessarily lead to approval, but it does
help me to see things from his perspective, and I think that's very
important.''
   After he finished the book, Parmet said, he turned to his editor
at Little Brown, Ray Roberts, and asked, ``Do you think this is
sympathetic to Nixon or hostile?''
   Roberts said it was sympathetic, Parmet recalled.
   Ambrose, who wrote an admiring two-volume biography of Dwight
Eisenhower before taking on Nixon, said his revised estimate of the
first U.S. president to resign from office stemmed from ``the fact
he is not in active politics anymore and I am trying to look at him
as a historian rather than as a citizen.''
   ``I am giving the devil his due,'' he said.
   He interviewed former Nixon aides, including Sen. Daniel Patrick
Moynihan, D-N.Y., and New York Times columnist William Safire, and
found they ``really like the guy and admire him.''
   ``I just had to rethink my own feelings about Nixon in the light
of what people whose opinion I respect felt about him,'' he said.
   ``And then I'm working right now on the year 1974, and I must
say that Nixon in adversity is more likable and more admirable than
Nixon in triumph. Now that doesn't mean that I have suddenly
decided that he was innocent. By no means. In fact, I think I
probably know as much as anybody except Nixon himself about how
guilty he was.
   ``Also I hadn't paid any attention in '74 to what Nixon was
doing other than Watergate. All I wanted was to get him out of
office.''
   After taking another look at Nixon's proposals on arms control,
welfare reform, federal aid to education and health care, he said,
``I just have to groan at what we lost'' when he resigned.
   Morris said his research ``gave me a great deal of added respect
for how good a politician he was. I think as a young man he was
quite superb, and would be good today.''
   But his studies did not soften Morris' view of Nixon's
California campaigns against Rep. Jerry Voorhis for the House in
1946 and Helen Gahagan Douglas for the Senate in 1950, often
criticized for red-baiting and character assassination.
   ``If anything the critics did not know the half,'' he said.
``Those campaigns were worse than even the critics thought.''
   ``He was a meticulous, painstaking, thorough, often brilliant,
very well organized, beautifully timed politician,'' said Morris.
``That doesn't say anything at all about his values. It doesn't
have anything to do with the compromise of his integrity, or dirty
money, or the honesty of his campaigning.''
   Yet Morris, a Democrat when he first met Nixon and went to work
for him, said: ``I think we ended up writing a very empathetic and
even-handed book about him and especially about his family. It is a
book I wouldn't hesitate to show to his mother or father if they
were still alive.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Sunday, Dec. 10</NOTE>
</DOC>
