ID: 128	RANK: 58	SCORE: 5.423687
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880405-0241 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-04-05-88 0121EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r f PM-Japan-Autos Bjt   04-05 0767</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Japan-Autos, Bjt,0789</SECOND>
<HEAD>Japanese Car Makers Help Boost U.S. Motor Vehicle Exports To Japan</HEAD>
<DATELINE>TOKYO (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Aided by the stronger yen, sales of U.S.-built
motor vehicles in Japan are expected to triple this year, but still
will hold only a marginal share of the world's second-largest auto
market.
   Sales of U.S.-built cars could reach 12,000 this year, out of a
6 million-vehicle market that includes minitrucks and minicars.
   But U.S. automakers should not be overjoyed at such growth,
because much of it will come from Japanese automakers who export
their U.S.-built cars to Japan, says Kunihiko Ono, an official at
the Japan Automobile Importers Association.
   Ono said the impetus for the surge would not come from the Big
Three U.S. automakers _ Chrysler Corp., Ford Motor Co. and General
Motors Corp. _ but from imports of the Honda Accord designed by the
wholly-owned U.S. subsidiary of Japan's Honda Motor Co. and
assembled at its plant in Marysville, Ohio.
   The expected surge in U.S. motor vehicle sales underscores the
efforts made by the governments of the United States, Japan,
Britain, France, and West Germany since September 1985 to reduce
trade imbalances by driving down the value of the dollar and
improving the export competitiveness of U.S. manufacturing industry.
   Ono also said foreign car makers should be more encouraged to
export to Japan because of the government's recent move to remove
tariffs on imported cars and relax elaborate import inspection
procedures.
   But Japanese government and industry officials criticize the
U.S. Big Three automakers for failing to capitalize on the dollar's
decline, which should make U.S. autos more competitive against
local models.
   Recent Japanese import statistics indicate only the West Germans
have been able to seize on a growing Japanese consumer preference
toward luxury cars fueled by the stronger buying power stemming
from the rising yen.
   Of the 97,750 foreign motor vehicles sold here last year, only
4,006 or 4.1 percent were U.S. made. West German makers accounted
for sales of 74,289 units, or 76 percent.
   Analysts say sales of U.S.-made motor vehicles in Japan have
been less than impressive since peaking at 16,739 vehicles in 1979.
   This week, Honda will become the first Japanese automaker to
import its U.S.-made cars when 540 Accords are unloaded from a
U.S.-flagged ship at Narashino Port, near Tokyo.
   Mazda Motor Co., a Ford affiliate, has announced that this
summar it will begin sales of the 2.2 liter-engined Ford Probe
built at Mazda's new plant in Flat Rock, Michigan. A Mazda
spokesman, Noboru Hosoya, says his company is hoping to handle
3,000 to 4,000 Probes annually in the future after selling 800
units this year.
   Many observers see the Big Three's problems as stemming from a
lack of commitment to Japan, not necessarily from current Japanese
business conditions.
   Honda Executive Vice President Koichiro Yoshizawa said that,
even accounting for export costs, it should cost as much to build
cars in the United States as it does in Japan as long as the dollar
remains near current levels.
   Takamori Matsuda, a vice president at Prudential-Bache
Securities (Japan) Ltd., says Detroit is suffering from an image
problem, as evidenced by deep-rooted Japanese consumer distrust
toward the Big Three's overall product quality as well as by
commonly held views about poor after-sales servicing, bad fuel
economy and high sticker prices.
   Other factors include the unsubstantiated association between
their cars and Japan's underworld, the Yakuza gangsters. The
Yakuzas are said to prefer driving large, luxurious U.S.-made cars.
Ono reports that parking lots in western Japanese cities, where
certain powerful Yakuza clans are based, refuse to admit foreign
cars, including Volkswagens, claiming they are a cause of trouble.
   To increase its market share in Japan, an official at a leading
Japanese automaker argues, Detroit should adopt a long-term
commitment that can withstand short-term losses.
   ``If they want a bigger slice of the market, they'd have to,
first, create Japanese sales subsidiaries and set up decent
distribution channels and reduce their reliance on small-scale
importers, and, second, market right-hand drive cars,'' he said.
   Analysts see recent moves by GM and Ford to team up with Mazda
and Suzuki Motor Co., respectively, as a step in the right
direction.
   One of Mazda's two dealer networks early this year added the
Ford Taurus to its product lineup and expects to sell 1,000 cars
this year.
   GM's joint operations with Suzuki, which is 5 percent controlled
by the U.S. automaker, will market two GM subcompacts starting in
April or May. Suzuki officials hope to sell 500 cars the first
year, and to boost sales to 3,000 units annually in three years.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
