ID: 128	RANK: 79	SCORE: 5.161481
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880913-0198 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-13-88 1938EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u p AM-PoliticalRdp 2ndLd-Writethru a0768 09-13 1046</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Political Rdp, 2nd Ld-Writethru, a0768,990</SECOND>
<HEAD>Dukakis Doubts Bush Could Deal With Gorbachev; Bush Talks Recovery</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: EDITS and UDPATES throughout to include new poll results and
Bush comments on latest resignation, and to tighten.
^By DAVID ESPO</NOTE>
<BYLINE>AP Political Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Michael Dukakis questioned on Tuesday how George Bush would be
able to deal with Soviet Leader Mikhail Gorbachev ``if he couldn't
stand up to the ayatollah or say `no' to Noriega.'' The vice
president preached the gospel of Republican prosperity and said
America is a ``rising nation again.''
   GOP vice presidential candidate Dan Quayle got off the snappiest
one-liner of the day when he announced to a Milwaukee audience that
Dukakis had lost his top naval adviser. ``His rubber duck drowned
in his bathtub,'' Quayle said in another in a series of comments
designed to undercut the Democratic candidate's foreign policy and
defense credentials.
   Bush campaigned as two new national polls found Bush pulling
ahead of Dukakis by eight points. Bush led by 47 percent to 39
percent in a CBS News-New York Times poll and 49 percent to 41
percent in a Gallup poll.
   Gallup found results from Bush's attacks on Dukakis for vetoing
a Massachusetts law requiring teachers to lead students in the
Pledge of Allegiance. The poll said 68 percent of the registered
voters it interviewed had heard of the Pledge of Allegiance issue,
and by a 2-1 margin they had a less favorable view of Dukakis
because of it.
   The Republican campaign was buffeted with more controversy when
the co-chairman of ``Bulgarians for Bush'' resigned after being
identified in a newspaper report as the former head of a
Nazi-aligned group formed in Bulgaria after World War II. Radi
Slavoff became the sixth person to resign from Bush ethnic
organizations over allegations of anti-Semitic activities.
   Top Republican National Committee official Frederic V. Malek
also resigned Sunday after it was reported that he had conducted a
survey under orders from then-President Nixon of top Bureau of
Labor Statistics officials to see how many of them were Jewish.
   Bush expressed irritation at what he called the lack of ``hard
evidence on various things.'' Although he refused to say whether he
would hire Malek in a Bush administration, the vice president
expressed confidence in him.
   President Reagan, in remarks before Slavoff's departure had been
announced, said he was sure the vice president's campaign hadn't
suffered from any appearance of anti-Semitism. He added he was
certain ``because I know (Bush) and I know the people involved and
there isn't an iota of discrimination in any of them.''
   Dukakis spokesman Leslie Dach said Bush's policy on questions of
bigotry is to ``ignore the shame'' and blame the opposition.
   The new polls came on the heels of two surveys providing
snapshots of a close presidential race with eight weeks remaining.
One survey indicated Bush was leading, but by less than the poll's
margin of error. The other indicated Dukakis led, but also by less
than the margin of potential error.
   The image was thus of a race still forming, with the outcome
likely to be heavily influenced by two presidential debates in late
September and mid-October, as well as by an early October
confrontation between Quayle and Democratic vice presidential
candidate Lloyd Bentsen.
   NBC executives said Tuesday the network has reversed its
decision and will carry the first presidential debate live on Sept.
25, interrupting prime-time coverage of the Summer Olympics. The
other major networks said earlier they would cover the debate as it
occurred.
   Both Bush and Dukakis made their way through large battleground
states during the day.
   Dukakis, hoping to bolster his standing as a candidate
knowledgable about foreign policy, offered his view of U.S.-Soviet
relations, criticizing Bush and Quayle and invoking the optimistic
rhetoric of John F. Kennedy.
   ``Civility is not a sign of weakness and sincerity is always
subject to proof,'' he quoted the last president from
Massachusetts. Dukakis said he would challenge Gorbachev to reach
additional arms control accords and to open the Eastern bloc to
more freedom.
   He said Republicans ``are content to leave the intiative on arms
control and regional disputes and the spread of advanced weapons
systems around the world to Mr. Gorbachev. We are not.''
   ``George Bush has been around Washington for a long time, but if
he couldn't stand up to the ayatollah or say `no' to Noriega, how
will he measure up to Gorbachev?'' Dukakis said in a speech to the
Chicago Council on Foreign Relations.
   That was a reference to the Iran-Contra arms-for-hostages affair
and U.S. government dealings with Panamanian leader Manuel Antonio
Noriega, who is under indictment on drug charges.
   Dukakis later went to a tank factory in Sterling Heights, Mich.,
where he donned a helmet and rode in an M-1 Abrams tank for the
benefit of television cameras. He recalled Bush's statement last
year that Soviet tank workers would be useful in Detroit, and he
said, ``Mr. Bush, I'd rather have mechanics from Michigan.''
   As for Quayle, Dukakis noted that since World War II, three vice
presidents have moved into the Oval Office without being elected
president.
   ``Dan Quayle is no Gerald Ford. He's no Lyndon Johnson. And he
sure ain't Harry Truman,'' the Democratic presidential candidate
said.
   Bush countered on his running mate's behalf: ``Isn't it
interesting that the top of the ticket has to be shooting at the
vice presidential nominee now.''
   Bush made his way from Illinois to Missouri to California during
the day _ states accounting for 82 electoral votes of the 270
needed for victory _ as he stressed the economic recovery of the
Reagan era.
   Scorning Dukakis as the governor from ``Taxachusetts,'' Bush
depicted Dukakis and the Democrats as ``prophets of pessimism.'' He
told the Executives Club of Chicago, ``Americans at every income
level are certifiably better off than they were in 1981. So the
next time somebody tells you that America is declining, tell 'em to
put away the 1980 calendar, this is 1988. America is a rising
nation again.''
   The CBS-Times poll was conducted among 1,043 probably voters
from Thursday through Sunday and had a margin of error of plus or
minus 3 percentage points. The Gallup poll was done Friday through
Sunday among 1,003 registered voters and was given a four-point
margin of error.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
