ID: 128	RANK: 84	SCORE: 5.106734
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890929-0226 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-29-89 0750EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r f PM-Northwest     09-29 0632</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Northwest,0653</SECOND>
<HEAD>Labor Upbeat About Change in Management at Northwest</HEAD>
<DATELINE>EAGAN, Minn. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Labor leaders welcomed Alfred Checchi's
emergence as chairman of NWA Inc., even though the change came
sooner than many expected and in the face of defections from top
management ranks.
   Checchi, 41, led a $3.65 billion buyout of Northwest Airlines'
parent in June. On Thursday the carrier said Chairman Steven
Rothmeier resigned for personal reasons after holding the position
since 1986. Four other top executives also resigned.
   ``I suspect that Mr. Checchi was surprised by the
resignations,'' said Northwest spokesman Alan Muncaster.
   Muncaster said Checchi was informed Wednesday of the
resignations, which will take effect Oct. 15. Before Wednesday, the
Los Angeles investor had repeatedly said he wanted Rothmeier to
continue as chairman.
   Checchi named Frederic Malek as president to replace president
and chief operating officer John Horn. Malek and Checchi will split
the chief executive duties previously handled by Rothmeier,
Muncaster said.
   Also resigning from the airline were Benjamin G. Griggs Jr.,
executive vice president of NWA Companies, Allan Pray, executive
vice president-international, and William Sitter, executive vice
president-administration and chief information officer.
   None could be reached for comment Thursday.
   James Cronin, former president and chief executive officer of
Tiger International, was named executive vice president and
chairman of NWA companies, including the Northwest Aerospace
Training Corp., MLT Vacations and Northwest Aircraft Inc.
   ``I'm getting reports from membership that it's a pretty
positive move,'' said Guy Cook, chairman of the International
Association of Machinists District Lodge 143, the carrier's largest
union.
   Cook said any rift between Rothmeier and Checchi could include
differing views of labor. He said Rothmeier inherited a byzantine
outlook from predecessors Donald Nyrop and M. Joseph Lapensky.
Nyrop is legendary for removing doors from the toilet stalls in the
employee wash rooms at Northwest to discourage lengthy bathroom
breaks.
   ``I think Checchi has given clear indications that he wishes to
change the direction of management-labor relations,'' Cook said.
   Jim Halvorson, a spokesman for the local unit of the Air Line
Pilots Association, said he had expected Rothmeier's team to stay
in place up to a year after the buyout. But he, too, welcomed new
management.
   U.S. Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner, who is reviewing
the buyout, had no warning of the resignations, Muncaster said. He
said it was too early to tell what impact the change will have on
Skinner's review.
   Muncaster said there was no indication that Checchi's
chairmanship would be temporary. Management by Checchi and Malek
``would definitely be hands-on,'' he added.
   Cook said the split was inevitable because Rothmeier was
accustomed to reporting to a docile board of directors. Since June,
Rothmeier has had to answer to Checchi, a former Marriott Corp.
executive who also worked as a dealmaker for the Bass brothers of
Texas.
   ``When you have two very strong-willed egos butting heads at
that level, you know it won't last long,'' Cook said.
   Neither Checchi nor Malek has airline experience, but both
worked for Marriott, which has close ties to the industry. In
addition, Malek was a finalist in December 1987 for the top job at
United Airlines. Malek, a merchant banker from Washington, D.C.,
also worked on the staff of former President Richard Nixon and was
an investor in Checchi's buyout group.
   U.S. Rep. James Oberstar, D-Minn., chairman of the House
aviation subcommittee, said the change at Northwest was necessary
to improve the company's ``prickly labor-management relations.''
   Rothmeier oversaw the 1986 acquisition of Republic Airlines and
led management's fight against a hostile takeover bid of Northwest
launched early this year by oil billionaire Marvin Davis. The
takeover battled ended in June when Checchi's group completed its
all-cash buyout of the carrier for $121 a share. Rothmeier said at
the time that he considered Rothmeier's group to be friendly.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
