ID: 135	RANK: 21	SCORE: 21.723198
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890918-0141 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-18-89 1833EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-Hugo 3rdLd-Writethru a0720 09-18 1115</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Hugo, 3rd Ld-Writethru, a0720,1144</SECOND>
<HEAD>URGENT</HEAD>
<HEAD>Hurricane Lashes Puerto Rico, Leaves At Least 14 Dead in Caribbean</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: SUBS graf 13 beginning `At 3 p.m. ...' with two grafs to UPDATE
with latest storm coordinates, wind speed, directions. Picks up graf 14
pvs, `Meteorologist Jesse ...' DELETES final graf to trim.</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By ROBERT GLASS</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Hurricane Hugo's 125 mph winds
pounded Puerto Rico on Monday after ripping across other islands in
the eastern Caribbean, leaving at least 14 people dead and thousands
homeless.
   The National Weather Service said Hugo, the most powerful storm
to hit the region this decade, slammed into the eastern tip of
Puerto Rico and skirted the northern coast before roaring to the
west-northwest toward the Bahamas.
   Hugo also threatens the Dominican Republic, which shares the
island of Hispaniola with Haiti, and civil defense authorities in
the Dominican Republic before dark Monday declared a state of
emergency.
   Eastern Airlines spokeswoman Karen Ceremsak in Miami said the
carrier flew a special Boeing 727 charter to the Dominican resort of
Puerto Plata Monday and returned to Miami with about 135 vacationers.
   The storm's winds overturned cars and stripped roofs off houses
and office buildings and sent chunks of concrete plunging into
streets in San Juan, where one-third of the U.S. commonwealth's 3.3
million people live. Fifty airplanes were reported destroyed at the
airport in Isla Verde.
   There was widespread damage in San Juan's Condado Beach area, the
site of many of the island's large tourist hotels. Shattered glass,
strips of roofing and overturned trees littered the streets, and few
drivers ventured out in their vehicles.
   Hugo cut power and disrupted international communications to the
island.
   One woman in a San Juan high-rise told radio station WOSO of
watching sections of the city darken as the first high winds and
heavy rains hit San Juan. Widespread power outages also were
reported in the Dominican Republic.
   There were no immediate reports of casualties in Puerto Rico
although one man was electrocuted while trying to remove a
television antenna as he prepared for the storm Sunday.
   Bands of people, mostly youths, looted storm-damaged shops in San
Juan and police patrols were reinforced at the main Post Office,
political party offices and shopping areas.
   In a boutique on the ground floor of the two-story building
housing The Associated Press bureau in San Juan, young looters
defied winds hitting 100mph at the peak of the storm and carried out
armloads of women's clothing.
   The storm blew out the windows in the AP office on a peninsula
between the sea and San Juan harbor, destroying its computers and
office equipment. One staffer said his furniture was blown out the
windows of his apartment on the 20th story of his building.
   At 6 p.m. EDT, Hugo's center was latitude 19.5 degrees north and
longitude 67.0 west, or 90 miles northwest of San Juan, said the
National Hurricane Center in Coral Gables, Fla. It said Hugo was
moving 13 mph in a wobbly, west-northwest to northwest direction.
   Maximum sustained winds declined slightly over the day, to 115
mph, and hurricane-force winds extended up to 75 miles from its
center, the forecasters added.
   Meteorologist Jesse Moore at the National Hurricane Center said
it was too early to tell whether Hugo would strike the U.S.
mainland. He said the storm was expected to be off southeastern
Bahamas by Wednesday and ``after that, it's anybody's guess.''
   Five people were reported killed, 80 injured and more than 10,000
homeless Sunday on the French island of Guadeloupe, relief officials
said. Two people were killed in Antigua, according to Beacon Radio
in Anguilla, and there were reports of six deaths in Montserrat.
   Richard Weening of Milwaukee, Wis., chairman of Caribbean
Communications Co., which operates the GEM Radio Network from its
headquarters on Montserrat, said ham operators linked to the network
said the storm killed six people on the British Island and damaged
95 percent of the homes and the hospital.
   Nearly all of Montserrat's 12,000 residents were homeless and
without food or fresh water, said ham radio operator Stuart Haimes
of Queens, N.Y.
   Off St. Thomas, charter boat captain O.B. O'Brian told Miami TV
station WTVJ that many boats and homes had been damaged. ``I'd say
the island is pretty well devastated,'' he said.
   Most of the Virgin Islands' 106,000 residents live on St. Thomas
and St. Croix. On St. Croix, a ham radio operator said the winds
tore off the roofs from up to 75 percent of the homes.
   Officials said stores in the St. Croix town of Christiansted were
heavily damaged, and there were reports of looting. National Guard
Adjutant Gen. Robert Moorehead said 1,000 people were evacuated to
rescue shelters in St. Croix.
   Storm watches were in effect for parts of the Dominican Republic,
and a hurricane warning was issued for the southern Bahamas,
including the Turks and Caicos islands.
   The weather service said winds ripped the roof off a baseball
stadium on Vieques, an island with 7,000 residents 10 miles east of
Puerto Rico.
   Bernard Sternberg, a Sunrise, Fla., ham radio operator, said he
talked to a radio operator who was on a boat in the eye of the
hurricane as it passed over Vieques. ``He asked us to pray for him
and we did,'' Sternberg said. ``We prayed for all of them.''
   High winds Sunday blew roofs off six houses in the offshore
island of Culebra. San Juan's Luis Munoz Marin International
Airport, by far the region's biggest, was closed, as were schools,
banks, courts and government offices.
   Navy Lt. Cmdr. Steve Burnett, spokesman for the Atlantic Fleet in
Norfolk, Va., reported ``some damage to buildings and housing'' at
Roosevelt Roads Naval Station on Puerto Rico's northeastern coast.
``At this point, we don't know the extent of the damage,'' he said.
   Burnett said all Navy ships that had been operating in the area
moved north over the last 48 hours.
   Residents of hilly areas where flash floods are a danger were
urged to evacuate, and Social Services Secretary Carmen Sonia Zayas
said 11,300 people were moved from flood-prone coastal areas to
rescue shelters.
   The Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico were last hit by a major
hurricane in 1956, when Betsy caused extensive damage and killed 11
people in Puerto Rico.
   Hugo is the fourth hurricane of the Atlantic hurricane season and
is the most powerful hurricane to hit the region since Hurricane
David in 1979. That storm killed an estimated 1,200 people in the
Caribbean and Florida.
   In Paris, the French Defense Ministry assigned 3,000 soldiers,
two military transport aircraft and four cargo vessels to assist in
restoring communications and emergency services to Guadeloupe.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
