ID: 135	RANK: 25	SCORE: 20.982447
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890920-0001 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-20-89 0002EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-Hugo 4thLd-Writethru a0800 09-20 1046</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Hugo, 4th Ld - Writethru, a0800,1072</SECOND>
<HEAD>Killer Hurricane Devastates Caribbean; Threatens U.S.</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: SUBS 5th graf, `At 10:30 ..., with 2 grafs to include Hugo's
track, speed; picks up 6th graf: `Hurricane warnings ...</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos PAR3, PAR4, WX10, PAR9; LaserGraphic</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By DAN SEWELL</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>MIAMI (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Hurricane Hugo, the Caribbean killer blamed for 25
deaths, seethed past the Bahamas Tuesday on an uncertain path that
threatens an area from Florida to North Carolina by Friday.
   Disaster teams found death and destruction in Puerto Rico and a
string of resort islands clobbered by the mightiest storm in a
decade in the northeastern Caribbean. More than 50,000 people were
homeless, and military planes ferried radios, drinking water,
generators, chainsaws and other equipment to stricken areas that
pleaded for more help.
   ``Whole buildings just picked up and left,'' said James Grissim,
a resident of Water Island in St. Thomas. He recalled ``sheet metal
roofing flying through the air, singing as it went, and glass, the
sound of glass breaking all over the place.''
   Forecasters used computers, satellites and charts of old storms
but could not predict Hugo's wobbly path. It lurched to the north
and west because other weather systems seemed to be blocking it from
heading into the open Atlantic.
   At 10:30 p.m. EDT, the hurricane's center was near latitude 23.8
degrees north and longitude 69.5 west, about 190 miles northeast of
Grand Turk Island, a British island off the southern Bahamas,
according to the National Weather Service.
   Hugo was moving northwesterly at about 12 miles per hour, but its
winds were down to 105 mph, and forecasters expected some
fluctuations in Hugo's strength overnight.
   Hurricane warnings were downgraded to storm warnings for the
southern Bahamas as Hugo skirted past, but the Bahamian government
issued warnings for the central islands of the archipelago.
Islanders boarded up their homes as a precaution.
   ``No one is relaxing their vigil because it can change
direction,'' said Bill Kalis, press secretary for the government's
information office.
   In Florida, NASA officials said they would wait until Wednesday
before deciding to move the space shuttle Atlantis, scheduled for
launch Oct. 12, from its launch pad and into shelter. They also put
off a decision on whether to remove a Navy communications satellite
from an Atlas-Centaur rocket on another launch pad until more is
known about Hugo's path.
   ``I think Hugo has certainly got people nervous,'' said Kathleen
Hale, director of the Dade County Office of Emergency Management.
   Fred Krounse, spokesman at Brevard County's emergency management
office in Rockledge, Fla., said volunteers were getting 100
telephone calls an hour.
   Cruise ships steamed out of the way, while American Airlines'
heavy Caribbean service, which uses San Juan as its hub, was
suspended.
   In San Juan, National Guardsmen with automatic rifles patrolled
streets to help police with rescue and to prevent looting. Police
spokesman Tony Santiago said 40 businesses reported looting, much of
which occurred at the height of the storm. Police had arrested 30
people on looting charge, he said.
   Puerto Rico, Gov. Rafael Hernandez Colon said he would ask the
federal government to declare the island of 3.3 million, a U.S.
commonwealth, a disaster area and seek immediate relief aid.
   Looting by machete-wielding mobs was also reported on the island
of St. Thomas in the U.S. Virgin Islands.
   Relief officials asked for cots and plastic sheetings to use for
shelters for the thousands of islanders whose homes were crumpled by
Hugo, the fourth hurricane of the season and the first to hit Puerto
Rico since 1956.
   Coast Guard vessels from Puerto Rico would scour the waters off
the island because of reports ``there are a lot of people stranded
(on boats) out in the water,'' said Coast Guard Lt. Stan Douglas.
   Hugo walloped the northeastern part of the island, then skirted
its populous northern coast on Monday. It churned on to the
northwest and toward open water. It whirled past but missed the
Dominican Republic.
   At least 25 people in the Caribbean died from the storm, said
Cizanette Rivera, a spokeswoman for the Civil Defense in Puerto Rico.
   Two people died on Puerto Rico while trying to remove a TV
antenna Sunday in preparation for the storm, according to Maria
Dolores Oronoz of the governor's office. She said no other deaths
had been reported on the island.
   However, American Red Cross spokesman Brian Ruberry said in
Washington there were reports of 12 deaths and 100 injuries in
Puerto Rico, and that three-fourths of the island's residents were
without power.
   Hugo's winds overturned cars, peeled roofs off houses and office
buildings and sent chunks of concrete plunging into streets in San
Juan. Fifty airplanes were reported destroyed, mangled into twisted
wrecks at the Isla Verde airport.
   In Hawaii, Secretary of the Interior Manuel Lujan said $500,000
in emergency assistance funds were released to aid storm-stricken
areas of the U.S. Virgin Islands.
   Federal teams reached the U.S. Virgin Islands to assess damages
Tuesday before deciding whether to recommend disaster relief.
   Sailboats were blown out of the water and thrown up to 150 feet
on shore in St. Thomas, and some waterfront businesses have
disappeared.
   Hugo's itinerary included some of the most idyllic pearls in a
750-mile long necklace of Caribbean isles, beginning early Sunday
with the French resort of Guadeloupe in the Leeward Islands. Five
were killed, 80 injured and more than 10,000 lost their homes there.
   Also damaged were the lush British isle of Montserrat, Antigua,
St. Kitts, Nevis, Anguilla, the British Virgin Islands, the U.S.
Virgin Islands of St. Croix and St. Thomas and Puerto Rico.
   Forecasters said it was the region's worst storm in terms of wind
strength since Hurricane David, which killed 1,200 people in the
Caribbean and Florida in 1979.
   Last year, Hurricane Gilbert walloped the western Caribbean and
took a southern route through the Gulf of Mexico, killing more than
300 people and causing billions of dollars of damage in nine nations.
   Meanwhile, Tropical Storm Iris was building up, although
forecasters said its strengthening would be slowed by Hugo's wake.
Iris, with 70 mph winds, was about 275 miles northeast of the
Leeward Islands on Tuesday and was moving northwest at about 12 mph.
   At 10:30 p.m., Iris was near latitude 21.3 north, longitude 60.6
west.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
