ID: 135	RANK: 27	SCORE: 20.764568
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890921-0038 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-21-89 0312EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-Hugo 8thLd-Writethru a0447 09-21 1264</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Hugo, 8th Ld - Writethru, a0447,1299</SECOND>
<HEAD>Hugo Picks Up Speed En Route To Coast; Bush Orders Troops</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: SUBS 20th graf, `At midnight ..., to UPDATE with 3 a.m. EDT
position, direction, speed.</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos MH3, WX11, LaserGraphic</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By DAN SEWELL</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>MIAMI (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Hurricane Hugo quickened its pace toward the Eastern
Seaboard on Wednesday as residents gathered supplies and made
evacuation plans, while violence and looting broke out on the
shattered islands in the storm's wake.
   President Bush ordered Army troops to St. Croix of the U.S.
Virgin Islands after National Guardsmen and police reportedly joined
prison escapees and others in wild looting. Armed Coast Guard
crewmen also went ashore to help restore order.
   Attorney General Dick Thornburgh ordered 100 U.S. marshals and
FBI agents to the island, and Coast Guard cutters evacuated
frightened tourists and residents. Bush also authorized troops to
help hurricane-damaged Puerto Rico.
   Forecasters issued a hurricane watch from St. Augustine, Fla., to
Cape Hatteras, N.C., urging coastal residents to begin taking
precautions. Hugo picked up speed over open water and could come
ashore late Thursday or early Friday.
   ``I think they're looking at this one with a bit of respect,''
city spokesman Pat Dowling said in Myrtle Beach, S.C., as radio and
TV advisories warned: ``Remember the people of Puerto Rico.''
   Since Sunday, Hugo has killed at least 25 people, left thousands
homeless and caused hundreds of millions of dollars in damage as it
slashed through the northeastern Caribbean with wind of 125 to 150
mph.
   Chaos reigned on St. Croix, as police and National Guardsmen
joined machete-armed mobs on a post-Hugo looting spree. Gunshots
were fired, and ham radio operators heard reports that inmates had
either escaped or been released because of prison damage and were
looting.
   Tourists pleaded with reporters landing on the island to take
them off.
   ``They said, `Please get food! Please get water! Please help us!
They're looting. We've seen police looting. We've seen National
Guard looting. There's no law and order here,''' said Gary Williams,
a reporter for the San Juan daily El Nuevo Dia.
   The U.S. Coast Guard had six ships in the area and sent armed
crewmen from the cutter Bear ashore to help restore order.
   ``Our shore party went ashore and basically determined there was
a complete breakdown of authority. There's a very high indication
that innocent people are going to get hurt in an act of violence
there,'' Lt. Jeff Karonis said in Miami.
   The crew was evacuating ``all people from the island who fear for
their safety,'' the Coast Guard said in a statement. A cargo plane
was ready to supplement the evacuation if needed.
   Tourists sat on the porch of the King Christian Hotel, protected
by hotel employees carrying shotguns.
   ``It was horrendous,'' said Rose Hertzog of Northampton, Pa., who
waited out the storm in a hotel laundry room. ``I thought we were
going to die.
   Thornburgh ordered the 100 marshals and FBI agents to protect
federal officials and property, as well as help bolster local law
enforcement, said David Runkel, a Justice Department spokesman in
Washington. A small team of FBI agents was sent in first to set up a
command post.
   The White House said Alexander Farrelly, governor of the U.S.
Virgin Islands, asked Bush to authorize use of troops to restore
order on St. Croix, but Farrelly on Wednesday night denied making
that request.
   Bush on Wednesday declared the U.S. Virgin Islands a disaster
area and a White House spokesman said a similar declaration was
expected soon for Puerto Rico, which suffered widespread damage.
   The Coast Guard sent cutters to St. Thomas to pick up personnel
and their families whose homes were destroyed. It also was
evacuating 200 American medical students at Montserrat, a British
colony where Hugo damaged nearly 90 percent of the homes.
   Federal relief shipments laden with supplies and rescue workers
from Florida, South Carolina, West Virginia and Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba, went to Puerto Rico, while British and French forces helped
Montserrat and Guadeloupe.
   At 3 a.m. EDT Thursday, Hugo's center was about 450 miles
southeast of Savannah, Ga., at 28.2 degrees north latitude and 75.2
degrees west longitude, and was moving northwest at 17 mph, up from
12 mph earlier in the day.
   Hugo's wind speed also rose from 105 to 110 mph Wednesday, but
forecasters said little further strengthening was likely.
   Forecasters said Hugo's path made residents from Savannah, Ga.,
to Charleston, S.C., most likely to be in harm's way, but they were
delaying issuing hurricane warnings until they could make better
projections.
   Bob Sheets, director of the National Hurricane Center, said
officials didn't want to spur ``a cry-wolf syndrome'' by triggering
premature evacuation of the resort and retiree communities. But
forecasters said they hoped U.S. residents learned from Hugo's
Caribbean rampage.
   ``When those islands got pounded like they did, that's
remarkable,'' forecaster Martin Nelson said of the relatively low
death toll. ``We gave them a lot of warning, and they apparently
took the warnings.''
   U.S. coastal residents have enough time to prepare, he said.
   ``Let's hope they are,'' Nelson said. ``If later on, they say
`Boy, you sure got that wrong,' that's OK. We'd rather that happen
than have people wake up at 2 a.m. and find a hurricane coming.''
   South Carolina Gov. Carroll Campell put state law enforcement
agencies on alert. `All we can do is to watch now and to wait,'' he
said.
   In Charleston, the historic City Hall was boarded up and school
children were told to stay home Thursday.
   Officials said coastal residents seemed to be taking the right
steps, such as storing emergency supplies and buying materials for
boarding up.
   ``They're buying me out of all my candles, tape, flashlights,
propane fuel, oil and lamps,'' said Tim Brindley, merchandise
manager of K mart in Mount Pleasant, S.C.
   ``I see a lot of people buying water and canned goods like pork
and beans. It's been pretty steady,'' said Bryan Raleigh, manager of
the Market Street Food Lion in Wilmington, N.C., where nearby
Carolina Beach suffered $90 million in damages when hit by Hurricane
Diana in 1984.
   Some took extra precautions.
   ``We're going to church a lot,'' said Dean S. Phillips, town
manager in Bethany Beach, Del.
   The Navy sent its Charleston-based ships to sea to avoid Hugo,
while crews were called Wednesday to their ships at Mayport Naval
Station near Jacksonville for a possible move out.
   ``Like the Boy Scouts, we're prepared,'' said Chief Petty Officer
Art Riccio.
   Adminstrators at the Florida School for the Deaf and Blind sent
home 400 children living in dormitories. ``The decision was to
assume the worst and plan accordingly,'' said Mary Jane Dillon, a
school spokeswoman.
   Bahamians, meanwhile, watched as the hurricane moved away with
little impact.
   ``It's a great sigh of relief for all of us in the Bahamas,''
said meteorologist Michael Stubbs in Nassau. ``Most people want to
be able to enjoy the sea and sunshine here, and now they can.''
   Meanwhile, forecasters said Tropical Storm Iris was being
weakened because of its proximity to Hugo, but could cause more
problems for the Hugo-hit islands.
   ``Satellite pictures show an area of thunderstorms extends south
of the center into the extreme northeastern Caribbean,'' forecaster
Gil Clark said. ``Unfortunately, this activity will be moving
westward over an area that was struck by Hurricane Hugo just three
days ago.''
   At 10:30 p.m., Iris was near latitude 22.0 north and longitude
64.0 west, or 250 miles north-northeast of Puerto Rico. Its winds
were down to 45 mph as the storm moved west-northwest at around 12
mph.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
