ID: 135	RANK: 42	SCORE: 19.314234
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890922-0184 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-22-89 1847EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-Hugo-Path     09-22 0691</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Hugo-Path,0713</SECOND>
<HEAD>Hugo Remnants Suprise West Virginia Before It Chugs North</HEAD>
<HEAD>With AM-Hugo, Bjt</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   The remnants of Hurricane Hugo made a surprise sweep through West
Virginia on Friday, downing power and telephone lines, snapping
trees and causing flooding before fizzling and meandering toward
Ohio.
   ``There's basically nothing left of him,'' said weather service
meteorologist Alan Reznek in Charleston, W.Va. ``His punch is gone.''
   The center of the storm advanced farther westward than expected,
targeting eastern Ohio, western Pennsylvania and western New York
before it was expected to wear itself out in Canada. It was moving
to the north at 30 mph.
   Charleston, S.C., got the full brunt of Hugo, which wrecked a
string of Caribbean resort islands beginning early Sunday. There
were 20 confirmed deaths in the Caribbean, but an official on Puerto
Rico said the death toll for the region was 26 people. About 50,000
people are homeless.
   Ten of the 11 U.S. deaths were in South Carolina. Eight died in
counties surrounding Charleston and one in the Columbia area, said
Warren Hardy of the state's Office of Emergency Preparedness. In
North Carolina, a 6-month-old baby was killed in Union County when a
tree fell on a house.
   A hurricane is a heat engine fueled by warm, moist air over open
oceans. When these giant storms hit land, they lose their wallop,
although they can still manage considerable bluster.
   Hugo was downgraded into a tropical storm at 6 a.m. and decayed
more as it went inland, but places in its path could expect several
inches of rain and high winds. By 6 p.m., Hugo had lost the
characteristics of a tropical storm, although the weather system
featured maximum sustained winds of 40 mph and torrential rains.
   Its last location was just west of Pittsburgh, Pa., at latitude
40.5 degrees north and longitude 81 degrees west. Officials said no
further tracking would be done.
   Earlier, Hugo was expected to skirt West Virginia. But
communities in the southern part of the state instead were lashed by
fierce winds and inundated with water.
   ``It's blowing 45 or 50 miles an hour,'' said Fred Kitts, of the
Mercer County Sheriff's Department in Princeton. ``We've had trees
fall on houses, cars, trailers. There are power lines everywhere.''
   Heavy rains brought rapidly rising water, which forced some
evacuations Friday in the Oakvale area of Mercer County, said
officials with the county's emergency services. There were no
immediate reports of injuries.
   At 4 p.m. EDT, the weather service said the center of the rapidly
weakening storm had moved out of West Virginia into southeastern
Ohio. Bob Sheets, director of the National Hurricane Center, said
the storm was expected to pass through eastern Ohio and western
Pennsylvania late Friday or early Saturday.
   The weather service issued a small stream and urban flood warning
Friday evening for Cuyahoga and Medina counties in northeast Ohio.
About 2{ inches of rain fell in Medina during a 90-minute period
late Friday afternoon.
   An outer band of the tropical storm hit Virginia's western half
earlier Friday, knocking down power lines and trees with winds
gusting as high as 81 mph and forcing residents in low-lying areas
of several counties to evacuate.
   But the eye of the storm swept through the narrowest part of the
state _ entering in Washington County and exiting in Tazwell County
_ and dumped far less rain than anticipated. Five to 10 inches of
rain was expected in areas where 3 inches or less fell.
   ``It passed a lot farther west than we thought it would and it
didn't stay here too long,'' said Janet Clements, spokeswoman for
the state Department of Emergency Services. No serious injuries were
reported.
   In Washington, government agencies, schools, transit officials
and property owners, preparing for the worst, were relieved when the
brunt of the storm missed the nation's capital.
   In New York City, rain and blustery winds were the biggest
concern. The threat of high tides and flooding and closed down the
Statue of Liberty's island.
   Emergency management coordinators in New Jersey also expected the
the worst from Hugo, but instead saw only some rainstorms and gusty
winds.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
