ID: 135	RANK: 68	SCORE: 17.617023
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891016-0009 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-10-16-89 0046EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-StormJerry 7thLd-Writethru a0416 10-16 1247</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Storm Jerry, 7th Ld-Writethru, a0416,1282</SECOND>
<HEAD>URGENT</HEAD>
<HEAD>Hurricane Jerry Hits Texas Coast; At Least Two Dead</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: LEADS with 17 grafs to UPDATE with two deaths, storm downgraded
to tropical storm, other details. Picks up 16th graf pvs, `As Jerry...'</HEAD>
<HEAD>Laserphotos HT1, MH1, LAK3, GAL1</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By SUSAN FAHLGREN</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>GALVESTON, Texas (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Hurricane Jerry roared into the Texas
coast Sunday, killing at least two people as it tossed cars and
ripped down power lines, balconies and trees in this island city.
The storm also spun off tornadoes that inflicted damage along the
Gulf Coast.
   Jerry's fury combined with the highest tides of the year to
flood coastal areas as thousands of people, mostly in Louisiana,
fled to higher ground.
   The center of the hurricane moved ashore on the west end of
Galveston Island about 7:25 p.m., with sustained winds of 75 mph
and gusts up to 100 mph, according to the National Hurricane Center
in Coral Gables, Fla.
   In Galveston, a 32-mile long barrier island connected to the
mainland by a causeway, officials reported scattered power
failures, street flooding and a roof torn off a building, along
with numerous downed trees and neon signs.
   Late Sunday, the bodies of a man and a small child were found
floating near the city's seawall, said Gary Stone, a spokesman for
Galveston's Emergency Operations Center. He said the victims, who
could not be identified immediately, were believed to either
passengers in a car that washed over the seawall or pedestrians.
   There were no other immediate reports of injuries.
   Glass windows in an apartment complex on the island's west end
were blown out, and several balconies were torn off.
   ``The winds blew threw the glass of several of these apartments
and blew the gutters down,'' said John Harsh, a resident of the
complex who had been without power since 7:30 p.m. ``Whole
balconies came down, it just ripped them up from the bolts.''
   At the historic Galvez Hotel, the management said guests would
have to spend the night in the lobby because several rooms had
broken glass inside.
   Houston Lighting &amp; Power spokeswoman Graham Painter said 52,000
customers were without power Sunday night, most of them on
Galveston.
   The city of 62,000 was the site of one of the worst hurricanes
in U.S. history, a storm that killed an estimated 6,000 people in
1900. Galveston Island is about 50 miles south of Houston.
   By 11 p.m., Jerry was downgraded to a tropical storm as maximum
sustained winds decreased to 70 mph. The storm's center was located
about 40 miles north of Galveston near Baytown, Texas, or near
latitude 29.6 degrees north, longitude 94.6 west.
   The storm was moving northeast at 14 mph and was expected to
brush past the southeast side of Houston while steadily losing
power over land, meteorologists said. Rainfall totals of 3 to 5
inches were expected along the path during the next 12 to 24 hours.
   Jerry was considered a category 1 hurricane, the least severe
possible. Hurricane Hugo, which devastated Charleston and other
parts of South Carolina last month, was a category 4.
   ``I think that we did very well,'' Galveston Mayor Jan
Coggeshall said after the hurricane had passed over the island
after a two-hour mauling.
   ``I think we're going to find some damage, but I don't think
it's going to be as significant as it could have been. I think we
are going to suffer a lot of erosion on the west end beaches,'' he
said.
   City leaders said a team of officials would begin surveying
damage to the area at 6 a.m. Monday.
   As Jerry struck, heavy rains and rising tides moved over the
upper Texas coast and were expected to increase over the southwest
Louisiana coast, the National Weather Service said.
   The hurricane center said the area would receive 4 to 8 inches
of rain.
   Jerry's hurricane-strength winds extended 25 miles east of the
eye and 15 miles west. That was about 10 times weaker than Hugo,
which packed hurricane force winds extending 100 miles out from its
center.
   ``It's a very small hurricane. I would not expect much damage
from it,'' said Bob Sheets, director of the National Hurricane
Center.
   ``Category 4 is a major disaster and Jerry is a bad day,'' said
Jerry Jarrell, deputy director of the center.
   Jerry strengthened from a tropical storm to a hurricane 110
miles off Galveston Island at 1 p.m. when its sustained wind hit 75
mph, or 1 mph above the threshold, according to the National
Hurricane Center. During the afternoon, the storm reached 85 mph
sustained wind and swung onto a northerly course toward Galveston,
the hurricane center said.
   The storm surge caused by a combination of Jerry and high tides
was not expected to be over eight feet, he said. In comparison, the
storm surge in the Charleston, S.C., area from Hugo was up to 20
feet.
   Hurricane warnings were posted from Freeport, Texas, to
Intracoastal City, La. Tornado watches were issued for southwestern
Louisiana and southeastern Texas.
   Several tornadoes were spotted between Galveston and Houston,
damaging some buildings. No injuries were immediately reported.
   A tornado hit downtown Orange, near the Louisiana border, and
several homes and businesses were damaged, police officials said.
There were no reports of injuries, police dispatcher Rachel Timaeus
said.
   Earlier, a funnel cloud was reported near New Orleans.
   Galveston City Manager Doug Matthews, who ordered an 11 p.m.
curfew, said he believed many of the island city's residents
decided to stay in their homes behind the seawall. He said about
500 residents left their low-lying homes on the island's west end,
which is not protected by the seawall.
   Several cars were tossed onto sidewalks and there was a report
of one washing over the seawall, but officials did not know if
anyone was inside. The wind also blew out the windows of a police
car, but the officer was not injured.
   Earlier, workers distributed sandbags and barricades to
low-lying areas, and residents stocked up on supplies and secured
homes and boats.
   In Louisiana's southwestern corner, the Cameron Parish Civil
Defense Office ordered coastal areas evacuated, and spokesman Scott
Henry said that affected 8,000 to 10,000 people.
   ``We're anticipating extremely high tides, plus we'll be in the
storm push for the tidal surge,'' said Henry.
   Even without the hurricane, tides were expected to peak this
week because of the relative positions of the sun, moon and the
Earth.
   High tide at Galveston, which arrives around sunset and just
before sunrise, is 1{ to 2 feet above sea level. Astronomical tide
was expected to add about a foot, and storm surge 4 to 7 feet,
forecasters said.
   ``Our main concern is we only have two or three roads out of the
parish,'' said Henry of Cameron Parish. High tides ``could cut off
several escapes routes. As night comes, if you hadn't already got
out, it could cause problems.''
   An evacuation center was set up by the Red Cross at Lake
Charles-Boston High School, but only 48 people had checked in by
late Sunday.
   ``Cameron evacuates four times a year. I don't think they were
worried about this one,'' said Mary Touchette, the center's manager.
   Offshore oil operations pulled hundreds of workers in from the
Gulf of Mexico.
   Chevron spokesman Jim Lajaunie said Sunday the 250 offshore
workers from the company's base in Amelia, La., were moved to dry
land. Mobil Oil spokesman Bill Barnard said about 600 workers were
called in in southwestern Louisiana.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
