ID: 135	RANK: 7	SCORE: 25.121023
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890919-0097 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-19-89 1243EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i PM-Hugo 7thLd-Writethru   09-19 1036</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Hugo, 7th Ld-Writethru,a0572,1067</SECOND>
<HEAD>Hurricane Heads for Bahamas; Forecasters Say Likely To Hit U.S. Mainland</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: LEADS with 30 grafs to UPDATE with quote from witness, French,
British aid; picks up 31st pvs: `Most of...'</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By KERNAN TURNER</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Hurricane Hugo spun toward the
Bahamas today after thrashing Puerto Rico with 125 mph winds,
leaving more than 50,000 people homeless throughout the eastern
Caribbean. An official reported at least 25 dead.
   Hugo hit northeastern Puerto Rico and then skirted its populous
northern coast on Monday. It roared on to the northwest and toward
open water, its hurricane-force winds missing the Dominican Republic.
   At noon EDT today, the hurricane's center was near latitude 22.2
degrees north and longitude 68.5 west, about 175 miles east
northeast of Grand Turk Island in the southern Bahamas, according to
the National Weather Service. Winds fell to 105 mph.
   Forecasters said it likely would hit the U.S. mainland later in
the week but said it was too early to predict where. Cruise ships
steamed out of the way, residents prepared along the North Carolina
coast and Florida residents jammed the phone lines of insurance
companies for financial protection.
   ``It's a long way from any potential landfall,'' said Bob Sheets,
director of the National Hurricane Center in suburban Coral Gables.
``Unfortunately, the higher likelihood is that it will turn more
west and could make landfall anywhere from South Florida to North
Carolina.''
   At least 25 people in the Caribbean died from the storm, said
Cizanette Rivera, a spokeswoman for the Civil Defense in Puerto Rico.
   Maria Dolores Oronoz, a spokesman for Gov. Rafael
Hernandez-Colon, said only two people died on Puerto Rico. The two
died while trying to remove a TV antenna Sunday in preparation for
the storm, she said. She said no other deaths had been reported in
Puerto Rico.
   The National Weather Service in San Juan reported its preliminary
statement that said 25 had died on the U.S. commonwealth was
incorrect.
   Ms. Rivera gave no breakdown on where the other reported victims
had died, but scattered fatalities were reported throughout the
heavily visited tourist islands of the eastern Caribbean.
   Hugo left a trail of smashed homes, power failures and injuries
in Guadeloupe, Montserrat, Antigua and the Virgin Islands since
Sunday, and widespread looting by machete-wielding mobs was reported
on the island of St. Thomas in the U.S. Virgin Islands.
   Widespread evacuations apparently lessened the chance of
fatalities.
   Sailboats were blown out of the water and thrown up to 150 feet
on shore in St. Thomas, and some waterfront businesses have
disappeared.
   ``We were all huddled together in the corridor when the wind took
off the roof of the house,'' said 14-year-old Didier Gacoby-Kaoly of
Guadeloupe.
   Cleanup efforts were under way today throughout Puerto Rico. Gov.
Rafael Hernandez-Colon said at least 27,900 people were left
homeless and asked President Bush to declare it a disaster area.
   Hugo's winds overturned cars, peeled roofs off houses and office
buildings and sent chunks of concrete plunging into streets in San
Juan, where one-third of the U.S. commonwealth's 3.3 million people
live.
   The winds ripped out glass, walls and furnishings from the top
four floors of a 25-story building in the Santurce section, leaving
only beams remaining.
   Fifty airplanes were reported destroyed at the airport in Isla
Verde. Looters stripped shops of their goods in San Juan.
   Officials were working to restore power, which was cut to 75
percent of the island.
   Police cars with flashing lights patrolled San Juan streets early
today. Major streets were cleared, but secondary streets remained
clogged with power lines, tree limbs, sheets of metal and shattered
glass.
   Flooding made many roads impassable, and international
communications were disrupted.
   In the northeast town of Luquillo, 10 homes were swept downriver
and six families were reported missing, the weather service office
said.
   Civil Defense officials reported 80 percent of the homes on the
Puerto Rican islands of Vieques and Culebra were were either
destroyed or damaged.
   Secretary of the Interior Manuel Lujan said $500,000 in emergency
assistance funds were released to aid storm-stricken areas of Puerto
Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands.
   The weather service said maximum sustained winds had slowed to
near 105 mph with hurricane-force winds extending up to 60 miles
from the center. It was moving to the northwest at 12 mph and was
expected to continue in that direction during the next 24 hours.
   A hurricane watch was in effect for the central Bahamas and
tropical storm warnings for the southern Bahamas.
   Since Sunday, the storm has caused widespread damage in
Guadeloupe, Antigua, St. Kitts, Montserrat and the U.S. and British
Virgin Islands.
   Six people were killed and hundreds of buildings were flattened
on the British island of Montserrat, the British government said
today. It said nearly all of the 12,000 island residents were
homeless.
   Britain reported the Royal Navy marines landed on Montserrat to
help clear the airport runway so planes could deliver aid supplies.
British Overseas Aid Minister Lynda Chalker said Britain would
provide $1.57 million in emergency aid to islands struck by the
hurricane.
   Five people were reported killed, 84 injured and about 15,000
homeless on the French island of Guadeloupe. Two were killed in
Antigua.
   In Paris, the French Defense Ministry assigned 3,000 soldiers,
two military transport aircraft and four cargo vessels to assist in
restoring communications and emergency services to Guadeloupe.
French President Francois Mitterrand pledged to rebuild ``what was
destroyed.''
   Most of the Virgin Islands' 106,000 residents live on St. Thomas
and St. Croix, where a ham radio operator said winds had torn off
the roofs of up to 75 percent of the homes.
   Hugo is the fourth hurricane of the Atlantic hurricane season and
is the most powerful hurricane to hit the region since Hurricane
David in 1979.
   That storm killed an estimated 1,200 people in the Caribbean and
Florida.
   Tropical Storm Iris rose in the wake of Hugo and forecasters
advised residents of the battered Leeward Islands to keep a close
watch on the new storm. They said Iris, with 50 mph winds, was about
300 miles east of the Leeward Islands Monday night and was moving
north-northwest at about 18 mph.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
