ID: 135	RANK: 73	SCORE: 17.404333
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890922-0100 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-22-89 1134EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a PM-Hugo-Northeast 2ndLd-Writethru a0570 09-22 0848</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Hugo-Northeast, 2nd Ld - Writethru, a0570,0869</SECOND>
<HEAD>Northeast Prepares for Effects of Hurricane Hugo</HEAD>
<HEAD>With PM-Hugo, Bjt</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: INSERTS two grafs after 2nd to UPDATE with quotes from spokesmen
in Albany and Boston. Picks up 3rd graf pvs, `At 9 a.m....'.</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By DAVID BRIGGS</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Eastern Seaboard residents as far north as Massachusetts braced
for rains and flooding from the remnants of Hurricane Hugo, which
shut schools today in the nation's capital and spoiled plans for a
Sunfest in Maryland.
   Forecasters downgraded Hugo from a hurricane to a tropical storm
this morning, but warned it could spin off tornadoes as it headed
across North Carolina toward inland Virginia, then up the
Appalachian Mountains to New York and New England.
   Donald Maurer, a spokesman for the New York state Disaster
Preparedness Commission in Albany said many people living inland
wrongly believe they're immune from tropical storms in the
Northeast. ``That's not true. Some of the worst flooding in this
state's history has been from storms like Hugo,'' Maurer said.
   ``Two weeks ago, Hurricane Gabrielle only came within 500 miles
of us and we had six deaths and five capsized boats,'' said Coast
Guard Petty Officer Ken Arbogast in Boston. In that case, the
hurricane was far out in the Atlantic.
   At 9 a.m., Hugo's center was located just north of Hickory, N.C.,
in the Blue Ridge foothills, and it was moving toward the north
northwest at 25 to 30 mph, the National Weather Service said. Fears
of flooding moderated somewhat as the storm picked up speed on its
march northward, ensuring that rain wouldn't linger quite as long
over any one place.
   ``We're just hoping there aren't thunderstorms ahead of it,
because that would mean a flood threat,'' said weather service
metrologist Bill Coneaux.
   Maximum sustained winds were estimated to have decreased to 60
mph, with higher gusts in squalls. Hickory had gusts of up to 73 mph
this morning.
   In Maryland and Delaware, from 5 to 10 inches of rain and wind
gusts of up to 70 mph were expected to buffet the Chesapeake region
this afternoon.
   With the storm expected to hit the Baltimore-Washington area
around the afternoon rush hour, the District of Columbia, federal
and Maryland governments told employees they could leave early if
necessary, transit authorities added service and officials closed
schools in the capital and its suburbs.
   Ocean City, Md., canceled its annual Sunfest festival set for
this weekend, as hotels reported an increasing number of tourists
calling off their beach visits.
   In Nelson County, Va., where 128 people were killed in floods and
mudslides caused by Hurricane Camille in 1969, workers hurriedly set
up a network of electronic rain gauges to act as an early warning
device, Sheriff William Harris said.
   But to the 50 or so surfers in the water at Virginia Beach on
Thursday evening, thoughts of the coming storm centered on the waves.
   ``It's pretty good right now,'' said Joe Wool, 23. ``The waves
are breaking about head high.''
   Farther north, a flash flood watch was posted statewide in both
Delaware and Maryland, in addition to a high wind warning for New
Castle County, Del. Hagerstown, in western Maryland, could have
winds of 30 to 50 mph with higher gusts, the National Weather
Service said this morning.
   Tropical storm warnings remained in effect this morning from
Virginia Beach northward to Manasquan, N.J., including Chesapeake
and Delaware bays.
   Commanders at Dover Air Force Base in Delaware ordered the
evacuation of their fleet of jet transports late Thursday.
   In New York, forecasters said vestiges of Hugo could cause severe
rain and flooding.
   Hugo could hit New York State some time tonight or Saturday
before passing through southern New England, according to
meteorologist Robert Barton in Albany.
   Barton said there could be 2 to 4 inches of rain in parts of New
York south of Albany, including New York City.
   In Connecticut, forecasters said the state faces winds between 20
mph and 40 mph in the Hartford area, with 2 to 4 inches of rain
likely by Saturday.
   ``We will be spared a direct hit from the storm,'' said Mel
Goldstein, director of the Weather Center at Western Connecticut
State University in Danbury. ``We should be ready for some power
outages and some localized flooding.''
   Some Connecticut residents, particularly those living near Long
Island Sound, were not taking any chances.
   In Greenwich, hardware stores were busy all day Thursday with
customers buying everything from flashlights to waterproof tarps.
   ``One guy came in and bought a generator. He said he was just
taking it for precaution,'' said Steve McDow, a salesman at the
Super Handy Hardware Center in Greenwich.
   In Massachusetts, heavy rains with flooding in low-lying areas
were expected in the Boston area, according to Jim Roets, a National
Weather Service meterologist.
   The storm already has postponed a statewide shoreline cleanup
scheduled for Saturday.
   ``In the aftermath of the coming storm, e will need even more
people available to help pick up all the debris that's bound to wash
up on our shores,'' said John DeVillars, state environmental affairs
secretary.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
