ID: 135	RANK: 91	SCORE: 16.728582
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880911-0088 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-11-88 2315EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-HurricaneGilbert 5thLd-Writethru a0566 09-11 0854</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Hurricane Gilbert, 5th Ld - Writethru, a0566,0877</SECOND>
<HEAD>Hurricane Gilbert Heads South Of Hispaniola Toward Jamaica</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: CORRECTS to insert Jamaican prime minister's name in 5th
graf.</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By LLOYD WILLIAMS</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>KINGSTON, Jamaica (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Hurricane Gilbert swept toward Jamaica
on Sunday with 100 mph winds and officials issued warnings to
residents on the southern coasts of the Dominican Republic, Haiti
and Cuba.
   The storm ripped the roofs off houses and caused coastal
flooding in Puerto Rico. In the Dominican Republic all domestic
flights and flights to and from Puerto Rico and Miami were canceled.
   Heavy rain and winds lashed the southern zone of the Dominican
Republic Sunday night as the hurricane passed south of the Barahona
peninsula, officials reported.
   Eugenio Cabral, director of the Dominican Civil Defense, said
there was some flooding in parts of the capital of Santo Domingo
and power outages there and other southern areas but no casualties
had been reported.
   Jamaican Prime Minister Edward Seaga alerted all government
agencies and told a news conference Sunday night: ``Hurricane
Gilbert appears to be a real threat and everyone should follow the
instructions and hurricane precautions issued by the Office of
Disaster Preparedness in order to minimize the danger.''
   Jamaica's National Meteorological Service said if the hurricane
continues on its current course effects of the storm would be felt
in Jamaica by 6 a.m. EDT Monday.
   Ferry service across Kingston Harbor was suspended and
commercial flights were canceled.
   Outgoing flights from Jamaica's international airports at
Kingston and Montego Bay were being rescheduled but incoming
flights continued to arrive Sunday, officials reported.
   Cuba's official Prensa Latina news agency reported a state of
alert was declared at midday in the western Cuban provinces of
Guantanamo, Holguin, Santiago de Cuba and Granma.
   In the report from Havana received in Mexico City, Prensa Latina
said civil defense officials were broadcasting bulletins on
national radio and television recommending emergency measures and
providing information on the storm.
   Forecasters said the hurricane was gaining strength as it passed
over the ocean and would dump heavy rain on the Dominican Republic
and Haiti as it moved south of Hispaniola, the Caribbean island
they share, and headed west.
   ``It's certainly one of the larger systems we've seen in the
Caribbean for a long time,'' said Hal Gerrish, forecaster at the
National Hurricane Center in Coral Gables, Fla.
   The U.S. National Weather Service in Miami said that at 9 p.m.
the hurricane's center was near 16.8 north latitude and and 72.2
west longitude or about 310 miles east of Kingston, It said the
storm was moving just north of due west at 15 mph and it was
expected to continue that motion for the the next 24 hours.
   Maximum sustained winds were near 100 mph, the report said, with
tropical-storm force winds extending up to 250 miles to the north
and 100 miles to the south.
   The hurricane center said small craft in the Virgin Islands and
Puerto Rico should remain in port until winds and seas subside.
   Forecasters said the hurricane's track would take it about 50
miles south of southwestern Haiti.
   ``The track looks like it will go right over Jamaica, but we
can't say for certain yet,'' Gerrish said.
   The forecasters said the Dominican Republic would receive 5 to
10 inches of rain on Sunday, with similar amounts falling in Haiti
Sunday night and Monday.
   In Santo Domingo, the Civil Defense alerted the nation's heavily
populated southern coast to prepare for high winds, heavy rains and
high seas.
   Civil Defense Director Eugenio Cabral said residents of the
Barahona peninsula should closely follow Gilbert's movement. An
estimated 100,000 people live in the area, including 70,000 in the
city of Barahona, 125 miles west of Santo Domingo.
   Antonio Cocco Quezada, director of the Dominican Weather
Service, said that if the hurricane changes course and starts
moving north it would put the south in ``grave danger.''
   Hurricane warnings also were issued for the south coast of Haiti
and Cuba by their respective governments.
   Jamaica's Ministry of Health said that hospitals throughout the
island were discharging all patients who could leave on their own
and only keeping the critically ill.
   The hospitals also were stocking up on emergency supplies of
medicine, blankets, water and food.
   Tropical Storm Gilbert formed in the eastern Caribbean and
strengthened into a hurricane Saturday night.
   ``The hurricane passed about 100 miles south of the southwest
coast of Puerto Rico'' on Saturday night, Gerrish said. ``They got
pretty heavy rain.''
   In Puerto Rico, the storm left several homes without roofs,
caused coastal flooding and downed power lines and trees along
roads and highways in the west and southwestern regions.
   Four policemen stationed on Mona Island, between Puerto Rico and
the Dominican Republic, were stranded as a result of the poor
weather conditions.
   ``We are in constant contact with them by radio and they are in
good condition,'' said a police official in Mayaguez in western
Puerto Rico.
   Three people were injured in Guayanilla, Puerto Rico, when a
tree fell on top of their vehicle as they traveled along Route 97
shortly after midnight Saturday, police reported.
 
</TEXT>
</DOC>
