ID: 125	RANK: 64	SCORE: 11.227741
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910726-0187
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910726-0187.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Art Crime Update:
   The Nurse's Aide Did It
   ----
   By Constance Lowenthal
</HL>
<DATE>
07/26/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A7
</SO>
<LP>
   The heirs of Emily McFadden Staempfli were distressed to
discover that among her collection of paintings two important
ones, Pablo Picasso's "Head of a Woman With Golden Earrings"
and "Sans Famille" by the Belgian surrealist Rene Magritte,
had been replaced by copies. In her later years, Ms.
Staempfli was an invalid, largely unable to supervise those
who took care of her in her Manhattan apartment. The police
are investigating just who exchanged the fakes for originals
and when.
   The Picasso, a 1943 portrait of the artist's mistress,
Dora Maar, was originally painted on brown paper. The copyist
worked in oil on canvas and painted parts brown to
approximate the paper background. The "Magritte" was more
efficiently executed, but lacked the artist's characteristic
glassy finish and some details of the original composition.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Late in May, IFAR received a call saying that the stolen
Picasso was being offered in Chicago to a New York art
dealer. IFAR spoke to the police and arranged for the
interested parties to meet the dealer to discuss his
information, which might lead to a recovery. The meeting was
set for May 31, but on the morning of May 30, Joseph
Guttmann, a Los Angeles art dealer acting on behalf of a
jeweler, brought the Picasso into Sotheby's New York and
showed it to John Tancock.
   Mr. Tancock, head of impressionist and modern paintings at
Sotheby's, immediately recognized the work as stolen for two
reasons: He'd seen it listed in "IFAR-reports," and he
himself had appraised the pictures for the estate and had
seen the Picasso and Magritte fakes in Ms. Staempfli's
apartment. With Mr. Guttmann's agreement, Sotheby's notified
IFAR and IFAR called the police, who recovered the painting
that afternoon.
   That evening, all local TV news programs covered the
police press conference announcing the recovery of the
Staempfli Picasso. All of them emphasized the still-missing
Magritte. The next afternoon, an unidentified man appeared
with his lawyer at the office of the Brooklyn district
attorney and surrendered the Magritte.
   ---
   Other shut-ins have been unwitting victims of art theft.
James Johnson Sweeney, the first director of the Guggenheim
Museum, was 85 years old when his Joan Miro was swiped. In
late November 1985, Mr. Sweeney's nurse's aide appeared at
Peter Findlay Gallery on Madison Avenue with the painting in
a shopping bag, offering it for sale. Mr. Findlay said he
recognized the picture, "Seated Woman," as "one of the icons
of 20th-century art" and asked the woman to come back the
next day so he could have time to research it. A quick call
to Pierre Matisse, the art dealer known for his expertise in
Miro, identified it as Mr. Sweeney's. Mr. Findlay called the
police, and when the woman returned the following day she was
apprehended and charged. (The picture sold at Sotheby's the
following year, after Mr. Sweeney's death, for $900,000.)
   When, on Nov. 23, Bridget Hickey was named in a newspaper
account of the recovered Miro, a reader who lived on Sutton
Place called the police to say that her Remington drawing had
disappeared while Ms. Hickey had worked for her. IFAR had had
an inquiry about the drawing from Michael Frost of J.N.
Bartfield Gallery, who wanted to know if the Remington had
been reported stolen; it had not. We called Mr. Frost, and
told him the Remington was stolen after all; he immediately
returned it to its owner and was compensated by the thief's
embarrassed children.
   ---
   The Staempfli story was reminiscent of the Case of the
Accused Butler, a classic whodunit set in Bel Air, Calif., in
1987. There too, a painting was replaced by a copy, a
to-scale photographic print. The artist was the Swedish
impressionist Anders Zorn, and the picture, "I Fria Luften,"
showed a female bather. The owner, Elizabeth Keck, had hung
the painting in a rarely used card room in her mansion. She
told Detective William Martin, who investigates art theft for
the Los Angeles Police Department, that she didn't notice the
switch until she entered the room from the garden door and
the angle of light revealed the flat surface. That was some
five months after the exchange was made.
   The original had already been purchased for more than
$500,000 by a Swedish corporation at a Stockholm auction
house, where it was consigned by Ms. Keck's butler of 15
years, Rune "Roy" Gunar Donell.
   Police found additional blowups of the Zorn in Mr.
Donell's motor home in Redondo Beach, and auction-house
personnel testified that they'd dealt with Mr. Donell and
paid him cash. Despite this evidence, a jury failed to
convict the butler. His story was that Ms. Keck had asked him
to replace her painting with a photo and sell the original;
he claimed he'd sent her the cash through the mail, in
envelopes each containing $20,000. His version apparently
cast enough doubt for the jury to acquit him. The Zorn,
therefore, remained in Sweden, and Ms. Keck, though unable to
recover her picture, did collect from her insurance company.
   ---
   The chief of police in Prague, Pavel Hoffman, announced
the recovery in late June of four cubist Picassos stolen May
6 from that city's National Gallery. He said the thieves were
Czech and habitual offenders, and that the theft was neither
the work of an international ring nor the result of a
commissioned theft. Three of the paintings were recovered in
Prague; the fourth was found in Bayreuth, Germany. Its return
is being arranged through Interpol, which recently welcomed
several Eastern European nations to its ranks.
   ---
   Ms. Lowenthal is executive director of the International
Foundation for Art Research (IFAR).
</TEXT>
</DOC>
