ID: 125	RANK: 66	SCORE: 11.186497
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910503-0125
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910503-0125.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
   The First 25 Years, Definitively Delineated
   ----
   By Roger Kimball
</HL>
<DATE>
05/03/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A9
</SO>
<LP>
   In both his excesses and his achievements -- above all, in
the union of his excesses and achievements -- Pablo Picasso
was the paradigmatic artist of our age, the Einstein of
modern art. Some might argue that Henri Matisse was a greater
artist, but surely no one epitomized the character of the age
more dramatically than Picasso, with his demonic energy,
dazzling originality and uncompromising self-infatuation.
   One does not have to read far in the first volume of John
Richardson's "A Life of Picasso" (Random House, 548 pages,
$39.95) before realizing that it will be the definitive life
of the artist. A diligent scholar and a critic of formidable
sensitivity and penetration, Mr. Richardson is also a
sparkling writer. He entertains even as he supplements and
patiently corrects our understanding of the most exhaustively
discussed artist of our time.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Mr. Richardson's portrait of the artist as a young man
boasts all the romantic trappings of genius. There is the
classic family romance: the embittered father, Jose Ruiz
Blasco -- a failed artist who specialized in painting pigeons
-- and the perennially doting mother, from whom Picasso took
his surname. There is the riotous, peripatetic youth of
whoring, poverty and neglect. And there is the all-consuming
ambition and appetite for work.
   Covering the first 25 years of the artist's long life
(Picasso died in 1972), Mr. Richardson takes us from his
birth in Malaga, Spain, in 1881 to his first serious
recognition in Paris in 1905-06. He takes us, in other words,
through the creation of some of Picasso's most famous works.
There are the Blue Period paintings of 1902-03; the clowns,
acrobats, harlequins of the Rose Period; the great 1905
portrait of Gertrude Stein; and the beginnings of his
encounter with primitivism. It is extraordinary to think that
the dealer Ambroise Vollard bought 20 of Picasso's most
important early paintings in 1906 for 2,000 francs.
   As knowledgeable about his subject's work as about the
details of his life, Mr. Richardson brings a discriminating
eye to Picasso's painting, deftly discussing the development
of his technique and artistic ambitions. He is especially
good on the multifarious influences and rivals (for Picasso,
the words were synonymous) the artist encountered in his
early careerGoya and Velazquez, Puvis de Chavannes, Gauguin
and above all Cezanne, whom Picasso called "the father of us
all."
   Mr. Richardson is also very good at evoking the texture of
Picasso's life: the Barcelona of the '90s, Paris at the turn
of the century. He vividly portrays the cast of characters,
the patrons, friends, hangerson and mistresses who found
their way into his portraits.
   As Mr. Richardson emphasizes, one of the greatest
obstacles facing the Picasso biographer is the Picasso
legend: the mountain of half-truths, fanciful embroideries
and outright lies that the artist and his coterie spun with
ever increasing diligence in order to perpetuate the myth of
Picasso as self-created prodigy and fount of bohemian virtue.
   Some biographers have simply succumbed to the legend,
adding new chapters or details to the official hagiography.
Others have inverted the process and given us Picasso the
misogynistic sadist and pathological liar, who also, it just
so happens, was a painter of genius. The one group is
worshipful, the other damning; neither comes close to
understanding the phenomenon of Picasso.
   Mr. Richardson's chief accomplishment is to set the record
straight about item after item in the Picasso dossier without
discounting his work. Noting Picasso's "compulsion to have
been a genius from his earliest days," for example, he sifts
through the early work to show that Picasso "conforms to the
rule that no great painter has ever produced work of any
serious interest before puberty." Picasso's dazzling success,
he writes, depended as much on "the infinite pains he took as
on the infinite gifts with which he was born."
   To say that Picasso was charismatic is like saying that
Aphrodite was good-looking. He exercised a mesmeric influence
on people, a brutal emotional tyranny that, as Mr. Richardson
notes, "was the more effective for being tacit." Yet he
himself was something of a cipher. The truth is Picasso had
plenty of personality but no character. "Quicksilver," "mass
of contradictions" and similar phrases recur often in Mr.
Richardson's narrative. "Truth is a lie; truth is a lie,"
Picasso used to tell his son. Why not, then, recast reality
as one wishes? That was the ultimate, frightening ambition of
his art. "God is really another artist like me," he once
said. "I am God, I am God, I am God."
   Mr. Richardson ends his first volume at the doorstep of
cubism. Picasso has just seen Matisse's great painting "Le
Bonheur de Vivre" (1905-06) and is about to go "into
training" to outdo it. The result was "Les Demoiselles
d'Avignon" (1907), the revolutionary painting that Mr.
Richardson compares to the work of Giotto in its effect on
art and that he describes as "the first unequivocally
twentieth-century masterpiece." It is indeed a masterpiece,
but a savage one that exploded and rearranged the human form.
"To like my painting people really have to be masochists,"
Picasso observed. That might sound like self-criticism, but
Mr. Richardson shows that Picasso wouldn't have it any other
way.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
