ID: 125	RANK: 73	SCORE: 10.954153
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910325-0100
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910325-0100.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Sotheby's Rare Baseball Card Sale Is a Hit
   As Childhood Pastime Joins Big Leagues
   ----
   By Alexandra Peers
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
03/25/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C1
</SO>
<CO>
   BID
</CO>
<IN>
DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, CREDIT INSTITUTIONS (FIS)
</IN>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- Pablo Picasso and Pierre Auguste Renoir may
have seen better days, but Honus Wagner and Mickey Mantle are
hot.
   Eager bidders in a sale at Sotheby's Holdings Inc.'s New
York auction house pushed up the price for a rare baseball
card with the likeness of early Pittsburgh Pirates star Honus
Wagner to a record $451,000. A 1952 Mickey Mantle card sold
for $49,500.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Los Angeles Kings hockey-team owner Bruce McNall, who
bought the Honus Wagner card in partnership with the team's
Wayne Gretzky, said some people had told him he was "nuts" to
pay so much. But Mr. McNall, a coin and ancient art dealer
who bid for the card by phone, said that they "are the same
people who said, when van Gogh's were $5 million, `How could
you buy a bit of oil that has no intrinsic value?'"
   "Sotheby's is anointing the hobby as being big business,"
said Doug Garr, co-author of "Mr. Mint's Insider's Guide to
Investing in Baseball Cards and Collectibles." The New York
firm had gone to considerable lengths to promote the sale of
873 sports-related items collected by California
sporting-goods dealer James C. Copeland, including touring
the highlights of the collection to Japan.
   But the bidding wasn't indiscriminate, and there were no
foreign bidders for the major lots. Altogether, the
collection brought in $4.6 million, including a 10%
commission for the auction house. That was about 16% below
the low end of the firm's presale estimates of $5.5 million
to $7.7 million.
   In a sophisticated stratification of the market, the
auction established discrete price and demand levels for
different types of items. Rare, top-condition baseball cards
with pictures of big-name stars went for record prices. But
19th-century baseball cards, those that weren't in mint
condition, and some sports memorabilia didn't sell well. The
most expensive lot at the sale, a complete collection of the
World Series press pins issued from 1911 through 1988, failed
to find a buyer at its price estimate of $250,000 to
$300,000; bidding stopped at $170,000.
   Any dealer or collector who bets that the Sotheby's
auction will mean higher prices across-the-board "will be
sadly disappointed," said Robert Wynne, who writes a monthly
column on sports-card collecting for the San Antonio (Texas)
Light newspaper. "Cards at the high end, over $1,000, are
doing well, because they attract people other than sports
fans, but cards in the middle price ranges are suffering, and
selling for below book value.
   The sale was important for Sotheby's, which like other
auction houses has been scrambling to find revenue at a time
when art buyers are cool to big-ticket works. The firm has
held several auctions of rock-and-roll memorabilia, dolls,
and toys that outperformed, in the percentage of works sold,
recent sales of paintings by Picasso and Renoir.
   That was also the case with the Copeland sports
collection: After the final gavel fell Saturday, only 16% of
the items remained unsold.
   Still, the record prices prompted some concern among
collectors and dealers that they were watching for a market
top. For years, dealers have been able to tell collectors,
"If you don't buy it, {Mr.} Copeland will," said Bill Mastro,
a baseball-card dealer who helped Mr. Copeland assemble the
collection and worked for Sotheby's setting prices on the
items. "Now, they might be saying `Well, now that Copeland's
not around, why do I have to pay that?'"
   Even Mr. McNall suggested that prices at the auction may
have been top-dollar, at least for a while. "We may have come
to a market peak now, but I look at it for the long run," he
said.
   Mr. McNall is best known in the art world for advising the
wealthy Hunt brothers of Dallas on the acquisition of their
stellar collection (now dismantled) of coins and ancient
marbles, bronzes and vases. Mr. McNall's Los Angeles company,
Numismatic Fine Arts, advises Merrill Lynch &amp; Co. on its
limited partnerships investing in coins and ancient art.
   Bidding for the Honus Wagner card, dubbed "The Holy Grail"
by Sotheby's auctioneer Robert Wooley, started with a
$228,000 offer from Aspen, Colo., businessman Mark Friedland
and escalated rapidly. Four or five buyers vied for the card
well into the $300,000 range. The final $451,000 price --
more than triple the presale estimate and the previous record
for any baseball card -- would buy a small Renoir nude or a
Frank Stella geometric at the art auctions for which
Sotheby's is more famous.
   The mint-condition card, circa 1910, is extremely rare
because the Pittsburgh Pirates shortstop opposed cigarette
smoking and requested that the Piedmont Cigarette company
withdraw the card from their packs. About 40 cards are
thought to be left, but most are in less than mint condition.
Mr. McNall quipped that he'll be keeping the card in either a
bank vault "or in the spokes of the wheels of my bike."
   In other highlights of the sale, a 1952 Mickey Mantle
Topps baseball card, expected to sell for $12,000 to $15,000,
sold for $49,500. An autographed baseball from the 1939 Hall
of Fame induction ceremony, signed by Babe Ruth, Ty Cobb and
other players, sold for $20,900, double the low estimate.
   "This is not for small children," said Michael Gidwitz,
head of marketing for Rothschild Securities Corp. in Chicago.
"I'm here willing to pay next year's price," he said. "I'd
rather pay $15,000 for a $10,000 item now than lose it."
   The crowd at Sotheby's frequently broke with the usual
tony auction-house protocol, blurting out bids thousands of
dollars above the outstanding one or wheedling the auctioneer
to accept tiny incremental bids.
   At one point Mr. Gidwitz, bidding from Sotheby's front
row, stood up, turned around and yelled at the bidder at the
back of the room who was competing against him for a 1952
Bowman uncut sheet of cards estimated to sell for about
$10,000. Mr. Gidwitz, who had set himself a limit of $25,000
for the set, went to $34,000 in the heat of the chase, but
lost to an anonymous bidder who paid $38,500.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
