ID: 125	RANK: 77	SCORE: 10.776225
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911115-0018
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911115-0018.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Art Market's
   Slump Persists
   At Fall Sales
   ----
   By Alexandra Peers
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
11/15/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C1
</SO>
<CO>
   BID U.CHR
</CO>
<MS>
FINANCIAL (FIN)
</MS>
<IN>
DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, CREDIT INSTITUTIONS (FIS)
</IN>
<RE>
EUROPE (EU)
MICHIGAN (MI)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
GREAT BRITAIN (UK)
UNITED STATES (US)
WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)
</RE>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- The art market is still in a slump, with
Impressionist paintings dead in the water. But modern masters
and top contemporary painters are selling well at discount
prices.
   Those are some of the lessons of the troubled fall art
auctions that ended yesterday in New York. With more than one
out of every three paintings and sculptures failing to sell
at Christie's International PLC and Sotheby's Holdings Inc.'s
bellwether fall sales, art prices are likely to continue to
edge lower in coming months, dealers and auction house
officials say.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   For collectors, the sales gave clues to the sectors and
artists that are holding their value, the countries that are
calling the art-market shots, and the virtues that make one
painting more salable than another in a tough market.
   Prices for the sun-dappled, sentimental Impressionist
pictures that were the engine of the 1980's art-market boom
just kept falling. Works by blue-chip Impressionists Claude
Monet, Alfred Sisley and Pierre-Auguste Renoir had extreme
difficulty selling. With Japanese dealers and U.S. real
estate developers sitting on the sidelines, a Sisley
landscape that fetched a world record price for the artist of
$3.6 million in 1988 failed to get a bid higher than $1.7
million this time around and didn't sell.
   Works by the modern masters Pablo Picasso, Fernand Leger
and Paul Klee fared slightly better, largely propped up by
European collectors. And the contemporary art sales, where
top collectors and dealers went bargain-hunting, established
that there's definitely ardent demand for art when it's
priced right -- that is, cheap.
   The ruthless selectivity that buyers showed at these sales
will likely have a far-reaching impact: The twice annual New
York paintings sales are a barometer of art-market mood;
paintings dealers and auction houses world-wide adjust their
inventory prices and auction estimates in line with the
results.
   Based on what happened at these sales, art prices have
continued to fall during the past six months. Works routinely
sold at the fall auctions for 75% of the low end of the
auction house's pre-sale price estimates. And those estimates
supposedly already had factored in the art market's steep
slide that began in early 1990.
   The market is "quite thin," but there are "signs of
enthusiasm," said Christopher Burge, president of Christie's
American operations. "One got a sense of where the market is
now. The worst of the slide is over," he said.
   Penny-pinching collectors kept their purchases by and
large to the low six figures. "This is the sort of level
where a businessman, a lawyer, a professional could spend
once a year on his hobby, his passion -- art -- without
mortgaging his house or using his retirement fund," said
Hugues Joffre, head of Sotheby's London contemporary art
department. "That is where the market is, the pleasure
money," he said.
   The market weakness that was good news for buyers was bad
news for art dealers and auction houses. Not only did the
auction salesrooms prove to be an often illiquid marketplace,
but the sales had little of the drama that the stellar
successes and edgy disasters of recent years provided. That
element of theater had been the big draw for the monied
social set that used to pack auction salesrooms.
   Together, Sotheby's and Christie's expected to sell $99
million to $145 million worth of Impressionist and modern
paintings at their major evening sales. They got $65.7
million. For contemporary art, the expectations were for
sales of $59 million to $77 million. Sotheby's and Christie's
raised $39.8 million. The art that was being sold, however,
particularly the Impressionist paintings, was of generally
lower quality than the works on the auction block during the
boom.
   The weak results come at a time when both auction houses
are saddled with a world-wide infrastructure and staffing
levels that may be insupportable at the current levels of
business, auction house officials admit.
   The results are even more bleak when put in recent
perspective. In the 1988-1989 auction season from September
through August, Sotheby's sales of Impressionist and modern
paintings world-wide totaled almost $759 million. The next
year, that figure soared to $1.3 billion. A year later, the
total slumped to $296 million, a 76% drop from the high.
   Collectors are now shopping with pedigree and condition
foremost in their minds. For example, a torn Pablo Picasso, a
restored Piet Mondrian and a cracked Ellsworth Kelly, though
all better-than-average-quality paintings otherwise, were
marooned on the auction block by unforgiving buyers. Like
skittish investors who bolt to gold and Treasury bills in
times of trouble, collectors embraced artistically
sophisticated paintings and those deemed historically
important, perhaps in the hope that the volatility of the
economy wouldn't shake their value.
   But collectors were willing to spurn almost any work,
regardless of quality, if they found the price too high.
   Bidding stopped cold for Robert Rauschenberg's pop-art
forerunner,"Small Red Painting," at a level far below
Sotheby's pre-sale expectations of $1.8 million to $2.2
million. Sotheby's immediately sold the piece in a hastily
arranged private sale to William Acquavella, a New York
dealer who is a business partner of Sotheby's in a separate
venture. He paid $1.3 million.
   Even works by European favorites Rene Magritte and Joan
Miro, two artists that had continued to hold their value at
previous auctions despite the art-market slump, went unsold
when the prices were deemed too rich.
   The participation of German dealers and collectors was
boosted by a very strong German mark and new tax laws that
offer Germans tax breaks for gifts and loans of art. They
raised their paddles for minimalist works and for art by
contemporary German artists Gerhard Richter and Georg
Baselitz. Coming hard on their heels were Italians and a new
collecting group, South Koreans, who were a real force at
Sotheby's otherwise meager sale of Impressionist art.
Americans were back-playing the art market, but were
frequently the underbidders on lots that went to Europeans.
   Buyers balked at works by Cy Twombly and Eric Fischl, two
well-regarded contemporary artists whose prices the Japanese
had supported in recent years. Some funky, giant plastic and
formica pop art sculptures of Claes Oldenberg also were left
on the block. And works by Frank Stella, an American artist
known for his bright geometric canvases that are mainstays of
corporate art collections, sold only at a discount to the
estimates, if at all.
   Most works by Pablo Picasso received regular, but
conservative, bids, with none of the 21 Picassos on sale this
auction season breaking $1 million; most were lowerpriced
sketches. Willem de Kooning works changed hands easily, one
painting selling for $3.4 million to Hollywood record mogul
David Geffen, though they sold at prices well below the
levels of a year ago. Works by pop-art master Andy Warhol,
devalued in recent months as a result of the big supply of
Warhols hitting the market, enjoyed something of a rebound.
   One new artist who defied the art market slump is sculptor
Robert Gober. Prices for Gobers have been appreciating for
years, and the first of his pieces to be included in a major
evening sale, "The Split Up Conflicted Sink," a giant work in
white enamel, fetched $181,000, above estimate.
   Collectors should note: Auction-house officials predict
that in coming months, more high-quality art will become
available, as works come to market that have been withheld
for a year by owners waiting to see where art prices were
heading.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
