ID: 125	RANK: 94	SCORE: 9.938021
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910605-0087
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910605-0087.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Art Crime:
   Paintings Lost...And Found
   ----
   By Constance Lowenthal
</HL>
<DATE>
06/05/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10
</SO>
<LP>
   Thieves in Prague broke through a garden window of the
National Gallery and escaped with four small cubist paintings
by Pablo Picasso. Part of a distinguished collection of
French painting, the Picassos are "The Port of Cadaques,"
"Table with a Chalice," "Mandolin and a Glass of Pernod," and
"Absinthe and Card."
   The museum stands next to Hradcany Palace, the official
residence of President Vaclav Havel, yet it was 17 minutes
before police responded to the alarm in the wee hours of May
6. Last December, the gallery lost a Lucas Cranach, "The
Illmatched Pair," to thieves. Police authorities speculate
that recently opened borders are encouraging the free
movement not only of citizens and ideas, but of criminals and
stolen goods as well.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The churches of Czechoslovakia, rich in painted
altarpieces and baroque sculpture, are unguarded treasure
houses. Now they face risks all too familiar in Italy,
France, Germany and Austria. The dilemma modern sacristans
face is how to keep their vulnerable art safe while
permitting adequate access to the faithful.
   ---
   Mid-April in Amsterdam saw the dramatic pre-dawn theft and
recovery of no less than 20 paintings by Vincent van Gogh
from the museum dedicated to his work. Among the
stolen/recovered canvases were a version of his early "The
Potato Eaters," and numerous later pictures including a view
of his little room in the asylum in St. Remy and his last
work, "Wheatfield with Crows," painted in Auvers-sur-Oise
shortly before his suicide in July 1890.
   The two gunmen abandoned the getaway car, a museum guard's
Volkswagen Passat, at the nearby Amstel train station about
half past five in the morning, some 35 minutes after they
made off with their loot. Panic? No one knows. Most
important, police recovered all the paintings.
   The thieves' disregard for the art indicates that they
were not experienced pros. Three of the paintings suffered
severely and all of them were scratched when tossed into the
garment bags in which they were carried out of the museum and
stowed in the car.
   In recent years, Netherlands museums have had several
thefts and recoveries of work by Van Gogh. Still missing are
three early pictures stolen in June 1990 from the
Noordbrabants Museum in 's-Hertogenbosch; they are a "Peasant
Woman Digging the Soil," "Seated Peasant Woman," and "The
Watermill at Gennep."
   ---
   In a pink and turquoise art deco hotel on historic Collins
Avenue in Miami Beach, U.S. Customs seized a stolen Rubens
oil sketch on May 6. The tiny 10-by-6-inch panel was taken
from the art museum in La Coruna, Spain in 1985 and shows a
radiant woman, partially clad, perched on a cloud. Scholars
disagree on whether she is Aurora, Psyche, or a
personification of Reason. A week earlier, Miami Customs
described the picture to IFAR on the telephone and verified
that it was hot.
   The recovery took place following a staged consultation,
in which Charles Scribner III, an art historian who
specializes in Rubens, went to the hotel at the invitation of
a prospective buyer who understandably wanted it
authenticated. After all, the seller had asked $3.5 million.
Mr. Scribner, who was wired, relished playing the "role" of
New York expert to the hilt and gave a connoisseurship
tutorial on the esthetic merits of Rubens's spontaneous
brushwork to a hidden audience of armed Customs agents
listening in all over the hotel and environs. Mr. Scribner, a
scion of the publishing family, later described the scene as
a "tableau vivant from `Miami Vice,'" and expressed his
"total admiration for the artistry of the Customs officials
on the case."
   The next day, in conjunction with their coup, Customs
announced the arrest of four suspects: two Nicaraguans,
Roberto Alvarez and his son, Jose Pablo; Michael Dimitioff,
an Austrian national; and a woman, Orli Beigel of Mexico.
   Rubens, who was knighted for his service as a diplomat by
both the English and Spanish kings, would have applauded the
finesse with which Customs orchestrated the maneuvers, not to
mention the international significance of the picture's
return to Spain.
   ---
   The Boston Museum of Fine Arts has asked a Federal
District Court to affirm its ownership of a rare Egyptian
pectoral, a gold, silver and electrum vulture with a
wingspread of almost 15 inches. Inlaid with carnelian and
colored glass, the pectoral was included in a Sotheby's
auction in 1980 but failed to meet its reserve price. The
auction house later arranged for the Boston museum to
purchase it from the consignor, a Pennsylvania antiques
dealer, for $165,000 -- considerably less than originally
expected.
   Lafayette College in Easton, Pa., also claims ownership
and has asked the court to return the pectoral to Lafayette.
The college's papers state that in the late 19th century
Lafayette purchased the pectoral for $425, along with a
tablet, a scarab and a papyrus, from the widow of George
Alfred Stone. He had bought the objects in Thebes in 1858.
   The college asserts that it learned only recently that the
Museum of Fine Arts had purchased the work. Lafayette usually
kept the fragile object in a library vault with rare books
and other valuables. The loss was not reported, Lafayette
says, because the thief took the related records, so a
subsequent inventory did not detect the pectoral's
disappearance. The theft probably occurred during the
Egyptomania of the late '70s when the treasures of
Tutankhamun played to SRO crowds in many American cities.
   ---
   Ms. Lowenthal is executive director of the International
Foundation for Art Research (IFAR).
</TEXT>
</DOC>
