ID: 163	RANK: 41	SCORE: 11.711798
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880718-0073 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-18-88 1225EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i PM-CorriganAnniversary 1stLd-Writethru a0536 07-18 0775</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Corrigan Anniversary, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0536,0796</SECOND>
<HEAD>`Wrong-Way' Corrigan Reaches Irish Coast Again</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: New throughout with details of airport ceremony, quote from
U.S. ambassador, ADDS byline. EDITS to tighten. No Pickup.</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By DIARMAID MacDERMOTT</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>DUBLIN, Ireland (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Douglas ``Wrong Way'' Corrigan returned
here today for ceremonies commemorating his famous wrong turn 50
years ago that led him to fly thousands of miles east instead of
west, to Ireland instead of California.
   ``Look, no hands,'' the 81-year-old American declared, hands
aloft in a triumphant gesture, as the Aer Lingus plane carrying him
from Dublin landed at Baldonnel Airport after a 10-minute flight.
   First to greet him at Baldonnel, now Irish air force
headquarters, was R.W. O'Sullivan, the aviation engineer who met
him the first time he landed in Dublin, in 1938.
   U.S. Ambassador Margaret Heckler told the aviator: ``I'm so
proud of you. You are amazing.''
   Corrigan's first transatlantic hop as pilot of a $900 monoplane
was forbidden by U.S. officials, who said his plane wasn't safe. He
said he would fly back to Long Beach, Calif., but somehow he landed
in Ireland anyhow.
   This time, Corrigan arrived in Ireland by commercial jet for
festivities celebrating his famed wrong-way flight, then boarded
the Shorts-360 propellor plane, renamed WW2 (for ``wrong way'') in
his honor, and flew to Baldonnel in the cockpit.
   He sported the same leather flying jacket he wore on his first
flight.
   Corrigan flew from New York as an honored passenger of Aer
Lingus, the Irish Airline, on a Boeing 747. He wouldn't say in an
interview before his dekparture from Kennedy International Airport
Sunday night if the true story of what happened 50 years ago might
come out during his visit to Ireland.
   But Corrigan, of Santa Ana, Calf., hinted recently that his
``wrong-way'' explanation may change after he arrives in Dublin.
Nevertheless, he stuck to his story during the initial ceremony
today.
   Before his departure, Corrigan was whisked in a New York Police
Department helicopter to the Brooklyn airfield for a nostalgic
visit.
   ``It looks a little different than it did 50 years ago. It's got
more buildings scattered around,'' he said. ``But the runway is
still there and the control tower.''
   His Aer Lingus flight was delayed for several hours because of
rain in New York. When he took off from Floyd Bennett Field in
Brooklyn on July 17, 1938, ``it wasn't raining at all,'' the
81-year-old Corrigan recalled. It took him 28 hours to get to
Dublin.
   ``When I saw the water I didn't think it was the Pacific, but at
that time I was in the air for 26 hours and when I came down
through the clouds I noticed I had been reading the compass needle
backwards,'' he told Irish state radio.
   ``That was when I first realized I had been going east instead
of west,'' he said.
   Today's flight took about six hours, and Corrigan did not seem
to be suffering from the effects of jet lag when he arrived in
Ireland this morning.
   ``I believe he's in splendid form. We had plans he'd rest for a
while but he really wasn't interested in that,'' said Margaret
Coyne, an Aer Lingus spokeswoman in Dublin. Corrigan is staying in
Dublin as a guest of Aer Lingus, which plans three days of
ceremonies.
   On July 18, 1938, when he first touched down in Ireland, he only
had $3 in his pocket and didn't know anyone, Corrigan said.
   On his arrival in Dublin a half century ago, Corrigan claimed,
``My compass froze. I guess I flew the wrong way.''
   He has steadfastly maintained he thought he was returning to his
home base of Long Beach, Calif., after federal aviation authorities
said his used Curtiss-Robin monoplane was too heavy for a safe
flight to Ireland.
   The Bureau of Air Commerce, forerunner of the Federal Aviation
Administration, suspended Corrigan from flying for five days after
he made his unauthorized flight.
   But America and Ireland loved his explanation. After he returned
to New York, he was given a ticker-tape parade. There was a meeting
with President Franklin Roosevelt, and a movie, ``The Flying
Irishman,'' starring Corrigan as himself.
   Corrigan, a woodworker, was inspired to try aviation when he
helped build the ``Spirit of St. Louis,'' which Charles Lindbergh
flew across the ocean in 1927. He bought his plane for $310 in 1931
and spent $590 modifying it.
   Also present at the ceremony welcoming Corrigan to Ireland were
Transport Minister John Wilson, Dublin's deputy lord mayor Alice
Glenn, and Aer Lingus chief executive David Kennedy, who wished ``a
hearty cead mile failte -- 100,000 welcomes _ to Mr. Douglas `Wrong
Way' Corrigan.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
