ID: 163	RANK: 96	SCORE: 9.395105
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911008-0084
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911008-0084.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   No Fear of Flying: Interest Soars
   At Auction of Vintage Aircraft
   ----
   By Rick Wartzman
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
10/08/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C1
</SO>
<MS>
FINANCIAL (FIN)
</MS>
<IN>
DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, CREDIT INSTITUTIONS (FIS)
</IN>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Nobody wants an investment that promises a return of zero.
But a Zero, the World War II Japanese fighter, may be another
matter.
   Old aircraft, once coveted mainly by scrap dealers and
weekend sportsmen, are hot commodities these days. For the
long term especially, "there's no way to keep the prices
down," claims John Carnemolla, who is in charge of buying
vintage planes and helicopters for aviation holding company
Evergreen International. Some collectors think values may
soon be enhanced by the upcoming 50th anniversary of the U.S.
entry into World War II.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Last weekend, the Museum of Flying in Santa Monica,
Calif., put 65 planes up for bid at its second annual
auction, considered by many the best barometer of the
classic-aircraft marketplace. Among the weekend's top sellers
was a Ford Tri-Motor, once registered to Charles Lindbergh,
which fetched $650,000. A Vietnam-era Helio Stallion, a
Central Intelligence Agency spy plane -- with the fortuitous
serial number 007 -- went for $440,000.
   Some of the planes, though, went for considerably less
money than their owners had hoped and others didn't move at
all, reflecting the downturn that has plagued other
collectibles markets, such as fine art and cars. But while
prices for big-ticket aircraft may have somewhat leveled off,
"we just haven't seen a wholesale drop," says Bruce Redding,
the auction director.
   For at least some investors, sentiment may be stronger
than laws of supply and demand. Actor John Travolta says he
once bought a Douglas DC-3 not because it was rare, but
because "when I was a kid growing up, the airplane in all the
storybooks was a DC-3."
   "Airplanes have their own personalities," explains Mr.
Travolta, a certified pilot who bought his first collectible
aircraft in 1974 and today loves to take rides in his 1947 de
Havilland jet. "You never know when you're going to fall in
love."
   Maintaining an aircraft is obviously tougher than, say, a
Tiffany lamp. Many old planes require hundreds of thousands
of dollars of repair. And a sale can fall through on any
given day because of mechanical trouble: A World War
II-vintage P-47 Thunderbolt fighter never even made it to the
Museum of Flying auction because of landing gear problems.
   Most people who collect planes are themselves pilots, and
many enter air shows and races. Most collectors arrange with
local airports to house their investments, while others keep
them on display at aviation museums.
   Increasingly, though, people who buy aircraft say they are
simply looking for a good place to put their money. "I'd
rather have airplanes than gold," says Ed Schnepf, publisher
of Air Classics magazine, who bought several planes during
the weekend auction. "It's axiomatic: The older these planes
get, the more they're going to sell for."
   Patrick Harrison, a Houston real estate investor, says he
eagerly plunked down $440,000 for a newly minted version of
the old Russian Yak-3 fighter. The plane is currently being
manufactured in the Soviet Union from the original production
tooling, with delivery expected next year. "Within three
years," Mr. Harrison figures, "it'll be a million-dollar
airplane."
   Some 45% of the planes offered at the Museum of Flying
auction sold over the weekend, topping last year's 39%. And
collectors and sellers continued to bargain yesterday over
several planes that didn't sell. They included a B-17 Flying
Fortress, which was bid up to $925,000 before being taken
into a closed-door session between prospective buyers and the
seller; the owner at one point was looking for as much as
$1.5 million for the four-engine World War II bomber.
   Investors also had their sights fixed on a Japanese Zero,
which yesterday was still being haggled over in a "silent
auction," a private sale where prospective buyers submit
sealed bids. The plane was recently recovered from an island
off Indonesia, complete with Allied bullet shells still
inside the fuselage. The mangled plane is being restored, and
will be ready to take to the skies in 1993. It will then be
one of only two airworthy Zeros in existence. Mr. Redding,
the auction director, maintains that the Japanese aircraft
will sell for "seven figures."
   Such scarcity, of course, enhances value. At last year's
Museum of Flying auction, a retired Air Force general snapped
up -- for a record $1.55 million -- one of the six World War
II-era P-38 Lockheed Lightnings still flying.
   Like other collectibles, aircraft are not the most liquid
of assets, and the prices they will command can at times seem
utterly capricious. There's always the threat, moreover, that
the bottom will fall out of the market.
   People poured money into classic cars a few years ago,
believing "there was no reason prices would stop going up,"
cautions Bill Gillette, an analyst with the duPont Registry,
a buyer's guide for age-old automobiles. Now, after a
prolonged slump, some of them have been "left holding the
bag," he says.
   Certain pockets of the aircraft market already have shown
themselves to be vulnerable. For example, a top-of-the-line
North American T-28 Trojan trainer could have been expected
to go for $250,000 in 1990. At last weekend's auction, one
sold for $190,000. Sotheby's Holdings Inc., the big New York
auction house, says it has been slightly disappointed in
three of four aircraft auctions it has held in Europe since
March 1990.
   Still, "I decided I was better off putting my money in a
Staggerwing than in my bank account," says Duke Vincent, a
Hollywood producer who bought the propeller-driven plane
seven years ago for about $150,000 and then spent another
$150,000 fixing it up. A former Navy pilot, Mr. Vincent uses
the 45-year-old Beech-built craft both as a vehicle and as an
investment: He flies it for fun, while also noting that he
has been offered up to $450,000 for it.
   At this point, a delicate balance has been struck between
profitability and affordability.
   While prices for vintage aircraft have soared during the
past few years, planes remain -- at least for the moment --
cheaper than some other tangibles, particularly on a
pound-for-pound basis. Car buffs, for example, "are
flabbergasted at what they can buy" when it comes to
aircraft, says Vern Rayburn, a computer industry executive
who has been collecting "warbirds," or vintage military
aircraft, for about six years. "They'll look and say, `I
can't touch a Ferrari for twice that.'"
</TEXT>
</DOC>
