ID: 213	RANK: 18	SCORE: 21.116335
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911224-0118
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911224-0118.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   The Munificent Ebenezer Scrooge
   ----
   By Kenneth W. Cowans
</HL>
<DATE>
12/24/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A6
</SO>
<LP>
   Each Christmas season brings a new reading of Charles
Dickens's "A Christmas Carol." It would be hard to find
another plot so admired, so sympathized with and so silly in
its premise as the tale of the moral regeneration of Ebenezer
Scrooge.
   It is easy to believe that the unreformed Scrooge was a
cruel man. After all he refused to give anything to charity,
and he is represented as being abusive to his employee Bob
Cratchit. (Although in fact Scrooge treated Cratchit quite
well: Cratchit was able to live in a house, rare for the
time, and his salary supported a large family. Altogether,
Cratchit was doing well for a member of the early 19th
century lower-middle-class.)
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Dickens may have been right that Scrooge the unsaved would
have been an unhappy man. But he was very wrong to suggest
that the Scrooge who scrimped and saved before his visitation
by the Ghosts of Christmas was failing to serve society. In
fact, in the context of the 1830s, the apparent setting of
the story, Scrooge's decision not to give to charity and to
keep his capital working instead was the best contribution he
could make to the welfare of the poor.
   It is difficult to appreciate just how powerful capital
was in the early Industrial Revolution. Before
industrialization, wire for fences, package binding, nails
and other uses was made laboriously by a blacksmith. He would
first heat and pound a bar of metal to a reasonable starting
shape, maybe a half inch in diameter. Then he physically
pulled it through successfully smaller dies until the metal
was the right size. It would then be one-eighth the original
diameter and 64 times the original length.
   A large man working this way might be able to generate
about 1/20 horsepower. Now give the blacksmith a cheap and
simple five-horsepower steam engine hooked up to a
wire-drawing device. With that new power source, the
blacksmith would be able to produce roughly 100 times more
wire than an unassisted man. One or two pounds sterling
invested in an engine could thus easily produce 10 to 100
times that amount in usable goods the year after. Then the
capital so generated could be reinvested to produce thousands
the next year and so on.
   This is why dividends of 100% on speculative capital were
not uncommon in the early Industrial Revolution. And this is
why England's small initial stock of capital could so quickly
produce a vast quantity of goods.
   But the flip-side of the enormous productivity of capital
in the early Industrial Revolution was that each shilling
given to ease the celebration of Christmas by the poor meant
a pound or more that would not be available for consumption
the year after.
   So was Scrooge so very wrong to hesitate, for instance, to
provide medical help for Tiny Tim? The medicine available in
the 1830s was generally useless or worse. To quote the
historian Thomas McKeown, ". . . with the notable exception
of vaccination against smallpox {the medical cures of the
time} had no significant influence on mortality." Doctors had
only behavioral knowledge handed down from previous
generations. They knew only whether to keep lots of liquids
going into a patient, or if he should be kept extra warm or
cool, or should sweat. That, except they were good at hacking
off limbs, was about all they could do. It is ludicrous to
suggest that with money from Scrooge the Cratchits would have
been able to buy Tim a cure for multiple sclerosis or
whatever it was he suffered from.
   But by the end of the century medical care in Britain was
improving dramatically. It improved by virtue of the research
funded with capital generated by Scrooge and his ilk. It
improved because the wealth heaped up by capitalist
accumulation had built hospitals where they were needed. Not
incidentally, the roads and railroads built by other Scrooges
allowed more people to get to the medical centers. The alms
that Scrooge's nicer colleagues gave didn't help much at all.
   England was the birthplace of the Industrial Revolution
from which all of us alive today benefit. The wealth
generated by that revolution finances our contemporary
welfare states. But we should remember that the Industrial
Revolution was not the product only of scientists and
engineers. The hard-headed businessmen like Ebenezer Scrooge
who took this year's output and directed it to generating
more the year after deserve no less credit.
   ---
   Mr. Cowans, a retired engineer, is a writer in Woodland
Hills, Calif. He is completing a book on political theory.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
