ID: 213	RANK: 26	SCORE: 18.257746
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP881205-0217 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-12-05-88 1401EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>s a BC-APN--ChristmasGhosts Adv18-1stAdd   12-05 0928</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-APN--Christmas Ghosts, Adv18-1st Add,0942</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv18</NOTE>
<HEAD>AGENCIES AND RADIO OUT</HEAD>
<NOTE>For Release Sun., Dec. 18</NOTE>
<HEAD>UNDATED: spirit world.</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   ``My last crime was a Christmas crime,'' arch thief Flambeau
confesses to G.K. Chesterton's Father Brown, ``a cheery, cosy,
English middle-class crime, a crime of Charles Dickens. I did it in
a good old middle-class house near Putney, a house with a crescent
of a carriage drive, a house with a stable by the side of it, a
house with a name on the two outer gates...Enough, you know the
species.''
   The eager Christmas reading public certainly knew the species.
They had been conditioned to it by decades of ghosts haunting the
pages of the Christmas annuals and special gift books, often
sponsored by royalty, that were a matter of pride and profit to
authors and publishers from Victorian times down to the end of World
War II when TV became the main medium, so to speak, for encounters
of the spectral kind.
   These expensively bound and strikingly illustrated volumes had
names like Yule Logs, Christmas Blossoms, Winter's Wreath, Queen
Mary's Gift Book, Christmas Box, Princess Alexandra's Gift Book,
Beeton's Christmas Annual, the Snowflake, Longmans' Annual and St.
Nicholas, which its Boston publishers avowed was ``a Christmas and
New Year's gift made expressly under the direction of St. Nicholas
for all good little girls and boys.''
   In 1834, almost a decade before Scrooge pronounced Christmas a
humbug, there were 63 competing annuals on sale in London, some
running to 450 pages.
   ``These sold at an upscale, enhanced price, so the writers'
market definitely improved at Christmas,'' said Charles Benson,
curator of rare books at Dublin's Trinity College Library. In his
cubicle of an office looking down on the vaulted reading room where
Lord Dunsany and Elizabeth Bowen conjured up their Christmas ghosts
and where the 8th century Book of Kells is on display, Benson spread
out several editions of Beeton's and Longmans' annuals dating back
to l870s.
   ``The enormous demand for these gift books coincided with the
rapid rise in literacy throughout Europe,'' the curator went on.
``Prominently placed on the living room table, they proclaimed both
the giver and the recipient to be people of some culture.''
   Sherlock Holmes made his first appearance in ``A Study in
Scarlet'' in Beeton's 1887 Christmas annual. Author A. Conan Doyle
said the title recognized ``the scarlet thread of murder running
through the colorless skein of life.''
   Edgar Allen Poe and Mary Shelley, creator of Frankenstein,
frequently contributed to gift books. Hawthorne raised his earliest
Puritan phantoms in the pages of The Token and Goodrich's Annual.
   Ghosts ``began to disappear when electricity came in,'' lamented
librarian Benson. ``You seldom get a dark countryside now, those
lonely stretches of road lined with skeletal trees, with mist rising
from the bogs and the fields shrouded in snow, all so essential for
contacting the beyond. Christmas then was a time for ghosts because
as the days grew shorter, the peasants and the landed gentry had
more leisure to swap tales around their fires. Life was short and
precarious. People were much closer to death and the spirit world.''
   Ghost stories are for telling aloud as well as reading, as
Dickens soon discovered to his pleasure and profit. A consummate
actor, he took Scrooge on the road. An overflow crowd of 4,000
turned up at Bradford's Mechanics Institute for his three-hour
stage-cut reading of ``A Christmas Carol,'' and 2,000 jammed into
Birmingham's town hall. A new career and a new tradition were
launched.
   On the night before Christmas at Hyde Park, Franklin D. Roosevelt
always read ``A Christmas Carol'' aloud to the family, acting out
all the parts. Banker J.P. Morgan bought the original Dickens
manuscript and like the born-again Scrooge, ``merry as a
schoolboy,'' had his secretary read it to him each Christmas Eve.
   Cambridge don M.R. James, a learned antiquary and translator of
New Testament apocrypha, read aloud his devilishly clever ghost
stories to friends at King's College every Christmas Eve for more
than three decades, beginning in 1894. As provost of Eton College,
he concocted many of his holiday horrors for the small boys in his
charge and wrote ``The Haunted Dolls House'' specifically ``for the
library of Her Majesty the Queen's Dolls' House.''
   American novelist and global railway chronicler Paul Theroux, who
lives in London, has kept alive this haunting holiday tradition.
Every year when his boys Marcel and Louis were growing up, he wrote
and read to them over three nights a ghost story, ``leaving the
hammer stroke for Christmas Eve.''
   Like Dickens' urchins peeking through the frosted panes of the
bakery, the audience of two was allowed to window-shop for the
ingredients. Their requirements: a scary ghost, lots of snow, a
London setting, a happy ending and, ``Oh yes, please put a cat in.''
   At Hardscribble House in rural Connecticut, where this is being
hand-crafted at a wobbly Victorian stand-up writing desk, we refuse
to let old spooks lie. Ghost stories are always told over a flagon
of smoking bishop or hot purl, the lady of the house being from
Ireland where spectral visitors outnumber poor relations around the
fireside at Christmas. And our guest room is seasonally haunted by
the mournful whistle and dull headlight glow of a long vanished
Lionel model train set endlessly circling beneath the bed on rusty
rails.
   Or could it be the rats from the graveyard across the road
scratching out winter quarters beneath the floorboards and
occasionally venturing out to search for food with those baleful
eyes?
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Sunday, Dec. 18</NOTE>
</DOC>
