ID: 213	RANK: 71	SCORE: 11.737401
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911224-0115
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911224-0115.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   REVIEW &amp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):
   Have a Merry Christmas
</HL>
<DATE>
12/24/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A6
</SO>
<IN>
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
</IN>
<NS>
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
</NS>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   It's hard to remember another Christmas so dominated by
the spirit of Scrooge. Despite the din of Marley's ghost
clanking its chains in every corner of America, there is in
fact much to celebrate. By the standards of mankind, we enjoy
peace and prosperity.
   Yes, prosperity. We've heard about a recession, of course,
but in terms of national output, 1991 will probably go down
as the second-best year in history. That is, we will produce
a bit less than in 1990 and a bit more than in 1989, when
everyone thought prosperity reigned. On average, every
American man, woman and child will have some $15,000 in
after-tax income, wealth undreamed of in most parts of the
world today and remarkable in terms of our own history. In
constant dollars, disposable personal income will be more
than 50% above a generation ago, and some 15% above a decade
ago. Yet somehow we feel no cheer.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Yes, economic growth has been limping for three years, but
our biggest problem is that we've talked ourselves into a
funk. This same funk is also the big reason for worry about
the economic outlook. For if everyone thinks the economy is
declining and stops buying, merchants and manufacturers will
sell less; if they earn less, they will pay their employees
less; so everyone will have less pay to spend, and everyone
will become ever more convinced that the economy is
declining. So they will buy even less, and so on. This kind
of self-realizing pessimism is our economic predicament in a
nutshell.
   The pessimism, too, blinds us to the hope around us. The
proclamation of peace on earth rings true today as seldom in
history. While there is nastiness in Croatia, no large nation
is at war. With the toppling of the Berlin Wall and breakdown
of Communist totalitarianism, we can hope to have closed an
era of crisis and confrontation that reached back to 1914.
The prospects of peace are brighter today than at any time in
three generations.
   Then too, we live in the midst of a great technical
revolution. We have split the atom and the gene, yet somehow
avoided the fate of Prometheus. Indeed, we are taming the
powers of science for mankind's benefits. In health care we
can accomplish such miracles that the big problem is how to
pay for them. The microchip has changed the world, creating a
world of instant communication that profoundly erodes
oppression everywhere.
   Mankind has never had a better opportunity, indeed, to
forge a new world. Free communications and free economies
have the potential of linking men and women around the world
into common understandings and common purposes. It is a time
for leadership and vision; for finally there is a chance for
good will to men.
   The currently fashionable pessimism would have us turn our
backs on this chance, to separate the rest of mankind, to
pursue a narrow self-interest that in the end will make us
poorer not only in spirit but in wealth as well. Already we
are somehow afraid to partake even of holiday cheer.
   We need to prescribe for ourselves a Merry Christmas. For
all the visions of past and future, surely dourness will not
in the end prevail. After all, even Scrooge awoke Christmas
morning a new and restored man.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
