ID: 213	RANK: 79	SCORE: 11.156270
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891212-0190 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-12-12-89 2103EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>a e BC-APArts:WonderfulLife Adv15-17   12-12 1221</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-AP Arts: Wonderful Life, Adv 15-17,1248</SECOND>
<HEAD>$adv15</HEAD>
<HEAD>$adv16</HEAD>
<HEAD>$adv17</HEAD>
<HEAD>For Release Weekend Editions, Dec. 15-17, and thereafter</HEAD>
<HEAD>Mythical New York Town Is Home for Capra's Christmas Carol</HEAD>
<HEAD>With LaserPhoto</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   EDITOR'S NOTE: Frank Capra set his celebrated movie ``It's a
Wonderful Life'' in the central New York town of Bedford Falls. But
don't look for it on a map. Bedford Falls is a fictional place set
among the small towns between Syracuse and Rochester.
</TEXT>
<BYLINE>By DAVID GERMAIN</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   It's Christmas Eve. Small-town banker George Bailey is short
$8,000, and he's come to the railing of a snow-covered bridge
somewhere in rural New York to end his life.
   Luckily for George, in the place from where guardian angel
Clarence Odbody comes it's against the law to commit suicide.
Clarence stops George by jumping into the icy river below. George,
the goodest of Good Samaritans, hears Clarence's call for help and
dives in to save him. And that's how Clarence saves George.
   George, Clarence and the simple people of Bedford Falls, N.Y.,
have reappeared for the past 43 Christmases in endless reruns of
Frank Capra's holiday treat, ``It's a Wonderful Life.''
   The movie, with its excellent use of screen narrative and
effective lighting for black and white, is one of Capra's greatest
works. A colorized version was made after television entrepreneur
Ted Turner acquired the rights to the movie in 1985 when he bought
MGM-UA Entertainment Corp. with its huge film library for $1.5
billion.
   But Capra was furious with the tinted results. ``This
monstrosity is an embarrassment to me and my friend, James
Stewart,'' the filmmaker said. ``They splashed it all over with
Easter egg colors and they ruined it.
   ``Even the villian looks pink and cheerful. The story,
therefore, has been changed.''
   With the 1951 Alastair Sim version of ``A Christmas Carol'' and
1947's ``Miracle on 34th Street,'' the Capra movie is one of the
most popular holiday videos around. And according to 1988 sales
figures from Erol's Inc., the nation's largest independent video
chain, the black and white version of ``It's a Wonderful Life''
outsells the colorized version.
   The movie tells the tale of the American Little Man, the story
of Scrooge from Bob Cratchit's viewpoint. George Bailey, born for
better things, is trapped by circumstance in the same dreary life
his father led.
   ``It's a Wonderful Life'' shows that while life can be ``an
enriching Norman Rockwell experience, it also can be smothering,
where you end up marrying the girl you went to high school with,
and you never get to go to Europe,'' said Ray Carney, an American
studies professor at Boston University.
   ``It tells us George is one of the most sad and lonely and
tragic characters ever imagined. I cry when I see it,'' said
Carney, who wrote a book called ``American Vision: The Films of
Frank Capra.''
   Capra set the movie in the central New York town of Bedford
Falls, a fictional place set among the small towns between Syracuse
and Rochester.
   Instead of George (James Stewart) shaking ``the dust of this
crummy little town off my feet,'' events conspire to keep him in
Bedford Falls, running his father's savings and loan and battling
the rich town villain, Potter.
   Endless sacrifice to a town he hates embitters George. On
Christmas Eve, he faces embezzlement charges after his bumbling
uncle loses $8,000 of the savings and loan's money. George stands
on the bridge fingering his life insurance policy, mulling Potter's
mocking words: ``You're worth more dead than alive.''
   Clarence (Henry Travers) drops in and shows George what the
world would be like if he had never been born. Bedford Falls
becomes a sleazy pleasure town run by Potter, his children are
never born and his wife (Donna Reed) is an old maid. People also
die because George wasn't there, because if he had lived, he would
save his brother from drowning and his brother in turn would be
alive to save a shipload of servicemen during World War II.
   ``Strange, isn't it?'' Clarence says. ``Each man's life touches
so many other lives, and when he isn't around he leaves an awful
hole, doesn't he? ... You see, George, you really had a wonderful
life. Don't you see what a mistake it would be to throw it all
away?''
   Clarence's words sum up the movie for Jimmy Hawkins, who at age
4 played Tommy Bailey, George's son. Hawkins' most memorable line
was ``Excuse me,'' words he kept repeating to an enraged Stewart.
   ``That's the way Capra worked,'' said Hawkins, now a movie
producer. ``In a scene with a lot of tragedy going on, when Jimmy
Stewart is so angry, he throws in that touch of levity. That's
great filmmaking.''
   While the movie has the happiest of endings, its suicide theme
apparently kept many viewers away. The film opened Dec. 20, 1946.
   ``It's really a very dark film,'' said Jeanine Basinger, a film
professor and curator of the Frank Capra Archives at Wesleyan
University in Middletown, Conn. ``In a way it's a disturbing movie.
At the time, I think maybe people just wanted something light, like
`Miracle on 34th Street.'''
   The movie sets the American Dream alongside the American
nightmare, coming out of a period when the nation was ``confronting
Hitler and confronting evil and wondering about its adequacy as a
society,'' Carney said.
   While there were reports that RKO lost $525,000 on ``It's a
Wonderful Life,'' the movie actually broke even or made just a
little over its $3 million budget, Basinger said.
   With hits such as ``Mr. Smith Goes to Washington'' and ``It
Happened One Night'' behind him, Capra hoped for better on his
first post-war movie. In the long run, he got his wish.
   Its popularity grew after Paramount, which bought Capra's
production company, forgot to renew the copyright to ``It's a
Wonderful Life'' in 1974. Television stations learned they could
show the movie free. Marlo Thomas starred in a TV remake.
    The movie was based on a short story, ``The Greatest Gift'' by
Philip Van Doren Stern. Stern couldn't find a publisher, so he
printed 200 copies as Christmas cards for friends.
   RKO bought the rights for $10,000, planning to put Cary Grant in
the lead. After three scripts, including efforts by Clifford Odets
and Dalton Trumbo, RKO sold the project to Capra in 1945.
   With a new script in hand, the director assembled one of
Hollywood's greatest ensembles of character actors, casting many
against type. Lionel Barrymore, known for his grandfatherly roles,
played the villain Potter, while H.B. Warner, best known for
playing Christ in Cecil B. DeMille's ``King of Kings'' in 1927,
played the drunken druggist Gower. Thomas Mitchell, Scarlett
O'Hara's father in ``Gone With the Wind,'' played the inept Uncle
Billy.
   While he had a magnificent cast and script, Capra himself gave
the movie its lasting appeal through his vision of small-town joy
and agony. Capra should be viewed as one of America's greatest
artists, whose works rank with the paintings of Edward Hopper, the
stories of Nathaniel Hawthorne and the novels of Henry James,
Carney said.
   ``Some films like `It's a Wonderful Life' and `Casablanca' are
as profound and moving as any art produced in this century,'' he
said. ``The movie is one of the greatest American masterpieces.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Weekend Editions, Dec. 15-17</NOTE>
</DOC>
