ID: 170	RANK: 3	SCORE: 32.375980
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900326-0107 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-03-26-90 1416EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a PM-SocialClubFire 5thLd-Writethru a0587 03-26 1162</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Social Club Fire, 5th Ld - Writethru, a0587,1188</SECOND>
<HEAD>Fire Allegedly Set By Spurned Lover Kills 87 at Unlicensed Social
Club</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: SUBS 11-12th grafs, `Authorities early...', with 2 grafs to
UPDATE with number of clubs visited citywide, 52 safety violations
cited. Picks up 13th graf pvs, `It was...'.</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos NY6,7</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By RAUL REYES</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>NEW YORK (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   A man bounced from a Bronx social club for
quarreling with an ex-girlfriend returned with a jug of gasoline
and set a fire that killed 87 people at the nightspot, which had
been ordered closed, police said.
   Julio Gonzalez, 36, was charged with multiple counts of murder
and arson in the pre-dawn blaze Sunday at the Happy Land social
club, police Sgt. Edward Burns said.
   He appeared early this morning in Bronx County Criminal Court
and was ordered held without bail and placed in an isolated cell
under a suicide watch in a Rikers Island jail, Burns said.
   Meanwhile, authorities launched a crackdown on social clubs,
drinking and dancing nightspots that proliferate in New York's poor
neighborhoods and often operate without proper licenses and safety
features. Happy Land was operating despite a 1988 closure order
that cited safety violations including improper exits.
   Most of the dead suffocated in thick smoke in the pre-dawn blaze
Sunday, authorities said. Some people were trampled to death;
others broke a hole through a wall to an adjoining hall in a
desperate attempt to escape.
   Emergency workers described bodies felled by smoke so quickly
that they still had their legs wrapped around a bar stool, gripped
drinks or held hands. Only three people managed to reach safety by
way of the two doors on the front of the two-story Happy Land
social club.
   ``People literallywere stacked on top of each other,'' said
Anthony De Vita, the Fire Department's command chief. ``It was a
firetrap.''
   Gonzalez, a Cuban immigrant and former boyfriend of a Happy
Land's ticket seller, was thrown out of the club after a quarrel in
which he tried to woo back the woman, police said.
   After warning, ``I'll be back,'' he returned with a jug of
gasoline, sprinkled the fuel on the floor and lit it, said Lt.
James Malvey.
   Gonzalez cried with remorse under questioning, said Lt. Raymond
O'Donnell, a police spokesman. ``Basically, he's saying he did
it,'' O'Donnell said.
   Authorities early today inspected more than 200 social clubs
across the city, finding most of them closed. Vacate orders were
posted at 187 of them, and 52 safety violation notices were issued,
said Sgt. Dick Vreeland, a police spokesman. In addition, five
people were arrested for weapons possessions.
   On Sunday, officials had said a review of city records showed at
least 173 social clubs had been ordered to shut down in the past,
and Mayor David Dinkins ordered officials to make sure they were
closed.
   It was the deadliest fire in the continental United States since
the 1977 blaze at the Beverly Hills Supper Club in Southgate, Ky.,
that killed 164 people. A New Year's Eve 1986 fire at a hotel in
San Juan, Puerto Rico, killed 97.
   The fire occurred exactly 79 years after a blaze at the Triangle
Shirtwaist Co. in New York City, a garment factory, that claimed
145 lives. That blaze led to reforms around the nation in workplace
safety.
   At a ceremony today marking the Triangle fire, Dinkins referred
to Sunday's club fire, noting that in both cases most of the
victims were immigrants. As in 1911, he said, ``there are those
operating in the shadows, running sweatshops and illegal social
clubs and pursuing other schemes, turning the lure and promise of
America into a nightmare for those who seek to redeem the
promise.'' The ceremony had been scheduled long before Sunday's
fire.
   After Sunday's fire, the impoverished Latino neighborhood near
the Bronx Zoo was thick with mourners, who were asked to identify
relatives from snapshots of the bodies posted on the wall of a high
school.
   Killed were 61 men and 26 women, most of them Honduran and
Dominican immigrants.
   ``Most of the bodies were in dance clothes,'' Emergency Medical
Services specialist Christopher McCarthy said. ``They were out to
have fun.''
   Alva Romero, a Honduran immigrant, lost six relatives, including
a daughter, both brothers and a sister. Jerome Ford lost five
relatives. The local Honduran soccer club lost several players.
   The government in Honduras today expressed regret over the fire.
Foreign Ministry spokesman Eugenio Castro said officials were
``deeply moved by the deaths of many countrymen in New York.''
   Happy Land was ordered shut in November 1988 and again a year
later because of inadequate exits, sprinkler systems, emergency
lighting and signs, Dinkins said. It had no liquor or cabaret
license.
   City officials said the building was sold last year to Karl
Rubman, but Dinkins said it was unclear who owns the property now.
Residents said the manager of the club was Elias Colon. The Daily
News reported that Colon's wife, Elena, was one of the survivors of
the fire.
   Despite their name, the social clubs admit anyone. Happy Land
charged a $5 admission price at the door; its illegally served
drinks cost about $3 each.
   ``I will tell you it will not be an endless battle,'' the mayor
said in announcing the crackdown on illegal clubs. ``Anybody that
had an opportunity to view those 87 bodies knows that we're not
going to tolerate this.''
   Mayor Ed Koch, Dinkins' predecessor, made a similar promise
after a 1988 Bronx social club fire killed seven people. The clubs
are popular among poor immigrants.
   Two rickety staircases lead to the second-story dance floor
where most of the bodies were found. Disc jockey Ruben Valladares,
who spun reggae, salsa and calypso records, ran through the flames
and was hospitalized with severe burns.
   At least two other women escaped. Their condition was unknown.
   ``People were screaming; they were all burned,'' said Rosemary
Green, who found the club on fire when she arrived to meet her
sister-in-law and cousin. ``Once you got in the entrance there was
no way to get out.''
   Gonzalez, an unemployed warehouse worker, came to the United
States on the Mariel boatlift in 1980, O'Donnell said.
   Police said he went into the club about 3 a.m. and began arguing
with the woman.
   ``He's trying to talk her into making up; she's saying `Leave me
alone,''' O'Donnell said. The man's ex-girlfriend left before the
fire, which was reported at 3:41 a.m., Brown said. Police withheld
her identity.
   Denise Garcia, 20, a filing clerk who lives in the neighborhood,
said she and her friends avoided the club because they considered
it ``too sleazy.'' The building was rickety and the dance floor
sometimes trembled, she said.
   One firefighter broke a leg; 13 of his colleagues also were
injured.
   Gonzalez was charged with two counts of arson, 87 counts of
murder in the course of arson, 87 counts of murder by depraved
indifference to human life and one count of attempted murder.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
