ID: 170	RANK: 6	SCORE: 29.047680
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900327-0073 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-03-27-90 1123EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a PM-SocialClubFire 4thLd-Writethru a0528 03-27 1070</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Social Club Fire, 4th Ld - Writethru, a0528,1094</SECOND>
<HEAD>Spurned Boyfriend Charged in 87 Fire Deaths, Prosecutors Probe
Ownership</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: LEADS with 8 grafs to focus lead on investigation of
ownership, confirm reports on Turner's husband; picks up 7th graf,
`Across from...' SUBS 21st graf, `Valladares was...' to UPDATE disc
jockey's condition.</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By RICHARD PYLE</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>NEW YORK (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Prosecutors are investigating whether owners in
a corporate chain that includes the husband of actress Kathleen
Turner may share responsibility in the fire deaths of 87 people in
an illegal nightclub.
   The Cuban immigrant accused of torching the club to avenge a
romantic snub was under a suicide watch in a psychiatric ward today
after allegedly telling police he set the blaze because ``the devil
got into me.''
   Julio Gonzalez, 36, was charged with murdering 87 people by
setting fire Sunday to the jammed Happy Land social club in the
Bronx.
   Miss Turner's husband, Jay Weiss, acknowledged through a
statement by his lawyer that he and a partner are principals of
Little Peach Inc., which leased the club site in 1985 from a
corporation controlled by real estate developer Alex DiLorenzo III.
Two years later Little Peach sublet the two-story building to Elias
Colon, who operated the Happy Land club.
   Colon died in the fire.
   The statement by the lawyer, Roger Boyle, said Weiss' company
``has been actively pressing eviction proceedings against Mr. Colon
and had hoped that a final eviction would have resulted from a
trial scheduled for Wednesday of this week.''
   The statement said Weiss and his partner, Morris Jaffe, ``are
horrified at the events of this weekend and lament the loss of life
which ensued.''
   Bronx District Attorney Robert Johnson has said he has 10
assistants working on prosecuting Gonzalez and also ``working on
the investigation of whether or not there is any possible
responsibility, criminal liability, on the part of the club and-or
the owner of the building.''
   Across from the fire-blackened club in an impoverished
neighborhood near the Bronx Zoo, families on Monday drifted in and
out of Public School 67, where agencies helped arrange funerals and
offered counseling and financial aid.
   Anger was directed at Gonzalez' former girlfriend, Lydia
Feliciano, when she appeared at the school to inquire about aid for
friends.
   ``I can't believe she is here. How could she show her face?''
said Edgardo Rodriguez, 22, who lost four friends and was awaiting
information on financial aid to send their bodies home to Honduras.
   When asked why she came to the school, Ms. Feliciano responded,
``I lost people too. I lost friends.'' As a crowd gathered around
her, two police officers escorted Ms. Feliciano out of a back
entrance of the school.
   A huge wooden cross stood in front of the nightclub's ruins as
neighbors prayed at an outdoor service conducted in English and
Spanish. The service Monday ended with the singing of ``De
Colores,'' a song about brotherly love.
   At the direction of Mayor David Dinkins, authorities visited 241
clubs citywide from midnight to 7 a.m. Monday and posted orders on
187 of them to vacate.
   Police issued 52 safety violations and 30 summonses, said Sgt.
Dick Vreeland.
   Police said Gonzalez had vowed to ``shut this place down'' after
an argument with Ms. Feliciano, a Happy Land employee who had split
with the unemployed Gonzalez several months ago.
   ``I got angry, the devil got into me, and I set the place on
fire,'' Gonzalez told authorities, according to a police source who
spoke on condition of anonymity.
   Gonzalez was arraigned on 87 counts of murder committed in the
course of arson; 87 counts of murder by depraved indifference to
human life; one count of attempted murder, and two counts of arson.
He entered no plea.
   Johnson, the Bronx district attorney, said he hoped Gonzalez
would get consecutive sentences amounting to 2,000 years in prison
if convicted.
   Gonzalez, who was jailed for army desertion in Cuba in the
1970s, came to the United States from Cuba on the 1980 Mariel
boatlift. He told immigration officials he had portrayed himself as
a drug trafficker to get kicked out of Cuba, The New York Times
reported.
   The victims of Sunday's fire, many of them Honduran immigrants,
suffocated, burned or were trampled to death. They had to ``choose
between a wall of fire or retreating and dying of asphyxiation,''
Johnson said.
   Police believe five people escaped: three patrons; Ms.
Feliciano, and the club disc jockey, Ruben Valladares.
   Valladares was listed in critical but stable condition today at
Jacobi Hospital with burns over 30 percent of his body. Ms.
Feliciano and the others escaped serious injury. Ms. Feliciano is
in protective custody.
   Johnson said Gonzalez had described the following sequence:
   After arguing with Ms. Feliciano, with whom he sought to resume
a relationship, he was ejected from the club.
   He bought $1 worth of gasoline at a nearby station, returned and
faked making a telephone call when he saw someone. When that person
left, he poured gasoline between the street and an inside door and
ignited it.
   Gonzalez watched it burn for awhile, making statements to at
least two witnesses about his role in the fire. Then he went home,
where police found him a few hours later, his shoes reeking of
gasoline. He made a videotaped admission to police.
   Johnson said Gonzalez knew the two-story club lacked windows,
rear exits and adequate staircases. He also knew how crowded it was.
   ``He is a double animal,'' said Rene J. Mena, whose son, Rene
Jr., 30, died in the fire. ``Here, they're going to have good food
for him, a book, a movie. In Central America, we don't do it that
way.''
   A vacate order was issued in 1988 against the club and again a
year later because Happy Land lacked a proper sprinkler system,
exits, emergency lighting and signs. It also had no liquor or
cabaret license, Dinkins said.
   Dinkins discussed Sunday's tragedy while addressing garment
workers Monday commemorating New York City's Triangle Shirtwaist
Co. fire, which occurred exactly 79 years before the Happy Land
blaze. The 1911 tragedy claimed 146 lives and transformed workplace
safety laws around the country.
   ``The sight of those bodies, lined along the walls like so many
wax figures, and the realization of the panic and the pain they
must have suffered in their last moments, will remain with me for
the rest of my life,'' Dinkins said.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
