ID: 170	RANK: 7	SCORE: 28.542780
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900325-0067 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-03-25-90 2138EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-SocialClubFire 5thLd-Writethru a0753 03-25 0992</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Social Club Fire, 5th Ld-Writethru, a0753,1023</SECOND>
<HEAD>Fire Kills 87 at Unlicensed Social Club; Man Charged</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: SUBS 26th graf to CORRECT spelling to Ungar sted Unger.</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos NY7,8,11,16,19,27; LaserColor NY6,15; LaserGraphic
NY25</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By VERENA DOBNIK</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>NEW YORK (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Fire raced through an illegal social club early
Sunday and turned a packed dance floor into a deathtrap of smoke
and flame that killed 87. A man who allegedly had earlier fought
with a club worker was charged with arson and murder.
   The fire, the nation's worst in 13 years, tore through the Happy
Land club, which authorities said lacked proper exits and other
safeguards.
   The 3:40 a.m. fire killed 61 men and 26 women, most of them
Honduran and Dominican immigrants. Most were found on the second
floor.
   ``People literally were stacked on top of each other,'' said
Anthony De Vita, the Fire Department's command chief. ``It was a
firetrap,'' he said of the two-story building in an impoverished
neighborhood near the Bronx Zoo.
   Some of the victims broke a hole through a wall to an adjoining
hall in a desperate attempt to save their lives, said Red Cross
worker Margaret Glugover.
   Julio Gonzalez, 36, was charged with arson and murder in the
case, said Lt. Raymond O'Donnell, a police spokesman. The district
attorney's office later would determine how many counts Gonzalez
would be charged.
   ``We believe the motive in this case was the result of a dispute
he had with a female employee of the club,'' Police Commissioner
Lee Brown said at a City Hall news conference Sunday evening.
   Gonzalez emigrated in 1980 from Cuba during the Mariel boatlift
that brought 125,000 Cubans to the United States.
   Police said Gonzalez went into the club about 3 a.m. and began
arguing with his former girlfriend, who sold tickets near the
entrance.
   ``He's trying to talk her into making up, she's saying `Leave me
alone,''' O'Donnell said.
   A club bouncer evicted the man half an hour later, and police
alleged he returned and started the fire near the entrance.
   The woman employee left before the fire, Brown said.
   At least two women and one man, believed to be the club's disc
jockey, escaped. The man was seriously burned; the condition of the
women was unknown.
   Most of the dead were believed to have suffocated from the thick
smoke, which billowed hundreds of feet, but some were trampled,
said Lynn Schulman, an Emergency Medical Service spokeswoman.
   ``This is the worst thing I have seen in my career,'' said
Emergency Medical Services specialist Christopher McCarthy. ``It
hurt my stomach. It was sickening.''
   ``Most of the bodies were in dance clothes,'' McCarthy said.
``They were out to have fun. ... I saw wall-to-wall bodies _ an
indication of mass confusion and panic.''
   The fire was the deadliest in the continental United States
since a May 28, 1977, blaze at the Beverly Hills Supper Club in
Southgate, Ky., that killed 164 people. A Dec. 31, 1986, fire at a
hotel in San Juan, Puerto Rico, a U.S. commonwealth, killed 96
people.
   The tragedy occurred in East Tremont, a section of the Bronx
borough. Deputy Mayor Bill Lynch described it as an ``economically
disadvantaged, working-class, Latino neighborhood.''
   The building housed a group that organized children's baseball
as well as adult social events, said Lillian Rivera, a neighbor.
   A makeshift morgue was set up at a hall next door. Authorities
took Polaroid pictures of the bodies and showed them to 200 friends
and relatives at a school across the street where the cries and
wails of relatives could be heard outside. Then, the bodies were
moved to a hospital morgue.
   After viewing the bodies, Mayor David Dinkins called the scene
``graphic and sad.''
   Dinkins said a vacate order was issued in November 1988 because
the club lacked a proper sprinkler system, exits, emergency
lighting and signs.
   City records show the club was again ordered closed on Nov. 1,
1989, by the Buildings Department, Dinkins said.
   ``I don't know what subsequent visits were made there,'' the
mayor said.
   The club had no liquor or cabaret license.
   Two neighborhood residents said three gunshots were heard just
before the fire. Robert Ungar, deputy fire commissioner, said he
could not confirm another report that cans of accelerant were found.
   So-called ``social clubs'' proliferate in New York City's poor
neighborhoods, and despite their name many of them admit virtually
anyone who wants to enter, functioning essentially as unlicensed
taverns or dance clubs.
   New York police officials have estimated that alcohol is sold
without a license at more than 200 locations.
   Authorities said the victims tried to escape the windowless club
down a stairway just wide enough for one person. A second stairway
apparently wasn't used, perhaps because it couldn't be reached from
the club.
   Sixty-nine of the victims died upstairs, where the dance floor
was located.
   ``People were screaming; they were all burned,'' said Rosemary
Green, who found the club on fire when she arrived to meet her
sister-in-law and cousin. ``Once you got in the entrance there was
no way to get out.''
   Denise Garcia, 20, a filing clerk who lives in the neighborhood,
said she and her friends avoided the club because they considered
it ``too sleazy.'' The building was rickety and the dance floor
sometimes trembled, she said.
   Ms. Garcia said the club's patrons included many illegal
immigrants.
   The tragedy occurred on the 79th anniversary of the Triangle
Shirtwaist Co. fire in Manhattan, which killed 145 people, most of
them immigrant garment workers, and led to reforms governing
workplace safety.
   EMS Lt. Roy David said he got to the scene just as the male
survivor was staggering out.
   ``He walked toward me. He couldn't talk. He couldn't say
anything. All we could do was treat him,'' David said.
   Five firefighters, including a battalion chief who broke his
leg, were taken to Jacobi after inhaling smoke. Six other
firefighters were treated at the scene for smoke inhalation.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
