ID: 170	RANK: 75	SCORE: 11.032057
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900331-0079 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-03-31-90 1416EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a AM-HonduranDreams Bjt   03-31 1287</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Honduran Dreams, Bjt,1339</SECOND>
<HEAD>Honduran Immigrants' Dreams Shattered by Bronx Fire</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By RAUL REYES</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>NEW YORK (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   It was going to be different here.
   Here, in the United States, far from the poverty of their native
Honduras, they would become part of the American Dream.
   In a strange and sometimes hostile city, they clung to their own
kind _ especially when it came time to party.
   Often, they went to Happy Land, an illegal Bronx social club.
There, a week ago, an arson fire consumed the dream and the lives
of 87 people.
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   Pedro and Elida Alvarez decided in 1986 that life in Honduras no
longer was tolerable. They would emigrate first to the United
States, bringing their family with them as soon as they could.
   They traveled first to Los Angeles. ``But I didn't want to live
there. I already had relatives here and I wanted to be near my
family,'' Mrs. Alvarez said. They moved to New York, and by 1988,
they had saved enough money to begin the process of reuniting their
family.
   ``We all came here looking for a good job, to better ourselves,
our future,'' Alvarez said. ``That's what we all thought. We'd come
here and start a good life.''
   Denny, who had dropped out of a teacher education program in
Honduras, would come first. He would continue his studies here,
Mrs. Alvarez hoped.
   But when he arrived in March 1988, Denny had other ideas.
   ``When he got here, he didn't want to study,'' Mrs. Alvarez said.
   ``I would tell him not to go out at night but he would go,''
Alvarez sadly remembered last week. ``As a son, he was a good son.
But he would say he was young and he had his own life.''
   Last October, something happened that horrified the Alvarez
family. Denny got into a fight at Happy Land and was cut in the
abdomen. Doctors stitched him up, and he spent three days in the
hospital.
   In the aftermath of that incident, Denny's life became more
tranquil. Three months ago, he married a Honduran woman he met
here. He and Doralina were expecting a child in about three months.
He recently quit his job at a filter company and went to work in a
candy factory.
   On Saturday, he dropped by his parents' house and gave his
mother a box of candy from his new job. He then drove his mother to
a friend's house.
   From there, everyone thought Denny was headed for a private
party in the Bronx. But instead, Denny went to Happy Land.
   ``He liked the ambience. It was there that he could be with his
friends,'' said cousin Hector Martinez, who had stopped going to
Happy Land.
   ``You see,'' said Martinez, ``Denny was always happy. He was
very outgoing.''
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   They were the hope of the Gamoneda family.
   The two younger Gamoneda brothers, Marco and Lenny, were serious
students, aware that education was the ticket to escape the poverty
that had followed them from Honduras to the South Bronx.
   ``I don't just say this because they were my brothers, but these
kids were perfect,'' an elder brother, Miguel, said as he prepared
to fly with the bodies back to Honduras where they would be buried.
   ``They didn't smoke, they didn't drink. They never went out. And
that night, they went just to see what it was like,'' Miguel said.
   The brothers had saved enough from their part-time jobs at a
supermarket to buy a Nintendo computer game set.
   ``They'd stay up until 1 a.m. playing the Nintendo instead of
going out. They would rather stay home,'' their older brother said.
   The boys' parents _ Francisco and Leticia _ came to the United
States in 1983 and were able to bring their sons to New York two
years later.
   ``The life here is clearly better and you live well,'' said
Miguel, who works for the city of White Plains, just north of New
York.
   Marco, 23, was attending Bronx Community College and Lenny, 17,
went to Theodore Roosevelt High School.
   ``He was a shy student but he was very bright,'' said Arcadia
Ruiz, one of Marco's instructors.
   Marco told her he wanted to be a automotive mechanic but later,
as his studies progressed, he changed his mind, saying he would
like to be an electrical engineer.
   ``Marco spoke English and he could also write it very well,''
Miguel said. ``He was going to be the first in the family to make
it here.''
   Lenny, meanwhile, had dreams of being a police officer, said
Miguel.
   The brothers worked weekends at a neighborhood supermarket and
usually got off work at about midnight.
   ``But that night, for some reason, they got off at about 8
p.m.,'' Miguel said. A friend called their home several times;
party at Happy Land, the friend said. So they went.
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   For Marvin Doubleday, the American Dream soured very quickly.
   More than 1{ years ago, he decided the only way to better
himself was to come to the United States.
   ``Mother was very sad. She didn't want him to come here,'' said
brother Carlos Casco, 21.
   ``But Marvin knew he couldn't continue to live in Honduras. He
couldn't get a job. He kept hearing that he could find work here,
that there was a lot of money here. So he decided to come here.''
   Doubleday, 22, was determined _ he would gain success before
returning home to Honduras. He planned to work here a few years and
save enough money to open a small store back home.
   ``He wanted to put enough money together and go back home and
start a small business _ nothing big but something that was his,''
said a cousin, Ricardo Discua.
   ``People are dying of hunger back home, so you come here,'' said
another cousin, Jorge Bautista, who has been here 12 years.
   Doubleday learned quickly that life here wasn't necessarily
better.
   ``He didn't like all the drug dealers,'' Bautista said. ``He
complained there were drug dealers everywhere. He also didn't like
the city because of the crime, which keeps getting worse and
worse.''
   Moreover, Doubleday was not saving money. He earned about $200 a
week pumping gas at a Bronx service station, and New York's high
rents ate up his cash. He spoke almost no English, and his
prospects were dim.
   A new plan emerged late last year _ his younger brother, Casco,
would move here, doubling their earning power. When Casco and their
mother came to visit, Doubleday's kid brother was surprised at how
he lived.
   ``Don't misunderstand me. We lived in a very poor house back in
our country. And he lived better than we did in Honduras but I
thought he had a better life (in Honduras) ...,'' Casco said. ``It
wasn't a bad apartment but I thought he lived better than he did.''
   Still, the brothers decided they would ``both work real hard,
earn enough money to put together a business and leave here by
December. We would not stay beyond December.''
   Their mother returned to Honduras in February and the brothers
both worked at the Bronx gasoline station. They even found time to
relax, going to Happy Land a couple of times in the past few weeks.
   Casco worked all day Saturday and didn't feel like going out. By
the time he got home, Doubleday already had left. He and a friend
called Casco, urging him to join them later at Happy Land.
   ``But I was very tired. I ate dinner and went to sleep,'' Casco
said.
   The next morning Casco knew that their American dream had ended.
   ``And now, I will go back to my country and I will bury him,''
he said.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
