ID: 170	RANK: 93	SCORE: 9.392384
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910920-0064
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910920-0064.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   What's News --
   World-Wide
</HL>
<DATE>
09/20/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<LP>
   IRAQ RECEIVED U.N. approval for a limited return to world
oil markets.
   The Security Council, as expected, voted to allow Baghdad
to sell $1.6 billion of crude. The oil exports would be
Iraq's first since it invaded Kuwait more than a year ago and
prompted U.N. economic sanctions. However, it is unclear
whether Iraq's Saddam Hussein will act on the U.N. resolution
because proceeds from the oil would be administered by the
world body. Meanwhile, a Kuwaiti minister confirmed that
oil-field fires in the emirate have caused permanent damage
to its reservoirs.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Bush insisted he isn't planning a "Son of Desert Storm"
operation but is ready to use military action to force Iraq
to comply with U.N. resolutions.
   ---
   THE SOVIET UNION SUBMITTED a request for $14.7 billion in
food assistance.
   A senior Soviet official, citing a drop of between 10% and
30% in Soviet food production this year, asked the European
Community to provide about half of the total request. The
amount was far larger than had been anticipated. Treasury
Secretary Brady, winding up a visit in Moscow, commented that
$14.7 billion "sounded like an awfully high figure." Brady
said the U.S. was ready to supply the Soviets with emergency
food and other humanitarian assistance if needed.
   Yeltsin missed the opening session of the Russian
Parliament. He was said to be suffering from a minor heart
ailment but didn't require hospitalization.
   ---
   YUGOSLAV ARMY TANKS HEADED toward the republic of Croatia.
   The huge military convoy that left Belgrade was at least
six miles long and consisted of about 700 vehicles, including
tanks and heavy artillery. Its destination was unknown, but
it was traveling on the main highway to Zagreb, the Croatian
capital. Croatia's foreign minister said he feared an all-out
attack. Air raid alerts sounded throughout the republic and
intense fighting was reported in a number of towns.
   The European Community decided not to send an armed
peacekeeping unit to Yugoslavia, but agreed to study a
possible future deployment.
   ---
   The federal government proposed that hospital patients be
urged to undergo screening for the AIDS virus. While stopping
short of calling for mandatory testing, the Centers for
Disease Control said hospitals and health-care providers
should "routinely" encourage patients to be screened.
   ---
   Baker and King Hussein together urged Palestinians to take
part in a Mideast peace conference amid reports they may
decide against joining the talks. The Jordanian monarch, who
has offered to attend a conference in a joint delegation with
Palestinians, said that "the only alternative is disaster"
for the entire region.
                                                                                                       

   Israel's Shamir said the White House's opposition to
immediate loan guarantees for Israel had made peace more
distant. "Now there is euphoria in the Arab world because of
the Arab perception that the U.S. stands on their side," the
prime minister told two visiting U.S. congressmen.
   ---
   Ex-CIA officer Alan Fiers testified to meeting regularly
with Robert Gates concerning Central America and said that
the would-be CIA director understood the "framework" of the
secret Contra supply network run in 1986 from the White
House.
   ---
   A pro-Iranian kidnap faction declared it wouldn't release
any Western hostage until Israel releases 20 more Lebanese
prisoners. The Revolutionary Justice Organization's
statement, issued in Beirut, came after reports that a
77-year-old British hostage, Jack Mann, was about to go free.
   ---
   Julio Gonzalez was sentenced by a New York judge to 25
years to life in prison for setting the March 1990 fire that
killed 87 people at the Happy Land social club in the Bronx.
Gonzalez, a 37-year-old Cuban refugee, was convicted last
month of 174 counts of murder-two for each death.
   ---
   Aquino backed away from a confrontation with the
Philippine Senate over its rejection of a U.S. military base
treaty, saying she would hold a public referendum on the
issue only if the people demanded one. The Philippine
president has been facing mounting opposition to her efforts
to keep U.S. forces at the Subic Bay naval base.
   ---
   A Tunisian hijacker commandeered an Alitalia jetliner with
137 people aboard by falsely claiming he had a bomb. Police
in Tunis seized the man after the plane arrived from Rome and
said none of the passengers on the flight had been hurt. The
26-year-old hijacker told authorities he had been mistreated
as an immigrant in Italy.
   ---
   Iran has been implicated in the Aug. 6 slaying of former
Iranian Premier Shapour Bakhtiar outside Paris, a French
judicial official told Reuters news agency. He said a
suspected Iranian accomplice in the fatal stabbing had
"directly implicated the Iranian state." Tehran has
officially denied involvement in the killing.
   ---
   Died: Cyril Chappellet, 85, a founder and former executive
of Lockheed Corp., Wednesday, in Pebble Beach, Calif.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
