ID: 175	RANK: 28	SCORE: 13.659924

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-66588 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea021___94019" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-021 </AU>
JPRS 
Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     18 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> REPUBLIC OF YEMEN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Al-Ahmar Family Said To Be Front for Fundamentalists </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Al-Ahmar Family Said To Be Front for Fundamentalists </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94AE0091A Paris AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI in Arabic 18 Feb 94 pp 
20-21 </F>

<F P=103> 94AE0091A </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI </F>
<F P=105>  Arabic </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sa'id al-Qaysi: "Secret Network Rules North </F>
Yemen Using Saddam's Methods!"] 
  [Text] Yemen is on the threshold of war. The statement this 
time was made by President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih's vice-president 
in the General People's Congress [GPC], and it is considered to 
be true by all the people in power, by observers, and by Yemenis 
who are awaiting the catastrophe that is bound to happen--after 
everybody has crossed the redline and reached the point of no 
return; after the latest crisis has revealed behind-the-scenes 
activities in the regime, the contradictions of the rulers, and 
the absence of a unified authority. In this report from Sanaa, 
AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI reveals a [hitherto] unknown part of the 
background of the conflict going on in Yemen, the part that has 
played an important role in escalating this conflict and 
bringing the situation to a head. It has to do with the makeup 
of authority in Sanaa and the secret network built up by 
President Salih--or rather, which he participated in building 
up--in order to govern Yemen according to Saddam Husayn's 
methods. This is being accomplished by means of a "secret 
alliance" between the family and tribe that many people say 
rules Yemen, that is, the al-Ahmar family, and the extremist 
fundamentalist groups that have entered the arena and converted 
President Salih into their hostage, whom they threaten to expel 
any moment. It is known that southern Yemen is ruled by the 
Yemeni Socialist Party [YSP], but who really rules northern 
Yemen, and what is the role that the fundamentalist groups and 
Arab Afghans play there? 
  "Yemen is a country that is out of breath." Most of the 
people in government and observers agree with this remark. And 
there are those who are awaiting a catastrophe. This may happen 
because there no longer is anything to stop it, and everybody 
has crossed the redline. There is no authority. In the North, 
authority is in "unknown hands," as some of the educated people 
have said. 
  Talking about authority in Yemen is something that opens 
doors to a strange world that the crisis began to reveal and 
that has given it its dimensions. Everybody has come to know 
what is going on and who the bosses are--the family, the tribe, 
and the extremist fundamentalist groups. As for the corruption, 
this is a complete world unto itself, and stories concerning it 
have become regular fare at places of relaxation and 
khat-chewing rooms. "Nothing is new," according to a professor 
of sociology who has been in jail and does not care to go back 
there. 
  First there is the question of who is in charge. Who rules 
northern Yemen? The professor of sociology says: "We have a new 
royal family in the guise of a republican cover. We have the 
Bayt al-Ahmar monarchy in Yemen. Bayt al-Ahmar is one of the 
villages belonging to the Sanhan tribe located not far from the 
capital city of Sanaa. The al-Ahmar clan is considered to be one 
of the clans of the Hashid tribe which is headed by Shaykh 
'Abdallah Bin-Husayn al-Ahmar, head of the Yemeni Chamber of 
Deputies and head of the Higher Committee of the Yemeni Reform 
Grouping [YRG] (the political facade of the Muslim Brotherhood). 
  In northern Yemen, all power is in the hands of the al-Ahmar 
family. The village of Bayt al-Ahmar was not known until it was 
at the center of events when one of its native sons, Lt. Col. 
'Ali 'Abdallah Salih al-Ahmar, took over the reins of power in 
1978 after two presidents of the republic were killed in 
mysterious circumstances; they were President Ibrahim al-Hamdi 
and President Ahmad Husayn al-Ghashmi. From that time until 
today, the al-Ahmar clan has endeavored to consolidate its power 
and influence in the government, following the pattern of Saddam 
Husayn in Iraq. 
  The important positions in the military establishment and 
the 
security apparatus are occupied by the president's brothers, 
cousins, in-laws, and uncles--in other words, by blood 
relatives--and they are followed [in the hierarchy] by the other 
members of the clan. This is true in spite of the existence of 
the Yemeni Socialist Party [YSP], which has become merely a 
showcase. The head of the party and president of the republic 
does not trust anyone except individuals in his family and clan. 
For this reason, he has placed them in the most important 
military and security-related positions. 
  An examination of the rosters of the various commands of the 
armed forces in northern Yemen shows that most of the commanders 
of the brigades and units and all the management of the 
(technical, operational, and financial) offices in the armed 
forces and security apparatus are persons who are from the same 
tribal grouping, that is, Sanhan. 
  If anyone from any other tribal grouping occupies any of 
these positions, then he is at least from Hashid, the overall 
mother tribe. 
<H5>  Rule by Bayt al-Ahmar </H5>
  One notices that Bayt al-Ahmar, the birthplace of the 
president, accounts for the lion's share of the top positions, 
in fact, about 48 percent of them. Bayt al-Ahmar is then 
followed by the villages of Sayyan, Wadi Silmok, al-Jarda', and 
al-Dhanin. We find that Bayt al-Ahmar and four of its 
neighboring villages account for most of the top positions, that 
is, 22 of them, and this constitutes about 70 percent of the 
total. Consequently, we can say that many of the other villages 
inhabited by people belonging to the Sanhan clan do not enjoy 
the confidence of the president. In addition to this, no 
effective military command position is occupied by anyone from 
the Bakil tribe, which is Yemen's largest tribe that follows the 
Zaydi school of Islam, as do the Hashid tribes. Also, the areas 
of Ma'rib, Ta'izz, al-Hudaydah, al-Bayda', and Ibb, whose people 
follow the Shafi'i school of Islam, have no presence in the 
power structure. 
  The following is a list of persons who occupy the top 
positions: 
  Col. Muhammad 'Abdallah Salih al-Ahmar--the president's 
brother, commander of the central security units, which are 
deployed throughout Yemen's cities. 
  Col. 'Ali Salih 'Abdallah al-Ahmar--the president's 
half-brother by his mother, commander of the Republican Guard 
which is composed of 30,000 highly-trained soldiers armed with 
various modern advanced weapons. 
  Col. Muhammad Salih 'Abdallah al-Ahmar--the president's 
half-brother by his mother, commander of the Air Force and Air 
Defense Forces. 
  Col. 'Ali Salih Ahmad Muhsin al-Ahmar--the president's 
half-brother by his mother, commander of the artillery units in 
the Governorate of Sanaa. 
  Col. Muhammad Ahmad Isma'il al-Ahmar--the president's 
brother-in-law, commander of the 8th Brigade and commander of 
the troops stationed in the east. 
  Col. Muhammad 'Ali Muhsin al-Ahmar--relative of the 
president, deputy commander of the air defense affairs [branch] 
of the Air Force. 
  Col. 'Ali Muhsin Salih al-Ahmar--relative of the president, 
commander of the 1st Armored Division (Sanaa). 
  Col. 'Abd-al-Malik Ahmad al-Sayyani--from the village of 
Sayyan (Sanhan), chief of the general staff. 
  Col. 'Ali Ahmad al-Sayyani--from the village of Sayyan 
(Sanhan), chief of military intelligence. 
  Col. 'Ali 'Ali al-Sayyani--from the village of Sayyan 
(Sanhan), commander of the 1st Missile Brigade. 
  The list is long, and clearly indicates what the power 
structure is. 
  However, what about the regime's activity as related to 
terrorism, a matter which many people, both inside and outside 
Yemen, are talking about? 
  "Fundamentalist terrorism," in particular, intensified 
rapidly around the end of 1991, that is, after unification, and 
it has targeted the YSP and the opposition parties. However, 
since the end of 1992, investigations have begun to reveal the 
links of the terrorist fundamentalist groups, particularly after 
the attempt to assassinate 'Ali Salih 'Abbad, nicknamed "the 
Next One" [al-muqbil], who is a member of the Political Bureau 
of the YSP, and the explosions which targeted the Aden Hotel. 
The investigation revealed that the organization responsible was 
the Islamic Jihad movement, which is considered to be the 
military wing of the Muslim Brotherhood movement, led by Shaykh 
'Abd-al-Majid al-Zandani, the strong man in the Reform Party, 
who is also a member of the Presidential Council, the highest 
body of authority in Yemen. 
<H5>  Weapons from Somalia and Sudan </H5>
  According to official information, the Reform Party 
constitutes the political facade of the Muslim Brotherhood 
movement, which has been historically linked to Egypt since the 
sixties. However, starting in 1988, the movement began to 
change. It was restructured, by means of the creation of a 
military wing, during the war in Afghanistan. A total of 100 
soldiers were sent to Afghanistan to participate in the war and 
to train, and Sanaa has become the gathering point for a number 
of young Arabs who fought with the freedom- fighters in 
Afghanistan. In Sanaa they were supplied with official papers 
and travel tickets, and the main financier of these operations 
was one of the tribal leaders. 
  After [the war in] Afghanistan, the power struggles began. 
Several groups emerged, one of which was led by Yasin 
'Abd-al-'Aziz, a Shafi'i from Ma'rib who is not a bloody type 
and is not allied with the power structure. There is also a 
group known as the "Party of Iran," since most of its members 
regularly travel to Tehran. 
  In Sanaa, the "Arab Afghans" enjoy great freedom, live in 
"villas" in wealthy residential neighborhoods such as Hiddah 
[name as transliterated], which is where 'Abd-al-Majid 
al-Zandani's residence is, and they have offices on Hiddah's 
main street. Usually the "Arab Afghans" engage in political 
activity in Sanaa and go there to rest before returning to their 
training camps located near the city of Sa'dah, in the far 
north, in the Ma'rib area, and in the Maraqishah mountains on 
the [former] border between the North and the South, near the 
southern Governorate of Shabwah. These camps are financed by the 
Reform Party and a wealthy Yemeni living in Khartoum whose name 
is Usamah Bin-Ladin and who is a friend of Shaykh al-Zandani. 
  Reports indicate that the terrorist groups have strong ties 
to the military commanders, especially the brigade and unit 
commanders, since the groups are transported in military 
vehicles. Some of the military commanders are directly 
responsible for some of the actions of terrorism. There is, for 
example, the officer Salih Dahmash, who is in charge of a cell 
in the southern Governorate of Abyan. He works under the command 
of Col. Muhsin al-Ahmar, commander of the armored division, who 
is the regime's strong man. Their weapons are transported in 
boats from Somalia and Sudan. Some of them go to the coastline 
of southern Yemen, and the rest are transported to the eastern 
coastline of Egypt on the Red Sea. 
  Official sources indicate that the fundamentalist groups 
have 
become so strong that they are threatening the regime of 'Ali 
'Abdallah Salih. One person close to the president says that the 
problem is a very grave one, since these groups have capitalized 
on the crisis and have contributed toward inflaming the 
situation for the purpose of undertaking a palace coup and 
replacing the president with somebody else in his family who is 
from the Hashid tribe. 'Ali Salim al-Bid, the vice-president and 
secretary general of the YSP, says only that more than one 
Lockerbie-type of terrorist operation is being hatched in Yemen. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
