ID: 175	RANK: 76	SCORE: 12.182746

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-59347 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drnes092_j_94043" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-NES-94-092 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  10 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ARABIAN PENINSULA </F>
<F P=101> Yemen </F>
<H3> <TI>   Sanaa, Aden Conditions; Refugees Enter Oman </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Sanaa, Aden Conditions; Refugees Enter Oman </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94P50141A London AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT in Arabic 10 May 94 pp 1, 
4 </F>

<F P=103> 94P50141A </F>
<F P=104>  London AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT </F>
<F P=105>  Arabic </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Report from London by 'Abdallah Hammudah and Lutfi </F>
Shatarah, from Sanaa by Naji al-Harazi, from Damascus by Salwa 
al-Ustuwani, from Muscat by Sa'id 'Isa, and from the Aden and 
Cairo bureaus of AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT] 
  [Excerpts] The bullets and shells in the Yemeni civil war 
were accompanied by a confrontation of a new type, aimed at 
holding the minds of those who have conducted the battles or 
participated in them, as the two sides disseminated conflicting 
communiques about the northern forces' potential capture of the 
city of Aden, and the distance between it and the battles. 
  While the communiques issued by Sanaa yesterday indicated 
the 
battles were going on 5 km from Aden, communiques and statements 
of the southern command said these battles were in al-Dali' in 
the Governorate of Lahij--at a distance of 100 km--and in 
Zinjibar, the capital of the Governorate of Abyan--about 40 km 
away. 
  Eyewitnesses in Aden said conditions were quiet there. No 
firing or shelling was heard, which would testify to the 
closeness of the battles to them in the areas of al-'Alam or Dar 
Sa'd. Employees went to their offices and places of work, 
merchants opened their doors, and while the sounds of distant 
explosions echoed, some said that they perhaps came from 
northern shelling in the Governorate of Lahij. 
  The Sultanate of Oman yesterday witnessed a large wave of 
refugees entering from southern Yemen, due to the escalation of 
the battles going on between the northern and southern forces. 
  An Omani source told AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT that an Omani 
emergency committee was formed with the chairmanship of Musallam 
Bin-'Ali al-Busa'idi, minister of state and governor of Dhofar, 
to deal with this situation. The committee includes in its 
membership the director of labor in the southern part of the 
Sultanate and some officials from other agencies, among them the 
police and the armed forces. 
  This committee is being aided in its work by a similar 
committee in Muscat headed by the minister of social affairs and 
labor, Shaykh Muhammad Bin-Ahmad al-'Isa'i, and including 
officials from other government agencies. 
  Sultan Qabus Bin-Sa'id, sultan of Oman, has implored the 
northern and southern leaders of Yemen to stop the battles, and 
expressed Oman's regret over the fighting in the Cabinet meeting 
held on Saturday. 
  In addition, Omani officials expect that the movement of 
refugees toward the southern Omani borders will increase if the 
intensity of the battles increases or they near the city of Aden 
or the Governorate of Hadramawt. 
  Feelings of unease are spreading among the Yemeni citizens 
in 
both Aden and Sanaa, but it appears that their morale in the two 
cities is high. All appear ready to bear up and withstand 
hardship for a long time, if this will bring Yemen to a happy 
condition, after the months of unrest that have prevailed during 
the Yemeni crisis since 'Ali Salim al-Bid, vice president and 
secretary general of the Yemeni Socialist Party [YSP], 
sequestered himself in Aden on 19 August. 
  Observers in Sanaa stated that several of its residents have 
decided to leave for their villages, not due to fear of the 
confrontation's widening and reaching the outskirts of the 
capital, but to protect their women, children, and elderly. They 
would possibly return to defend it if the situation required. 
The movement of people and cars do not give the impression that 
the situation is abnormal, except that the electricity is cut 
off from time to time, and gasoline, diesel fuel, and kerosene 
are scarce. 
  Residents told AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT that they are prepared to 
remain in Sanaa and defend it, even if the war continues between 
what they term the forces of legitimacy and the forces of the 
separatists in the YSP for several weeks to come. Most of those 
who belong to regions outside the capital are amazed at the 
behavior of those who have decided to leave the city and flee to 
their villages, asking: "How can they leave this city, which has 
afforded them a chance to work, live, profit, and acquire 
wealth?" 
  These people expressed confidence that the war will end in 
victory for the truth and the constitutional, legitimate will, 
no matter how long it takes. They indicated that the bombing 
that Sanaa suffers from time to time, especially during the 
night hours, cannot be worse than that during the 70 day siege 
in which the masses' will was victorious. They described those 
who fired rockets at or conducted airstrikes against Sanaa as 
"traitors who deserve the most severe punishment." 
  At the same time, Sanaa radio and television are carrying 
propaganda campaigns to raise the morale of the Yemenis and 
mobilize them against what are called "the forces of separatism 
and rebellion against constitutional legitimacy, led by 'Ali 
Salim al-Bid." 
  Sanaa news does not provide specific details on the course 
of 
the fighting, which has become narrowly confined, as northern 
sources say, around the approaches of the Governorate of Aden. 
In addition, it affirms the advance of what it describes as the 
forces of constitutional legitimacy, and the proximity of its 
control over the approaches to Aden, and perhaps over the city 
itself during the next few hours. 
  However, YSP sources affirm that this is absurd, and give as 
an example the communique that said day before yesterday "that 
the northern forces control the al-'Anad airport, while today 
this was proved untrue." 
  The [northern] sources stated that these forces are striving 
during their advance to minimize human and material losses as 
much as possible in the areas that they control, especially 
among the civilians who are, they said, appearing very 
sympathetic and supportive of [the North], contrary to what Aden 
radio and the communiques issued from there are repeating. 
  In addition, Foreign Minister Muhammad Salim Basindwah's 
rejection of what was being said about Sanaa's acceptance of a 
delegation from the League of Arab States to mediate in the 
Yemeni crisis produced a positive reaction among many of the 
citizens. AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT talked to them about this, and they 
confirmed their support for President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salim's 
position refusing any foreign intervention or mediation at this 
very late stage of the crisis. 
  They also confirmed their support for what is being 
expressed 
in Sanaa and what Yemeni Interior Ministry sources are claiming, 
that the war going on now is not between the North and the 
South, or the northern and southern armies, but is a Yemeni war 
between forces defending constitutional legitimacy and forces 
defending the interests of some of the YSP leaders who they 
described as" [unfinished sentence as published] [passage 
omitted on statements by the foreign minister, Jordan's Arab 
League representative, the Arab League's assistant secretary 
general, on the possible intervention of Arab League states to 
mediate in the crisis] 
  In Aden, Dr. Yasin Sa'id Nu'man, head of the secretariat of 
the YSP, condemned the destruction caused by the northern 
authorities in the YSP Central Committee headquarters in Sanaa 
and inquired as to the fate of Salih 'Abbad (Muqbil), a 
Political Bureau member and member of the Senate presidency, who 
is in Sanaa and whose whereabouts are not currently known. He 
indicated "the absurdity of Sanaa's claim that its forces are 
nearing Aden" and welcomed "any efforts to stop the bloodshed in 
Yemen." 
  For his part, the former South Yemeni president, 'Ali Nasir 
Muhammad, called for a stop to the fighting, but insisted that 
the solution should be a Yemeni one, and rejected the sending of 
any Arab forces to Yemen. He affirmed that his forces are 
fighting for the Yemeni people's future, security, and stability. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
