ID: 247	RANK: 31	SCORE: 14.324209
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910103-0009
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910103-0009.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Truth in Gardening: Uprooting Black-Market Bulbs
   ----
   By Patti Hagan
</HL>
<DATE>
01/03/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A7
</SO>
<LP>
   Call me bulb-indulgent. I do a lot of preprintemps
primping. I dibble the fall away. Still, this past year I
troweled uneasy on the bulb front.
   It's not just the pang I feel each time I slash through
the heart of a quondam bulb. It's the guilt of certainty that
my mail-order Minors -- the hardy cyclamens, winter aconites,
snowdrops, leucojums, anemones, hoop-petticoat narcissus,
etc. -- are not indeed good Dutch burgher bulbs ("Product of
Holland" labels misled me) but are bulb endemics plundered
from the wild gene ponds of the Levant.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   What bulbwised me up was the historic
bulb-origins-labeling agreement signed in May between the
Dutch bulb industry and the Natural Resources Defense
Council, the World Wildlife Fund (TRAFFIC-U.S.A.) and the
Fauna and Flora Preservation Society (U.K.). Thirty-one Minor
Bulbs, customarily wild-dug, packaged and passed off as
Dutch, would henceforth exit the Netherlands with the usual
"Product of Holland" mislabel, but also verily tagged "Bulbs
From Wild Source." In 1992, such of the 31 Minors as are by
then propagated will carry "Bulbs Grown From Cultivated
Stock" birth certificates; so will the Majors, come 1995.
   Hard upon the debut of bulb-etiology-by-label, in July,
came Smith &amp; Hawken's "Bulb Book." The catalog commenced with
a righteous sermon on the bulb millions "dug from the wild .
. . disguised as cultivated or propagated plants {and}
shipped to consumers."
   "Much plant extinction," the catalog continued, "is the
direct consequence of commercial collecting to satisfy world
markets for bulbs . . . In the past, companies (ourselves
included) have suavely assured customers that `our' bulbs
were . . . not wild-collected." In the present, suavely
wiser, S&amp;H names 13 bulb binomials "of questionable source,"
which it has dropped. "We offer only cultivated . . . bulbs"
and "have chosen not to offer certain varieties . . . until
there is reliable certification . . . authenticating the
bulbs as commercially propagated."
   Ethical gardening has arrived, and none too soon. I say
this by the guilt of hindsight, recollecting my own entry
into the world of the Bulb Minors in the early '80s via
Louise Beebe Wilder ("Adventures With Hardy Bulbs," 1936),
Elizabeth Lawrence ("The Little Bulbs," 1957) and E.A. Bowles
("I have an insatiable desire for cyclamen.") In 1984, an
obscure New England catalog that had, the year before, slaked
my own insatiable desire for cyclamen ("rare and glorious
little charmers"), mentioned that, "due to the problems in
the Middle East, no white or red botanical cyclamen of any
kind were available." Same for Star of Bethlehem and
Sternbergia clusiana: "Not available this year. Middle East
Situation."
   That the Mideast had to do with my private bulb life was
news. I phoned the Yankee nurseryman for an ME situationer.
"These wild cyclamen are collected all through the mountains
along the Eastern Mediterranean -- in Turkey, Syria,
Lebanon," he obliged. "The collectors stake them out when
they're in bloom, then go back and bring them out on
camelback and in caravans. Very romantic. But right now the
collectors are scared stiff to go into Lebanon. And we're
having problems with the Turkish government." He hoped "the
Israelis will get into cyclamen. Israel is beginning to grow
the Star of Bethlehem. Though," he sighed, "they've got their
problems."
   My Middle East gardening problems became acute in 1985,
upon reading "The Laundered Bulb Trade Is a Dirty Business"
in the New York Botanical Garden's Garden magazine. Sara
Oldfield of the World Conservation Monitoring Centre's
Wildlife Monitoring Unit (U.K.) wrote: "Every year, millions
of flower bulbs are dug up from the natural bulb fields of
Mediterranean Europe, the Mideast and Central Asia to . . .
satisfy the horticultural demand." She identified Turkey,
"extraordinarily rich in bulb species" as "the largest
exporter of wild bulbs." Very unromantically she described
"truckloads of Turkish bulbs . . . regularly delivered to the
Netherlands for sale . . . to the international market," and
warned, "long-time garden favorites are becoming . . .
extinct in the wild," as "illegally wild-dug" bulbs, in vast
numbers, "end up in American gardens."
   The international bulb-rustling cartel's ultimate consumer
is, of course, Everygardener. "Bulb buying and growing is a
major aspect of gardening -- everybody is a bulb gardener,"
Ms. Oldfield said, though "until now, authorities and
gardeners alike have been unaware of the magnitude of the
illicit traffic in bulbs."
   Everygardener-USA was interring a gigabulb a year, and I
was Everygardener, party to illicit bulb practices. Abashed,
I began asking my suppliers if my own delightful misc. Minors
were illegit. To a bulbsman, they straightened their faces
and said: "These are DUTCH bulbs]"
   Something on the order of 100 million bulb wildlings move
through the trade each year. Since World War II the industry
has exploited Turkey, preeminently, as a vast free-dig,
open-pit, bulb mine: 71 million anemones, 20 million
cyclamen, 62 million leucojums, 111 million winter aconites,
200 million snowdrops were extracted from Turkey in the '80s,
without any documentable attempt to leave behind a viable
bulb population for future harvest. (Anent the Middle East
Situation 1991, would the talked-of Turkish second front in
the Bush War for a time interdict Turkey's bulb-mining
operations?)
   Among New World bulb activists, the "eminence grise" is
Marjorie Arundel of the Garden Club of America, a gardener
possessed of a Narcissus poeticus writing style. "The
ancestors of our modern tulips and narcissi are classic
little forms among the rich floral treasure evolved through
the millenia," she wrote in 1986. Yet, "the world's loved
bulbous-rooted flora may be facing extinction." Her cri de
corm: "It is unthinkable for gardeners to knowingly add to
the destruction of these little patriarchs, the floral gene
resources of the planet." Doffing her white goat gloves in
the August 1989 GCA Bulletin she declared: "You can, quite
simply, screen out all wild bulbs offered and become an
effective defense attorney at once for the little wild,
patriarch bulbs without whose genes there would be no tulips,
no daffodils and no catalogues. No one will want to be caught
wielding a `smoking trowel' . . . DO NOT WIELD THE SMOKING
TROWEL]]]"
   The GCA advocates substitution of nano-bulb hybrids. ("Can
be planted in good conscience," NRDC.) Shocked "to see this
world heritage in Mediterranean genetic resources up for
sale," Mrs. Arundel and cohorts have suggested bulb-ranching
in the Minors' homelands. (A Peace Corps project?)
   Several catalogs (Smith &amp; Hawken, Burpee, Van Tubergen)
have cut bulbs of dubious origin, but the NYBG seems stuck on
old-style, oblivious bulbopoly. Despite the years of
wild-bulb consciousness-raising in Garden magazine, the NYBG
Shops again sold wild bulbs this season -- some even labeled
"Bulbs From Wild Source."
   In 1987, when the NYBG sent members a brochure, "Bulbs for
Permanent Effects: A professional selection by the New York
Botanical Garden," offering "many rare bulbs that are not
generally available elsewhere," an in-Garden wild-bulb
imbroglio ensued. Staffers were outraged that this major
environmental education institution was hawking wild-dug
bulbs -- nine species of the 31 now on the Index of Forbidden
Bulbs. This practice has ended, and the NYBG Shops' wild-bulb
brokering ought to, as well. Everygardener hopes the NYBG
will begin reading bulb-origins labels, since its PR man,
Karl Lauby, stated yesterday, "We do not sell bulbs collected
from the wild knowingly."
   For righteous gardeners who knowingly choose to become pro
bono bulb DAs, Made-in-U.S.A. Bulb Minors for some of the
species and hybrids can be mail-ordered from: Nancy R.
Wilson, 6525 Briceland-Thorn Road, Garberville, CA 95440;
Sisters' Bulb Farm, Rt. 2, Box 170, Gibsland, LA 71028;
William Welch, 43 East Garzas Road, Carmel Valley, CA 93924;
Montrose Nursery, P.O. Box 957, Hillsborough, NC 27278 ($2);
The Crownsville Nursery, P.O. Box 797, Crownsville, MD 21032
($2); Robinett Bulb Farm, P.O. Box 1306, Sebastopol, CA
95473.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
