ID: 247	RANK: 86	SCORE: 10.520120
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910614-0070
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910614-0070.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Dutch Computer Firm Sets Bold Strategy
   In Bid to Outlast Rivals in Tough PC Field
   ----
   By Bob Hagerty
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
06/14/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4B
</SO>
<CO>
   N.TUC U.ATD
</CO>
<MS>
INDUSTRIAL (IDU)
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)
ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS AND EQUIPMENT (ELQ)
CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)
</IN>
<NS>
CORPORATE PROFILES (PRO)
</NS>
<RE>
EUROPE (EU)
NETHERLANDS (NL)
GREAT BRITAIN (UK)
WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)
</RE>
<LP>
   DEN BOSCH, the Netherlands -- Tulip Computers N.V. wanted
a little attention.
   So the Dutch maker of personal computers last month
invited 100 European journalists to a two-day junket near its
headquarters here, complete with indoor fireworks, bands and
a magician performing card tricks.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Tulip's $130,000 press party had a serious purpose:
Selling the notion that Tulip is potentially a major
Pan-European supplier of personal computers -- not just a
Dutch flash in the pan.
   It's a hard sell. True, Tulip can boast that it gets
nearly half its sales outside the Netherlands. Yet Tulip
ranked No. 16 among suppliers of professional personal
computers in Western Europe last year, with a market share of
about 1.3%, according to Dataquest Europe S.A.
   That leaves Tulip in an uncomfortable position: Too big
for its tiny home market, but too small to be considered a
leader in Europe. Apparently undaunted, Franz Hetzenauer,
co-chairman of Tulip's management board, boldly predicts that
the company will be among the top half-dozen suppliers in
Europe by the mid-1990s. Hence, Tulip is preparing to double
its production capacity, building up its sales network
throughout Europe and aiming to grow twice as fast as the
overall market in the next few years.
   Tulip officials say they can surprise the doubters by
being fast and flexible, and offering high-quality products
about 10% cheaper than those of the industry leader,
International Business Machines Corp. In any case, Tulip
thinks it has no choice. As the industry consolidates, Tulip
officials reason, survivors will need greater scale to cut
production costs, keep up with technology and fend off
powerful rivals from the U.S. and Japan.
   "It's a matter of life or death for us," says a young
Tulip product manager. "Either we reach that scale or we get
pushed aside."
   Many other small and midsized players already have been
pushed aside. Just last month, Oy Nokia of Finland sold its
computer division, Nokia Data, to International Computers
Ltd. of Britain, itself 80%-owned by Japan's Fujitsu Ltd. In
1990, Mitsubishi Electric Corp. snapped up the hardware
operations of Apricot Computers, which briefly grabbed a big
share of the U.K. market for business PCs in the mid-1980s
and dreamed of becoming a global player.
   Others are chastened. Amstrad PLC of Britain made a big
push to sell PCs to business users on the Continent in the
late 1980s, only to see its profit dive; today, Amstrad is an
also-ran in the corporate PC market.
   SMT Goupil S.A. of Paris, which relies mainly on the
French market, is struggling with losses and seeking a
partner to bolster its finances.
   Some local champions continue to plug away profitably.
Both ASEM S.p.A. of Italy and Investronica S.A. of Spain rely
heavily on their home markets, boasting that they understand
local needs better than foreign competitors do. "The key to
our success will be the quality of our service," says an
Investronica official.
   ASEM's strategy hinges partly on designing PCs that look
classy. "Design," notes Vincenzo Verita, ASEM's marketing
director, "has always paid in Italy."
   But the battle for survival is likely to get tougher, and
will certainly hinge on more than design. Growth in the PC
market has slowed considerably from the dizzying pace of the
1980s, and the European Community's unified-market program is
expected to make cross-border sales easier.
   "The writing is on the wall for a lot of local champions,"
says Brian Pearce, an analyst at Dataquest Europe in Paris.
He argues that computer makers in Taiwan and South Korea,
which now supply the guts of many PCs bearing European
labels, increasingly will ship their own brands to Europe,
undercutting European makers.
   At Tulip, Mr. Hetzenauer contends that his company has a
strong enough balance sheet to withstand such pressure. In
Amsterdam, Dutch stock traders clearly have their doubts.
Tulip shares are trading on the Amsterdam Stock Exchange at
around six times projected 1991 earnings, only a little more
than half the market average. At 26.70 guilders ($13.50), the
share price is languishing about 60% below its peak, reached
in 1988.
   The market's wariness is enough to exasperate Mr.
Hetzenauer, who thinks investors don't understand the
computer business and worry far too much about the power of
the industry's giants, such as IBM. "IBM doesn't rule the
world," Mr. Hetzenauer says testily. "IBM can't blow
everybody else out of the market."
   In any case, he notes, it isn't only small companies that
risk stumbling: Even IBM is in a slump, and such European
giants as Groupe Bull and Philips Electronics N.V. have run
up huge losses on computers in recent years. Tulip,
meanwhile, has been profitable every year since it began
operating in 1979.
   Tulip might never have sprouted without a chance encounter
on a ski slope. Mr. Hetzenauer, an Austrian, taught skiing in
his native Tirol while attending a technical school in the
late 1960s. Among the skiers he met was a young Dutch woman,
who proved so alluring that Mr. Hetzenauer married her and
moved to Holland.
   The Austrian learned Dutch and became a computer salesman.
One of his neighbors, Robert Romein, was involved in computer
software at Philips. At backyard barbecues, the two started
talking shop. Soon they decided to create their own company
to sell a new and little-understood product: the personal
computer.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
