ID: 320	RANK: 16	SCORE: 9.681004
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910920-0027
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910920-0027.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Autos:
   Mazda Hopes to Crack Japan's Top Tier
   ----
   By Gergory A. Patterson
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
09/20/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   J.MZD
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
AUTOMOBILES (AUT)
</IN>
<NS>
ANALYSTS COMMENTS ON STOCKS, INDUSTRIES &amp; COMPANIES (ANL)
</NS>
<RE>
FAR EAST (FE)
JAPAN (JA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   DETROIT -- Mazda Motor Corp. wants to become known in the
U.S. as the Japanese auto maker that builds solid cars with a
touch of spice -- a pint-sized Toyota with attitude.
   That image began to take shape three years ago when Mazda
brought its Miata roadster to the U.S. with great success.
Now the auto maker hopes to complete the cast by introducing
new versions of five of its cars over the next six months. A
lot is riding on these vehicles, which will replace half of
the company's product line. "This sets the pace for us for
the balance of the decade," says Clark Vitulli, senior vice
president of Mazda's U.S. sales arm.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Indeed, the new designs are part of the company's drive to
break out of the second tier of Japanese auto makers in the
U.S. -- populated by the likes of Mitsubishi, Subaru, Isuzu
and Suzuki -- and cruise into the first tier with the
Japanese Big Three: Honda Motor Co., Toyota Motor Corp. and
Nissan Motor Co. "We want it to be the Big Four," says a
spokesman.
   So next week Mazda will introduce two of the new lines: A
bigger, more luxurious 929 that will compete in the "near
luxury" market segment, and the MX-3, a small sporty coupe
for the younger set that shares underpinnings with Mazda's
four-door Protege subcompact.
   Mazda's success building such niche vehicles has raised
its annual U.S. car sales by about 30%, to around 270,000,
since 1987, before it introduced the Miata. Mazda now holds
3.5% of the U.S. car market -- well behind Honda and Toyota,
which stand at nearly 10% and 9%, respectively, but not too
far behind Nissan's 5%.
   Now the company wants more -- specifically, to increase
its annual vehicle sales more than 40% by the mid-1990s to
500,000 cars, vans and trucks. It's a lofty target,
considering the signs of resurgence at General Motors Corp.
and the growth ambitions of nearly every other car maker. To
help it get there, Mazda is starting a major ad campaign this
weekend built around the theme: "The New Mazda."
   But what stays the same is Mazda's modest sales
projections for its new designs. The auto maker plans to sell
only 30,000 929s annually and about the same number of MX-3s.
Such low-volume sales may be problematic for Mazda's
long-term growth. They leave the company's product lineup
like a dinner table with appetizers and dessert but no main
course.
   "The product line needs a core product," says Maryann
Keller, an analyst at Furman Selz Inc. in New York. Unlike
its bigger Japanese rivals, Mazda lacks a bread-and-butter
car. "Where is the car that they can depend on year in and
year out for 40% of their sales?" she queries. "There's no
Corolla, there's no Accord, there's not even a Nissan
Sentra."
   Mazda officials are hoping to fill the bill next spring
when they bring out the new 626 compact sedan and MX-6 sporty
coupe. (Mazda will also issue a new RX-7, its time-honored
peanut-shaped two-seater that has a dedicated niche
following.)
   The success of the 626 and MX-6 is important because they
are made in the U.S. and thus not subject to import
restrictions. Flagging sales of both models, in spite of big
discounts, have kept Mazda's U.S. assembly line below
capacity even as the company's overall car sales have grown
slightly from last year despite the recession. Sales of
U.S.-made 626s dropped 26%, while U.S.-built MX-6 sales sank
18% through early September.
   The 626 and its two-door sister car will compete in the
large market for family-sized vehicles populated by Toyota's
Corolla and Camry, Honda's Civic and Accord and Nissan's
Sentra and Stanza, as well as several offerings from the Big
Three U.S. auto makers.
   "The current MX-6 is just bland," says auto analyst Chris
Cedergren of AutoPacific Group Inc. in Santa Ana, Calif. But
the new MX-6 will solve that problem, says Mr. Cedergren, who
has seen all of Mazda's new product lineup. With the new
cars, he says, Mazda has created cars that look good and
exude sophistication.
   Mazda calls its attempt to build cars that produce a
pleasant driving experience "kansei" engineering. Kansei --
loosely translated -- means in harmony with the five senses,
Mazda says, and kansei engineering is the technical steps
Mazda takes to make sure its cars feel good to drive. The
company tried to explain the concept in ads two years ago.
Failing to do that, its marketers settled for the slogan, "It
just feels right."
   Mazda dealers agree the new cars hit the mark. "They're
awesome," says Ruben Rodriguez, sales manager for Stockton
Mazda in California. "The entire line is going to be more
bold."
   Notwithstanding the early reviews, the models' success
isn't guaranteed. Unlike Mazda's two current hits, the MPV
minivan and the Miata, next week's entries are headed for
market segments that already have a lot of competition. When
it debuted in 1988, Mazda's MPV was one of the few
alternatives to Chrysler Corp.'s minivan. And the Miata
created a market all its own as a true convertible sports car
with a then unprecedented $13,800 base price.
   In contrast, the 929 must compete in a market crowded by
entries from Honda, Nissan, Mitsubishi, and even General
Motors' Pontiac Bonneville.
   So Mazda is trying to be different. The company that
brought the rotary engine to America (an innovation that
flopped) is equipping the 929 with a solar-powered auxiliary
ventilation system that blows hot air out when the car is
parked in the sun. Prices for the line will start around
$27,000 and climb above $30,000 for the fully loaded model,
positioning it above Honda's Acura Vigor but below its
Legend.
   In addition to carrying its own weight, the 929 must do a
warmup act for Mazda's luxury division, Amati, which is
scheduled to begin selling cars in 1994. The next "logical
step" for 929 buyers will be the Amati cars, says Stephen
Gurski, an analyst with PaineWebber Inc. in New York.
   The MX-3's mission won't be to attract buyers so much as
to keep them. Buyers of modestly priced but highly styled
sporty coupes are so fickle that they constitute the "car of
the month club," says AutoWeek magazine. Cars such as the
Ford Probe and the Mitsubishi Eclipse were hot for a year or
so but quickly faded when newer competitors came along.
   The MX-3 will cost between $11,000 and $14,000, higher
than the Toyota Paseo but on a par with most other
competitors. Mazda officials hope the MX-3's optional
six-cylinder, 130-horsepower engine, the only one available
in this quirky niche, will be enough to hold and keep buyers.
   Should Mazda's new cars prove to be the right horses, the
next question is whether the company has an adequate stable.
Only 28% of Mazda's dealerships are in stand-alone
facilities. The rest share space with other brands. Most
dealer showrooms feature only four to five cars. "So the rest
of them are going to be sitting out on the back lot where
presentation is a lot less glamorous," says Furman Selz's Ms.
Keller.
   She also questions the wisdom of offering more two-door
cars (four models in all) than four-door models (three of
them) when the market seems headed toward four-door cars.
Mazda replies that it has enough four-door models, and that
in any case, its cars aren't for everybody.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
