ID: 320	RANK: 4	SCORE: 13.902766
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911024-0089
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911024-0089.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Autos:
   Tokyo Car Show Takes Itself Seriously
   ----
   By Paul Ingrassia
   Staff Reporter of the Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
10/24/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   C F G.AUD G.VOW GM HDI HMC J.FJH J.IZM J.MOT J.MZD TOYOY
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
AUTOMOBILES (AUT)
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
ENVIRONMENT (ENV)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)
</IN>
<NS>
ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)
</NS>
<RE>
EUROPE (EU)
FAR EAST (FE)
GERMANY (GE)
JAPAN (JA)
MICHIGAN (MI)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)
WISCONSIN (WI)
</RE>
<LP>
   TOKYO -- Forget highway frivolity. If the 1991 Tokyo Motor
Show is any indication, driving in the '90s is going to be
serious business.
   The previous Tokyo exhibition, in 1989, was a dazzling
display of power and whimsy. It included a bubblelike
single-seat car called the Daihatsu Sneaker, a Mazda
"microvan" called the Scrum and the Suzuki Escudome -- a
sport vehicle with a pop-out rear tent for going "back to the
nature."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   This year's version of the biennial show has its moments
of fun, including a display of the Avalon, a car of the
future from Toyota Motor Corp. The sleek open-air roadster
sports a stylishly grooved body that shuts up tight as an
oyster when the car isn't in use, forming what Toyota calls
"a cool and mysterious objet d'art." But the 1991 show
largely abandons flash and fantasy for cars that seem
tailor-made for "Save the Whales" bumper stickers. On display
is a politically correct lineup of experimental vehicles
powered by electricity, hydrogen, methanol and sunlight. The
Tokyo show's New Age theme: "Man, Car and Earth as One."
   Mazda Motor Co.'s HR-X coupe (the letters stand for
Hydrogen Rotary Experimental) runs on hydrogen gas that is
stored in a rectangular tank and fed into a rotary engine.
Mitsubishi Motors Corp.'s HSR-III (for Human Science
Research) strikes a "user-friendly" note by eliminating the
gas pedal and brake and putting those functions on the
steering wheel.
   Honda Motor Co.'s EP-X (for Efficient Personal
Experimental) takes a more traditional tack. It marries an
ultra-efficient three-cylinder gasoline engine to a
lightweight aluminum body to produce maximum fuel economy,
though Honda doesn't say just how much.
   So pervasive is the show's environmental emphasis that
manufacturers are stretching to make even their regular cars
fit in. Subaru, the auto-making subsidiary of Fuji Heavy
Industries Ltd., gave its rakish looking, 240-horsepower SVX
coupe a coat of turquoise paint -- and dubbed the car the SVX
Greenish Air.
   Amid all this, some industry executives worried at
yesterday's press preview that emphasizing the environment
and vehicle safety may not breathe life into world auto
sales, now simultaneously slumping in the U.S., Japan and
Europe. "I wonder whether environmental friendliness will be
a sufficient motive for consumers to buy cars," said Yutaka
Kume, president of Nissan Motor Co. and chairman of the Japan
Automobile Manufacturers' Association. "I have some doubts."
   One thing hasn't changed this year: Tokyo remains the
world's premier auto show. While the Russians didn't mount a
display this year (their first and only showing was in 1989),
almost everybody else showed up. Some 4,500 reporters have
press credentials for the show -- compared with about 1,000
for baseball's current World Series. The U.S. and Europe sent
a flock of senior automotive executives, including the
chairman of Volkswagen AG and the presidents of Ford Motor
Co. and General Motors Corp.
   Both Detroit companies, which this week reported big
third-quarter losses, raised their profile at this year's
show and promised to start exporting right-hand-drive cars to
Japan. (The Japanese, like the British, drive on the left
side of the road.) "We're committed to a long-term effort to
delivering cars and trucks that will meet the expectations
and needs of Japanese consumers," declared Lloyd E. Reuss,
GM's president.
   In fact, Mr. Reuss said the company will make a
right-hand-drive version of its Impact electric car. The
Impact is scheduled to go on the market sometime in the
mid-'90s as the world's first mass-produced electric
passenger vehicle.
   But the plethora of electric and other alternative-fuel
vehicles at the show spotlighted a problem for auto makers.
No one is sure just what technology will take the fore in
making cars that don't pollute.
   Mazda bills its hydrogen rotary engine as "the ultimate
engine of the 21st century" because the world has a virtually
limitless supply of hydrogen, and burning it doesn't create
the carbon dioxide that contributes to global warming. But
the company concedes that the engine has enormous practical
problems that must be overcome before hydrogen-powered cars
get anywhere close to the market.
   Such concerns are why Honda is taking a more traditional
tack. The company, whose new VTEC-E engine in the 1992 Civic
hatchback gets 48 miles a gallon in the city, believes it can
develop gasoline engines that get still higher mileage but
cause less pollution.
   The company's EP-X -- its first-ever futuristic "concept
car" -- is a two-seater that puts the passenger directly
behind the driver, like in a small airplane. The arrangement
makes for a slender body that cuts wind resistance.
   Honda says it isn't sure what mileage the car will get
when equipped with required safety and anti-pollution
devices. And executives concede that the EP-X is far too
rough-riding a vehicle for mass production. Nonetheless, the
car shows the direction the company's future research efforts
will take. "For now, there's no shortage of oil itself," says
Honda President Nobuhiko Kawamoto.
   Among the few vehicles on display in Tokyo not adhering to
the exhibition's no-nonsense theme is the AVUS Quattro, an
aluminum sports car with a monstrous 12-cylinder, 60-valve
engine from Volkswagen's Audi subsidiary. It generates 509
horsepower and moves from zero to 60 miles an hour in three
seconds.
   Isuzu Motors Co., for its part, bucked the exhibit's
socially conscious themes with the Nagisa and the Terraza.
The former is a boat-shaped amphibious car that seems
designed for the next James Bond movie; the latter is a
luxury city sedan with a fifth wheel that runs parallel to
the rear axle and that drops into use to scoot the vehicle
into a tight parking space.
   And then there is Toyota's Avalon. Toyota's brochure
describes the Avalon as a "socializing cruiser" and suggests
it be used for a trip with friends. "What could be better
than an active weekend spent at a chic resort with another
couple with the same interests as yours?" the brochure asks,
adding: "That's the way it's done in the States."
   But the car lacks so much as a convertible top and can be
operated only in openair mode. What happens to the
socializing couples when it rains? "Well, we haven't really
thought that far," shrugs Hiroshi Kawase, the Avalon's chief
engineer.
   But the prize for the show's least practical vehicle
undoubtedly belongs to Harley Davidson Inc., the American
motorcycle maker. It proudly displayed a hulking bike whose
body is finished with black Japanese urushi lacquer that's
topped with an inlaid silver dragon. This delicately
decorated "hog," as Harleys are called, isn't for sale; but
the company says the estimated price would be $120,000.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
