ID: 159	RANK: 100	SCORE: 7.093042
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900802-0197 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-08-02-90 2016EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>s a BC-EndangeredChoices Adv05   08-02 1242</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-Endangered Choices, Adv05,1281</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv05</NOTE>
<NOTE>For release Sunday, Aug 5, and thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>Louisiana Women Fighting for a Right They've Taken for Granted</HEAD>
<NOTE>With LaserPhotos</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By LESLIE DREYFOUS</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP National Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>MANDEVILLE, La. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Marie is a 33-year-old school teacher and
the mother of two young boys. She is happily married, lives in a
cozy two-story house, loves children and has had an abortion.
   ``It was a painful choice ... but it was the only choice,'' said
Marie, whose husband supported her decision.
   When Louisiana's legislature voted last month to foreclose that
choice, passing what would have been the nation's toughest abortion
law, Marie and others were forced to examine life before and after
abortion was legalized.
   Many for the first time imagined what they, their daughters and
granddaughters would do if the option no longer existed.
   Their vigils, marches, petitions and letters reached Gov. Buddy
Roemer, and his veto secured abortion rights, at least momentarily
_ Louisiana lawmakers are pondering an override, and abortion
rights supporters are apprehensive.
   ``We've been fighting for our lives,'' Marie said.
   Marie, who like others interviewed for this story spoke on
condition of anonymity, was the victim of protracted childhood
incest. With the birth of each of her sons, long-suppressed
memories crept closer to the surface.
   The fresh-scrubbed redhead became increasingly depressed and
alcoholic. Her home near this small town about 25 miles from New
Orleans became a cage in which she sat, sometimes cradling her
husband's revolver.
   Doctors warned that a third child could trigger irreversible
psychosis.
   ``It wasn't anything either of us wanted to do, but we already
had two children who needed a father and a mother,'' her husband
said. ``She couldn't have come out of another pregnancy without
permanent damage to her psyche.''
   She had the abortion four years ago. Had the bill initially
proposed by Louisiana lawmakers been law at the time, the doctor
who performed Marie's abortion would have faced up to 10 years in
prison and fines of up to $100,000.
   The original bill made no exceptions for rape or incest; Roemer
vetoed it. The second bill excepted pregnancies caused by
aggravated rape and incest reported to police and a physician
within a week; Roemer rejected it, as well. ``Some common-sense,
decent exceptions should be made,'' he said.
   The legislature is considering whether to reconvene for a
first-ever emergency override session Aug. 18. Some lawmakers have
proposed trying to revive the first bill, but the state's
constitution may prohibit the move.
   While they sympathize with the plights of women like Marie,
opponents of abortion in this heavily Roman Catholic and
fundamentalist state are pressing the legislature to override. They
say it's a mistake for women to assume that terminating a
problematic pregnancy will ease their despair.
   ``Abortion is not solving anything,'' said Phyllis Osborne, who
today still regrets the illegal abortion she underwent in 1970.
``We have to get to the heart of the problem of why a woman chooses
abortion: because she feels she has no alternative.''
   Anti-abortion activists offer adoption as an alternative that
protects both the mother and her unborn child.
   ``With abortion, there are two victims: the baby is killed and
the woman is wounded,'' said Linda Jefferson, who cannot bear
children.
   The 37-year-old woman had an hysterectomy more than a decade ago
following complications from the second of two abortions.
   ``I was ignorant, immature and very uneducated about abortion,''
said Jefferson, who founded a pregnancy counseling service
affiliated with the Roman Catholic church two years ago.
``(Abortion providers) tell women it doesn't hurt. But it does hurt
_ emotionally, spiritually and physically.''
   Other women, such as the victims of rape or incest, say the
wounds already inflicted could go no deeper.
   Jacquelyn's 15-year-old daughter was raped last year. The mother
knew members of her interdenominational church in a Baton Rouge
suburb would not approve, but abortion was the only way to keep her
baby from having a baby.
   ``Her virginity was taken from her. I didn't want her life taken
too,'' said Jacquelyn. She herself is a 34-year-old single mother,
who until recently was living on about $130 a month in government
aid.
   Her daughter ``has plans. She's always wanted to be a doctor.
(The pregnancy) would have shattered that dream,'' said Jacquelyn.
   ``If she were being permissive, maybe I wouldn't have considered
abortion. But under the circumstances I felt _ we felt _ it was the
only choice.''
   Jacquelyn said nothing could have stopped her from finding her
daughter help ``somewhere, somehow.'' If abortions had been
outlawed in Louisiana, she might have taken the girl to Mississippi
or Florida.
   That's if she could have scraped money together to make the
trip. Many women who could not afford that option would likely
resort to the illegal and dangerous methods that prevailed prior to
the Supreme Court's 1973 Roe vs. Wade decision, which restricted
the right of the states to outlaw abortion.
   A ban on abortions ``would just make them deadly,'' said Dorothy
West, 69.
   She remembers how it was in 1950, the year she nearly bled to
death following an illegal abortion.
   Dorothy was a young mother of two trying to run her deceased
husband's bulldozing business when she discovered she was pregnant
by a man she would later marry. She tried every way she knew how to
induce a miscarriage: quinine, scalding baths, gin and pills
prescribed by back-alley doctors.
   ``I don't believe in baby killing,'' said the Roman Catholic
grandmother. ``I'm not even for capital punishment. But my back was
against the wall and I was frightened. I was thinking about the two
children already living.''
   Three decades later, her 35-year-old daughter Velvet West also
had an abortion. She too cited concerns for the three children she
already had.
   Her father _ Dorothy's third husband _ was an alcoholic, given
to furniture-throwing rages. She felt those same impulses herself,
and she was frightened.
   ``I was afraid I would hurt my own children,'' said Velvet. She
had an abortion, sought counseling and has since remarried and had
another son. ``It was the best parenting decision I ever made. I
was a ticking time bomb.''
   Not all women cite rape or psychological scars as reason for
abortions; abortion opponents says the procedure is too often a
form of birth control, a ``quick fix'' in the words of Linda
Jefferson.
   Michelle, 25, has ended four accidental pregnancies with
abortions: ``Two were out of irresponsibility. Two were failed
birth control,'' she said.
   ``If I hadn't had access, I would have tried to self-abort ...
or suicide,'' she said, blowing cigarette smoke into the rafters of
the New Orleans nightclub where she works. ``I did not want to be a
mother at 17.''
   And such choices, said Norma McCorvey, are what the battle is
all about.
   McCorvey, a native of Louisiana, is known in the legal canon as
Jane Roe _ the woman whose challenge ultimately overturned the
nation's abortion laws, though she herself carried her child to
term and gave her up for adoption.
   McCorvey, 42, traveled from her home in California to Baton
Rouge to join the fight against the Louisiana bill. She feels ``the
hands of time being turned back'' on her Supreme Court victory.
   ``It hurts. It hurts real bad,'' she says.
   ``It's not like anybody is pro-abortion. But a lot of women
really aren't capable of (raising) children,'' she said.
   ``I didn't have a choice.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Sunday, Aug. 5</NOTE>
</DOC>
