ID: 159	RANK: 14	SCORE: 9.155999
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910715-0139
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910715-0139.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Law:
   Joint Custody Loses Favor for Increasing
   Children's Feeling of Being Torn Apart
   ----
   By Stephanie Simon
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
07/15/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<IN>
LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)
</IN>
<NS>
LAW &amp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)
</NS>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
FLORIDA (FL)
MASSACHUSETTS (MA)
MINNESOTA (MN)
MISSOURI (MO)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
SOUTH CAROLINA (SC)
UNITED STATES (US)
UTAH (UT)
</RE>
<LP>
   Joint custody, once hailed as the ideal child-rearing
arrangement for divorced couples, is coming under fire from
psychologists, lawyers and embittered parents.
   Joint-custody agreements, in which divorced parents share
custody of their children, became increasingly popular
throughout the 1980s. But many of these pacts are now
dissolving, and new studies suggest that early enthusiasm for
such arrangements was misguided.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "Joint custody was going to be a great panacea, the
ultimate solution," says Gary N. Skoloff, chairman of the
American Bar Association's family law section. "Lawyers,
mediators, judges -- everyone said this was the way to save
the children. But it turned out to be the world's worst
situation. It was an experiment that failed."
   Robert Mnookin, director of the Stanford Center on
Conflict and Mediation, which conducted a child-custody study
of 1,100 families in California, says, "Where parents are
fighting and remain locked in conflict, joint physical
custody can be like carrying out King Solomon's threat. A
child can be torn apart psychologically."
   Few nationwide statistics on custody arrangements are
available. Researchers estimate that the proportion of
divorce cases settled with joint physical custody, in which
children alternate between the parents' residences, ranges
from 3% in Massachusetts to 18% in California. Joint legal
custody -- in which children have a single home but, in
contrast to sole custody, the parents share responsibility
for making important decisions -- is granted in up to 80% of
divorce cases.
   But these numbers may represent a peak. "Social-science
data in the past five years has started to question the
applicability of joint custody, especially when the parents
are battling," says Amy Koel, director of the Middlesex
Divorce Research Group in Cambridge, Mass., which studied
divorce cases in the area. "It's too early to say whether the
courts will change, but they do seem responsive to the
national mood" of skepticism toward joint custody.
   The theory behind joint custody was simple: Judges would
no longer have to choose between parents, families would no
longer have to endure bitter court battles, and children
would no longer feel that their non-custodial parents were
visitors in their lives. Experts believed joint-custody
arrangements would reduce litigation time and encourage
parental cooperation.
   But a study of 700 divorce cases in Cambridge by the
Middlesex Divorce Research Group found that couples with
joint legal custody were more than twice as likely to
relitigate their child-care agreements as couples with sole
custody.
   Moreover, joint legal custody "makes no difference in
terms of the amount of parents' contact with their kids, the
quality of communication between parents, or the rate of
compliance with child-support payments," says Stanford's Mr.
Mnookin.
   Researchers say joint custody hasn't lived up to its
promise because most parents haven't embraced the concept
willingly. When joint custody was introduced, only the most
dedicated, cooperative parents requested it -- and they were
determined to make the novel arrangement work. Initial
successes prompted lawyers, judges and mediators to push
other parents to try joint custody -- and even to impose it
on unwilling couples.
   Within a few years, many of these nonvoluntary settlements
collapsed. "The willingness to share hasn't struck a chord in
America," says Judith S. Wallerstein, a psychologist and
director of the Center for the Family in Transition in Corte
Madera, Calif.
   Imposed joint custody is common both in and out of court.
The Cambridge study found that judges rejected more than
one-third of fathers' and one-fifth of mothers' requests for
sole custody. In all these cases (which include situations
where one parent requested joint and the other demanded
sole), the court mandated joint custody.
   In California, where most divorce cases are settled with
mediators out of court, the Stanford study similarly found
that 30% of the mothers and 38% of the fathers who requested
sole custody were denied it. Even when both parents agreed on
who should have sole custody, mediators pushed them into
joint custody in 5% of the cases, the study found.
   "Lawyers aren't trained to sit down with parents and
evaluate what will be best for a child they've never seen,"
says Ms. Wallerstein. "They're more likely to discuss
economic and legal issues, and they will make recommendations
to their clients based on what the court might favor" --
which often means joint custody.
   Some states, including Minnesota and Missouri, have
recently passed laws advocating joint custody. But several
states with joint-custody experience are moving the other
way. Massachusetts, Utah and California, a leader in the
joint-custody movement in the early 1980s, recently revoked
statutes favoring joint custody. Courts in Florida and South
Carolina decided in 1989 that joint custody should only be
considered under exceptional circumstances because it doesn't
provide a stable home environment.
   Even when both parents request joint custody, it can cause
big problems. "My daughter can't eat, sleep or get her work
done when she has to switch homes," says Anita Brazer, a
40-year-old homemaker from Lake Forest, Ill., "because she's
so worried about whether everything will be packed, whether
she'll remember to bring the English paper she's working on,
whether she'll have the right supplies for her art project."
   Joint decision making has proved difficult for the
parents. Says Ms. Brazer: "We fight about every little
nitpicky thing, from whether Chad should go to school for a
full day or a half day to whether Erika should be allowed to
chew gum."
   The father, Skip Brazer, agrees that the current
arrangement, in which the two children spend four-day
weekends with him every other week plus dinner once or twice
a week, is tough on them: "It's hello, goodbye, hello,
goodbye all the time," he says. A 42-year-old salesman in
Libertyville, Ill., he has proposed that the children spend
alternate weeks with each parent. "With longer blocks of
time, they wouldn't bounce around so much," he says.
   Ms. Brazer, however, wants to spend more time with her
children, not less. The couple will go to mediation next
month in an attempt to modify the custody arrangement for the
third time in two years.
   Some joint-custody arrangements survive, but with much
stress and strain. Carl Belcher, a 43-year-old engineer from
Columbia, Md., found joint custody worked best when he and
his former wife ignored "nitty-gritty details" outlined in
legal documents about such things as the exact times each
parent would pick up the children and who would pay for
clothing. "Instead, we worked hard to make sure the kids
wouldn't suffer," he says.
   Mr. Belcher's joint-custody pact has survived 10 years,
largely because he and his ex-wife have remained flexible
about visitation. His daughter, now 18, has had trouble
adjusting to the joint parenting and attends counseling at
the Children of Separation and Divorce Center in Columbia.
But overall, he says, the arrangement has worked: "I would
not have left the marriage under any other circumstances."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
