ID: 159	RANK: 45	SCORE: 7.749590
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910520-0143
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910520-0143.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Study of Baby Talk
   Is in Its Infancy;
   Grown-Ups Go Gaga
   ---
   Mothers Can Be Melodious
   (`Nice PIG-gy PIG-gy');
   Is the Song Universal?
   ----
   By Marilyn Chase
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
05/20/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<LP>
   PALO ALTO, Calif. -- In a cubicle in the Stanford
University psychology department, Joseph Pollard is being
analyzed. He responds nicely and is thanked the way all test
subjects here are thanked.
   "You were PER-fect," coos the research assistant. Then he
is handed the usual honorarium, a shiny toy car, which he
stashes in his diaper bag.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Master Pollard, at 19 months of age, is one of the more
senior volunteers in one of the hotter fields in the
psychology of child development: baby talk.
   That's right. Baby talk is controversial stuff in psych
circles these days.
   Baby talk is not babies talking ("goo goo"), but the
"exaggerated melodies of motherese," according to Anne
Fernald, a professor here. This infant-directed speech is a
kind of music mothers and fathers use to communicate with
their children long before the words make any sense.
   Jerry McRoberts, a Stanford speech scientist who charts
speech tones on a computer screen, demonstrates by playing a
tape of a session with a mother, baby and toy animals. He
analyzes it like a sportscaster doing play-by-play
commentary.
   Mother: "Spencer, what's this? Is it a PIG? We LOVE the
PIG] {Interlude of snort sounds.} And here's a DOG-gy. Look
at the DOG-gy. Nice DOG-gy. We love the DOG-gy] Yeeah]"
   Mr. McRoberts: "Mom's really laying it on. She's
effectively doubling her pitch to 500 hertz {a measure of
frequency} from 250 hertz. She's using all the tricks in her
bag to keep him interested."
   Mother: "Here's his NOSE, and his EYES, and his PAWS. And
he's SOFT. Niiice DOG-gy."
   Mr. McRoberts: "Note the swooping pitch-contours Mom uses
to label the target words. It's real selective, real
strategic."
   Prof. Fernald, who works with Mr. McRoberts, contends high
pitch and tonal contrast are most salient in baby talk.
Partly because babies hear better at high frequencies, it
grabs their attention, arouses their emotions and highlights
new words. Similarly, adults hearing a speech may find their
emotions roused more by the tonal contrasts of a Martin
Luther King than the tonal monotony of a Henry Kissinger.
   Prof. Fernald also believes baby talk is innate,
cross-cultural and an aid to language development.
   For instance, adults around the world use similar tonal
patterns to comfort or alert infants, her studies contend.
Baby talk flourishes in English, French, German, Italian,
Chinese, Japanese, Latvian, Arabic and some Native American
tongues.
   "The melody is the message," Prof. Fernald says. To be
sure, in tonal languages like Chinese, too wild a pitch
variation can change the meaning of "cat" to "hat." But
parents there spice up statements in other ways -- for
example, doubling words to say, "Look at the pig-pig." A
Japanese parent would also add a pig sound -- "boo boo" --
for effect.
   Prof. Fernald believes -- as do researchers in many
academic centers -- that baby talk is a genetically coded
behavior that humans evolved for communicating with their
young. "If you're ever going to find an evolved behavior,
you'll find it in the care of infants," she asserts.
   To some, all this may sound obvious. But actually, the
interest in early cognition signals a change in the way some
social scientists think about babies. "As late as the 1960s,
some people thought infants were cabbages," says Prof.
Fernald, who gets grant support from the National Institutes
of Health.
   Other scholars doubt her claims that baby talk is
universal or essential to learning language and pooh-pooh her
methods.
   Clifton Pye, a linguistics professor at the University of
Kansas, says that among the K'iche' Mayan Indians of Western
Guatemala, parents use the same tones when speaking to
children or adults. Anne Fernald's "claims have largely been
based on middle-class parents observed in a university
setting," he says.
   Nor does everyone buy into the genetic theory of
motherese. Joseph Colombo, a professor of human development
at the University of Kansas, argues babies aren't born to
love high-pitched sounds, nor is baby talk part of the
biological blueprint.
   "I'm quite skeptical," adds Kenneth Wexler, a professor of
psychology and linguistics at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. Like his colleague Noam Chomsky, Mr. Wexler
believes people are genetically programmed to learn language,
so that vocal sweeteners don't much matter. "There are kids
who grow up in orphanages who speak adequately."
   Yet others defend the study of baby talk, because it
provides a key to understanding normal and dysfunctional
families. "Do I think it's important to speak to children?
Yes I do," says T. Berry Brazelton, the well-known author and
Harvard University professor of pediatrics. "It should be
intuitive," he adds, "but with high-risk children, that isn't
true." (Indeed, Barbara Bettes of Cornell University found
that depressed mothers don't engage in responsive baby talk;
thus, their babies must strain to decode adult messages.)
   Prof. Fernald insists detractors like Prof. Pye base their
critiques on inadequate data. Motherese may not be universal,
but she contends it isn't just a cultural quirk, like the
American penchant for dressing a girl in pink or a boy in
blue. She notes that in South Africa, speakers of Xhosa, a
rural click language, indulge in a high-pitched baby talk.
   "These were women with babies on their backs in huts in
native homelands," she notes -- not the F.A.O. Schwarz set.
"Yet the intonation patterns were the same."
   With some amusement, she plays a videotape bolstering her
view of baby talk as a sort of maternal Esperanto. American
babies are shown listening to tapes of Greek, German and
Japanese. When foreign mothers scolded, the babies winced and
knitted their brows. When the mothers praised, the babies
smiled and flirted.
   "This is a strange thing to do to babies," says Prof.
Fernald. "It's amazing to me we got anything. But the babies
do respond."
   Outside academic circles, it isn't always so amazing. Long
before the arrival of his son Matthew, Tony Norcia of Palo
Alto perfected "a whole sound repertoire -- Donald Duck talk,
clicks, whistles, the raspberries" while working with babies
in vision research. He spurns the term motherese. "It's
parentese, obviously. And I do it all the time."
   Prof. Fernald points out that French fathers, especially,
will respond when asked if they baby talk: "Moi? Jamais]" But
they will indulge their wee ones like other babbling dads.
   Researchers say that studying baby talk can be trying.
"Infants give you four minutes," says Prof. Fernald. "After
that, they throw up or fall asleep." In few other fields are
experiments canceled due to fussiness. One recent volunteer
leapt off his mother's lap, knocking over a hidden camera and
collapsing the test booth.
   Almost as irksome to researchers are parents who insist on
glorifying their little prodigies. "One father came in," says
a research assistant. "His baby touched my leg and muttered
something. The father swore he'd said `pantyhose.'"
</TEXT>
</DOC>
