ID: 159	RANK: 70	SCORE: 7.426176
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP901224-0148 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NY-12-24-90 1322EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>a a AM-Transcenders Adv01   12-24 0917</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Transcenders, Adv01,1172</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv01</NOTE>
<NOTE>For release Tues AMs, Jan. 1, and thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>Psychologists Now Studyig Those Who Have Succeeded Against Big
Odds</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By TONY ROGERS</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>BOSTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Abandoned by her mother, raised in a small, West
Virginia town by an abusive aunt and a lecherous uncle, Elizabeth
didn't seem to have a chance.
   But when her impoverished family couldn't even provide a
bathtub, and a school counselor complained she was dirty, she made
the swim team so she could get a daily shower.
   Too poor to ever dream of owning a clarinet or violin, she
joined the school band anyway, playing whatever instrument the
school had to offer.
   For years, psychologists studied children who crumbled under the
weight of a traumatic upbringing, reinforcing the notion that
abused children become ruined adults.
   But recently they have come to believe that the Elizabeths of
the world - called ``transcenders'' by one researcher - can yield
clues on how to help all kinds of troubled children.
   Lessons learned from transcenders may be used to help those who
can't rise above the circumstances of their lives, said Norman
Watt, a professor of psychology at the University of Denver.
   ``In a sense they are experiments in natural therapy,'' he said.
``The kid whose mom is schizophrenic who still grows to be a Rhodes
scholar may tell us something about how nature works.''
   ``Life for transcenders is often short, sharp and brutish,''
said Karen Northcraft, a psychiatric social worker in Evansville,
Ind., who taped 20 hours of conversations with Elizabeth, the
subject of her doctoral dissertation.
   ``But they do well in situations anyone else would find
crushing,'' she said. ``If they had been born into different
families, they might have been prodigies.''
   Elizabeth told Northcraft of bone-breaking beatings by her aunt,
who she said once stripped her naked and dunked her in a vat of
scalding water. She told of the night when she was 8 that her uncle
got into her bed and sexually molested her for the first time in
what would be five years of assaults.
   Elizabeth's aunt often told her that her mother had sold her for
$25.
   Her battle did not end with grade school. She gained admission
to college and was told she was dyslexic and should drop out. But
she worked her way through school, earned a graduate degree and
became a family therapist.
   What happened? How could she possibly have endured?
   Northcraft said Elizabeth told her the turning point came in the
4th grade. One of her secret pleasures was her long, blonde curls.
When her aunt shaved her head, the well of pride, anger and
determination buried within her broke through.
   ``After that, she was able to reject what her aunt was saying
and start making her life better,'' said Northcraft, who met
Elizabeth through another professor familiar with her work.
   Transcenders are smart, resourceful and independent thinkers.
They all have the potential because of family surroundings to
suffer social or psychological problems, but transcenders seek out
other ways to live, Northcraft said.
   ``They have self-confidence, and early on they think for
themselves,'' Northcraft said. ``They emotionally distance
themselves from their parents, and they choose their actions rather
than do what would be expected in their environment.''
   Northcraft cited one case study of a boy whose schizophrenic
mother thought the family's food was poisoned. The woman's two
daughters believed her delusions and would not touch the food, but
the little boy ate heartily.
   Asked why, he responded, ``Well, I'm not dead yet.''
   The sisters grew up neurotic. The boy went off to college and
was successful and happy.
   In the worst of times, transcenders envision themselves
elsewhere, imaginingthat they can do great things despite their
surroundings, Northcraft said.
   They include all kinds of people, from the very obscure to the
well-known, such as actress Carol Burnett, the daughter of two
alcoholics who as a girl dreamed of someday going to college.
   Richard Rhodes, in his new book ``A Hole in the World: An
American Boyhood,'' details how he and his brother were viciously
abused by their stepmother. He went on to win a Pulitzer Prize.
   And they're like Mary, 25, who grew up with an alcoholic father
who often flew into violent rages.
   ``He'd come home and accuse mom of having affairs,'' she said in
a telephone interview. ``He'd beat up people who drove too fast on
our block.''
   Amid a family life of constant crisis, she felt always
demoralized.
   ``The hardest thing was to emotionally separate myself from the
craziness that went on in my family,'' she said. ``It still goes on
and it still hurts, but when you separate yourself you don't get as
involved with it.''
   She now is at the University of Denver working toward a double
major in psychology and sociology, and maintaining a B average.
   Northcraft said she decided to join the small group of
professors studying transcenders when she found volumes of research
devoted to troubled children but little to those who succeeded.
Most studies on such children have come only in the last 10 to 15
years, she said.
   ``We know much more about the factors for failure then for
success,'' Northcraft said. ``It's become conventional wisdom to
say, `Well, I was battered as a kid, so I'll batter my kids.'''
   Now such attitudes may be changing, said Watt.
   ``The ethos used to be that if your parent was schizophrenic,
the chances you will be, too, are high,'' he said. ``Now that's
changing. We are starting to unlearn that previous message.''
   ``I think this is part of a movement to focus on health rather
than pathology,'' Northcraft said. ``My whole notion is if we can
identify factors that enable transcenders to succeed, then we bring
them to bear on other children at risk.''
   The most important lesson? Any child may be able to transcend a
hurtful home life if just one supportive, stable adult - a teacher,
friend or counselor - is around to help, said Michael Goldstein, a
professor of psychology at UCLA.
   ``One child we studied had a psychotic parent,'' Goldstein
recalls. ``But he built up a relationship with a neighbor who
taught him electronics and how to fix things. The kid went on to
become an engineer and a relatively happy person.''
   Adult transcenders still carry the emotional scars of their
childhoods, said Northcraft, who dubbed them transcenders because
she disliked the moniker some psychologists gave them -
``invulnerable.''
   ``They're very hurt; they do have scars, no matter how
successful they become,'' Northcraft said. ``There are costs.
Transcenders survive in spite of their pain.''
   Elizabeth still hurts, but she has helped heal herself.
   ``I looked into my soul,'' Elizabeth said. ``There is nothing
that I am hiding.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Tues AMs, Jan. 1</NOTE>
<TEXT>
</TEXT>
</DOC>
