ID: 159	RANK: 84	SCORE: 7.236639
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910710-0006
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910710-0006.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Exploding Myth:
   Asian-American Youth
   Suffer a Rising Toll
   From Heavy Pressures
   ---
   Suicides and Distress Increase
   As They Face Stereotypes
   And Parents' Expectations
   ---
   You Add Up the Check, Ming
   ----
   By Joan E. Rigdon
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
07/10/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   SAN FRANCISCO -- At age 17, Kio T. Konno seemed to fit the
stereotype perfectly. Hard-charging, industrious and bright,
she was destined for stardom, like so many of her
Asian-American "whiz kid" peers.
   A senior at this city's prestigious Lowell High School,
she pulled a B-plus average, spoke fluent Japanese and
snagged national swimming awards. Her Japanese parents cared
so much about her education that they moved closer to the
school to ease her commute. Brown University was actively
recruiting her.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But last October, a week before her 18th birthday, Miss
Konno walked into her closet and hanged herself.
   Miss Konno's parents decline to comment on their
daughter's death. But people familiar with the case, as well
as a friend, say Miss Konno was distraught over the pressure
to succeed -- from her parents, from Asian and non-Asian
society and even, in a sense, from Asian history.
   Miss Konno's tragic fate is becoming all too common.
Suicide rates among Asian-American teen-agers have risen as
much as threefold over the past two decades. A 1989 study by
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services found that
the suicide rate among Chinese-Americans 15 to 24 years old
was 36% higher than the national average among that age
group. The rate for Japanese-Americans was 54% higher.
   The number of Asian-American youths who kill themselves is
quite small, of course, but it is the most dramatic evidence
of a more widespread emotional distress. "The problem is much
more pervasive than many of us think," says Leland Yee, a
psychologist who sits on the San Francisco school board. "If
you're an Asian who's alive, eating and breathing, you're
expected to be a genius. It's not unusual for Asian kids to
have nervous breakdowns."
   Asian-American youths face many pressures that children of
other immigrants don't. Many are even born with names that
translate to lofty titles such as "Treasure of China" or
"Universal Versatility." Many grow up with the burden of
carrying on the legacy of their entire ancestry, not to
mention the wishes of their immediate families. In school,
they are saddled with the "Model-Minority" myth, which says
that Asians are bound to excel at whatever they do. Thinking
this way, many educators expect Asians to overcome academic
and emotional difficulties without help from special programs
available to members of other minority groups. Meanwhile,
students of other races, goaded to do as well as those of the
Model Minority, resent Asians.
   Asian youths of the U.S. are, in fact, a tremendous
success story. They are vastly overrepresented, for instance,
in the Ivy Leagues and in prestigious contests such as the
Westinghouse Science Talent Search. But not all of America's
approximately three million Asian-Americans under age 25 fit
this mold. Asian youth gangs have emerged as a major criminal
force in California and New York. Almost 10% of juveniles in
detention or on probation in San Francisco are Asian, up from
5.7% in 1988. (Asians are about 30% of San Francisco's
population.)
   Some talented Asians graduate from high school with top
honors, only to flunk out in college. David Rue, a
psychiatrist at the Cleveland Clinic Foundation, says he sees
many cases like these: an Ivy League man who slit his wrists
after failing three classes in one semester, and a
16-year-old high-school valedictorian who went on welfare in
college and then tried to kill herself to escape her parents'
control.
   Asian parental pressure for academic success dates back to
the ancient Chinese philosopher Confucius, who influenced
other Asian countries with his teaching that the scholar sits
at the apex of social hierarchy. Under this philosophy,
education is the only route to success.
   The result: Some Asian-American parents choke off their
children's social lives while expecting nothing less than
stellar academic performance. Even star students come under
scrutiny. One 17-year-old Korean-American high-school student
in suburban Los Angeles was allegedly beaten in May by her
father because her A-minus grade-point average fell short of
his hopes for straight A's. He has pleaded innocent to felony
child abuse.
   That case is extreme. More typically, the pressure is
subtle, and often unintended. Consider Anthony Shong-yu Chow,
a 22-year-old psychology student at San Francisco State
University. Mr. Chow's father, who has a doctorate in
chemistry, and his mother, who has a master's degree in
botany, abandoned academic careers to start a Chinese
restaurant to make more money. They eventually set aside some
profits to pay for college for Mr. Chow and his older
brother. The sons weren't expected to work regularly in the
restaurant because school was more important.
   Their father, Chak Yan Chow, moved to the U.S. in 1958 at
the age of 21. He says he misses his chemistry career, but it
is his duty to provide the best education possible for his
children. Paraphrasing Confucius, he says, "If a youngster
isn't well educated, the parent is to blame."
   The younger Mr. Chow is grateful, but he feels guilty.
"They say they want you to be happy," he says. "But they also
say, `I'm working for you. I'm sacrificing for you.' Their
happiness is us doing well."
   Asians suffer many of the same problems that have always
faced American-born children of immigrants, they must
straddle two cultures. Sometimes that means going to language
school to study their parents' native tongue every day after
regular school or being pressed into service as translators
for their parents. But even here, some Asian-Americans have a
special problem: They feel torn between the American emphasis
on individuality and the Asian concern with family harmony.
   They are expected to shine academically, but once they do,
they aren't free to choose their own life paths. For
instance, when Lina Han, a Korean-American, graduated from
Yale this spring, she planned to move to San Francisco with
her non-Korean boyfriend and work for a few years before
studying to become a liberal arts professor. But "my mother
put her foot down," Ms. Han says. Her mother, who lives near
Cleveland, urged her to break up with her boyfriend and go
straight to medical school. For Asian parents, many of whom
are scientists because a 1965 change in immigration laws
barred the entry of most others from Asia, the science field
promises financial security, prestige and less
discrimination.
   When the 22-year-old Ms. Han balked, she says, she and her
mother got into terrific screaming matches. The rebellion was
out of line with Korean tradition. "Our parents grew up in
households where they would bow their head when giving dinner
to their fathers and then walk backwards out of the room so
they would never turn their back on them," Ms. Han says.
   During the fights, Ms. Han's mother became bedridden with
a previously diagnosed heart condition. "I felt very
responsible. It came to the point where I had to make a
compromise," Ms. Han says. The truce: Ms. Han is breaking up
with her boyfriend and will work at a law firm in New York
for a few years before going back to school. But she won't go
to medical school. Instead, she will study law, which
satisfies both her mother's concerns about prestigious work
and her own preference for liberal arts.
   Lina's mother, Jane Han, says she appreciated the
compromise. "I cried with her a lot," she says. "I told her
thank you a number of times. . . .
   "When I was Lina's age," she says, "I had my own ideas, my
own hopes and my own dreams. But they didn't mean much
because I just followed what my parents told me to do." Mrs.
Han says she went back to school six years ago partly to
understand America -- and its children -- better. "I know I'm
in a different generation here," she says. "I'm still trying
to accept the fact that I'm in a different world." One
change: She agreed to allow her younger children to attend
their high school proms. But she says she's not willing to
budge on issues concerning education and interracial
marriage.
   Says Dr. Yee, the San Francisco psychologist: "You have to
understand that the primary identity is always family. It's
as if they say, `We'll give you a leash and it can be as long
as you want. But you always have to know who the master is.'"
   Society adds more stress by stereotyping Asians. Even
though Asia encompasses countries as different as high-tech
Japan and rural Cambodia, many people expect Asians to be the
same: shy, brainy nerds who are especially good at math.
   The nerd perception prompts some teachers to grade Asian
students more easily and misinterpret their confusion as deep
thought or timidity. In some cases, teachers refuse to call
on Asian students in class, figuring they know all the
answers anyway. "I got away with a lot," says Ms. Han of
Yale. In high school, "My teachers singled me out and treated
me with kid gloves. In their eyes I couldn't make any
mistakes -- even if I did," she says. She recalls teachers
"fudging" her grades to give her the benefit of the doubt on
quizzes. "My work got less rigorous attention," she says.
   Ming Leung, a 27-year-old Chinese-American project manager
for the San Francisco-based Asian American Health Forum,
recalls being the butt of the math stereotype in numerous
settings. In high school, his counselor tried to get him to
study chemistry and physics instead of government and
psychology. When he went out to eat with friends and the bill
arrived, he was often nominated to figure out who owed what.
And at an officers' election for a school committee in San
Diego, Mr. Leung cringed when the chairwoman suggested that
an Asian volunteer for the post of treasurer for
"convenience's sake."
   The stereotype comes wrapped in resentment. In high school
and college, Mr. Leung endured several acerbic remarks about
Asians. "People used to say that there's a correlation
between the grading curve and the slant of the eye," he says.
   Other Asian-Americans recall similar treatment. Says Sang
Do Bae, an 18-year-old Korean-American biology major at
Cornell University: "Whenever I scored in the 80s, there was
always someone saying, `Oh, you mean you didn't break the
A-minus mean?'"
   The stereotypes "pit one group against another," says
Bernard Wong, an anthropology professor at San Francisco
State University. "And it's being used as an excuse not to
give help to Asians when they need it." He adds: "I've sat on
committees where they say, `Oh, you don't need any help.
You're the model minority group.'"
   What can make all this especially difficult for
Asian-American youths is that they are generally less likely
to seek professional psychological help than others. "Asians
aren't accustomed to venturing to ask for help outside," says
Sookyung Chang, a Korean-American psychologist in Los
Angeles. In Korea, for instance, people seek counseling only
when they have a mental breakdown. In China, there is no word
for mental illness. Says Mr. Leung: "You're not supposed to
tell people your personal business."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
