ID: 159	RANK: 93	SCORE: 7.110841
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910807-0136
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910807-0136.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Beating the Clock:
   Fast-Track Kids Exhaust Their Parents
   ----
   By Thomas F. O'Boyle
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
08/07/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<LP>
   {Part of a Series}
                                                                                                       

</LP>
<TEXT>
   It's early Saturday morning at the Yocum residence in
Columbus, Ohio, and the weekend drill has already begun.
Robin and Jill Yocum are scrambling -- their three children
and coffee thermos in tow -- to get their four-year-old
daughter to her 9 a.m. gymnastics class.
   By late afternoon, when the children's sports and social
activities are finished, the Yocums will have watched four
youth sporting events and participated in two others, once as
coach and once as umpire, squeezing in a picnic somewhere in
between.
   "By the time 5 o'clock rolls around, I'm dead," says Mr.
Yocum, whose weekend schedule couldn't be kept without help
from at least one grandparent. "It's a test of your
endurance."
   Parenting nowadays has become as frenzied a job as many
management positions. The number of activities available to
children has exploded, and today's fast-track parents don't
seem to be able to just say "no." They're pushing children
sooner and more often into activities they believe will
enhance their kids' chances to land at the best schools and,
later, the best jobs.
   In helping children try to achieve their full potential,
"it's de rigueur for the parents to be fully involved," says
Daniel Stamp, president of Priority Management, a consulting
firm in Vancouver, British Columbia, that specializes in time
usage and productivity. Baby boomer parents don't just sign
their children up for Scouts or craft and music lessons --
many go along and participate.
   But at what cost? "Everybody's in such a hurry, and adults
end up transferring the anxiety they feel to their children,"
says T. Berry Brazelton, a professor of child development at
Harvard University. "There's not much chance to be a child
anymore."
   Overscheduling takes its toll on the parents, too. Instead
of relaxing at home in their spare time and unwinding from a
busy work week, they shuttle from one activity to the next.
What gets left out is any time for themselves, or time at
home with spouses, family or friends. Sometimes resentment
over the breakneck pace builds.
   David Gutterman, a clinical psychologist in Evanston,
Ill., says the new fathers he counsels face more stress than
ever, largely because of the issue of time management.
"Society expects that fathers be more involved," he says.
"There's a lot of anxiety associated with fatherhood now.
There are so many balls to juggle."
   Increasingly, the responsibilities of parenting intrude
into the working day, heightening the stress many feel.
Sometimes tough decisions must be made: choosing, say,
between attending an important management meeting and a
child's school play.
   "For the first time in all the years I've worked, I don't
have enough time in my day," says Ilana Knapp, an executive
at a New Jersey securities firm. She says her children, ages
seven and 12, seem to require more time from her now than
when they were younger. For years, the 12-year-old has called
her at work every afternoon to chat. Now she also calls at
noon. Though her bosses never object, Mrs. Knapp says:
"Things can get pretty crazy around here. I try not to rush
her, but there are times I feel rushed."
   Parents say they've had to make big adjustments --
including cutting back on their sleep -- to keep pace.
Television watching, socializing with friends and household
chores are most often cited as the activities that have been
curtailed.
   Mary Anne Jarvik, a business manager in Pittsburgh, and
her husband, Jonathan, a biology professor at Carnegie Mellon
University, have tried to limit their three sons' schedule of
organized activities. Friday night, for instance, is always
set aside for the family to watch a movie together or play
board games.
   Yet despite the discipline the Jarviks have tried to
impose, "you can't help but get involved in too many things,"
Mrs. Jarvik says. "It just happens." The Jarvik children,
ages eight, seven and four, play soccer and baseball and take
swimming and piano lessons. In addition, "if they're not
having a birthday party, they're going to one," Mrs. Jarvik
says.
   "Some of it's fun," she adds. "But we don't seem to savor
anything. Frenetic is the only word I can think of to
describe our pace. Everything rushes by so fast, and then
it's on to the next activity. I feel like I careen from one
thing to another."
   Mrs. Jarvik says she has considered quitting her job to
stay home with the children, thinking that might alleviate
the time stress she feels. Meantime, her "mental peace of
mind" suffers, she says. She fantasizes about a simpler life,
usually living in a one-room cottage in Maine or France. And
when the children aren't in bed by 10 p.m., she gets
"resentful. I feel, `How dare you not go to sleep. This is my
time.'" Her own bedtime usually isn't until after midnight.
"That's how long it takes us to pick up the pieces and try to
keep some order," she says.
   Some parents have finally said "enough." In some cases,
the children themselves have initiated a more rational pace.
That was the case for Karen Stump, a chemistry instructor at
Carnegie Mellon in Pittsburgh and mother of three. She says
her schedule was once overwhelming -- until her
seven-year-old daughter, Megan, objected to the pace. "She
finally said, `I want to spend some time at home,'" Mrs.
Stump recalls. "Now we're better at limiting the number of
outside activities the kids are involved in."
   Working women with children are more than twice as likely
as men to feel constant stress, according to a survey this
year by John P. Robinson, director of the University of
Maryland's Americans' Use of Time Project. More than 40% of
the working women surveyed felt "trapped" by their daily
routine, the study concluded. A 1989 study by Cornell
University found the stress of balancing personal and
professional lives so great that about two-thirds of mothers
who worked full time would have cut their hours if they
hadn't needed the extra income.
   Parenting claims huge chunks of time for moms who stay at
home, too. In the summer months, for instance, Mrs. Yocum is
liberated from the dual demands of mother and high school
teacher. Yet she finds the time constraints even more acute
in summer than during the school year, partly because the
children's activities expand as she becomes more available.
   "There's days we start at 9 or 10 in the morning and we
don't finish until 9 or 10 in the evening," she says of her
summer schedule. "Sometimes I don't know where one day begins
and the other ends."
   Mr. Yocum says he has wondered lately if the pace is
simply too much: "I worry that the children are too
regimented and they don't get time to be kids." Mrs. Yocum
shares her husband's concerns. She wants to write a book, she
quips, titled, "So You Think You Want To Be a Parent?"
   Some people have adopted complex working schedules to
balance the demands on their time. Consider Scott Harris, who
for the past six years has put in 80-hour work weeks building
his own advertising and marketing firm, Mustang Marketing, in
Westlake, Calif., into a success. In the same period, he has
also had two children.
   Most mornings Mr. Harris is at his desk by 4 a.m. He puts
in three hours of work, then returns home to have breakfast
with his wife and children. The schedule is repeated most
evenings: Once the children are in bed, he goes back to the
office, usually until midnight. Mr. Harris says it wouldn't
be possible except that he requires little sleep, typically
getting three hours a night.
   "My kids didn't suffer at all" from the work schedule, he
says proudly. "I haven't missed a single athletic event or
school award."
   But Mr. Harris admits he has made sacrifices besides
sleep. Until recently, he hadn't taken a vacation in six
years. And time alone with his wife is limited. "There are a
lot of things I've given up," he says, "but I had to set my
priorities. My children are real important to me."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
