ID: 313	RANK: 45	SCORE: 28.169693
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910705-0172
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910705-0172.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Pinatubo Economic Effects May Be Dire
   ---
   Philippine Volcano's Eruption
   Affects Thousands of Workers
   ----
   By Lawrence MacDonald
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
07/05/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), NO PAGE CITATION
</SO>
<IN>
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)
</IN>
<NS>
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)
</NS>
<GV>
DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)
</GV>
<RE>
FAR EAST (FE)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
PHILIPPINES (RP)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   CLARK AIR BASE, the Philippines -- Amando Ayson, a day
laborer at this U.S. military base, gapes at the damage
wrought by the eruption of Mount Pinatubo and worries about
the future.
   Gritty, gray ash smothers the base's once-verdant grounds
under drifts as much as a meter deep. Collapsed warehouses
and abandoned homes appear ghostly through the swirling dust.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   In a canyon about 200 yards from the perimeter of the
base, a still-hot tongue of volcanic debris nearly half a
kilometer wide and four meters deep fills a channel where a
river once ran. On the horizon, a dark mushroom cloud blooms
over six miles into the sky, is swept away by the wind, and
is replaced with another.
   "A lot of people rely on Clark {for jobs} -- not only
people from here but from the {nearby} provinces," Mr. Ayson
says. "I don't think the base will close, but if it does, I
don't know what we will do."
   For Mr. Ayson and the tens of thousands of other Filipinos
who made their living directly or indirectly from the air
base, the impact of the volcanic eruptions that began early
last month could be dire. Once the largest U.S. air base
overseas, Clark has been transformed into a ghost town, its
two runways rendered useless by the highly corrosive ash and
the threat of continued eruptions.
   Sharp reductions in U.S. military personnel and dependents
at Clark and Subic Bay Naval Station, both within 25 miles of
the volcano's new crater, are expected to take a heavy toll
on central Luzon island. U.S. officials say the bases
previously pumped as much as $1 billion annually into the
Philippine economy.
   Experts are rushing to assess damage and future volcanic
threats to the bases before U.S. special negotiator Richard
Armitage arrives in Manila in mid-July to resume negotiations
on a new bases treaty. Costs include the repair of hundreds
of collapsed buildings, replacement of damaged equipment and
removal of millions of tons of sandy ash.
   Philippine Foreign Secretary Raul Manglapus has said he is
confident the U.S. will want to retain both bases. "I visited
Clark," he said last week. "It will need a lot of scraping. A
lot of roofs will need to be mended. I do not see that it has
been rendered totally useless."
   U.S. officials in the Philippines have also asserted that
they remain interested in reaching an agreement on both
bases. Rear Adm. Thomas Mercer, commander of U.S. forces in
the Philippines, said recently that his mission was to put
Clark and Subic back "exactly as" they were.
   In Washington, however, at least some officials apparently
believe the U.S. assurances emanating from Manila have gone
too far. Defense Department spokesman Pete Williams said, in
response to reports from the Philippines, that "Adm. Mercer's
statement notwithstanding, we have not made any decision on
whether to keep Clark and Subic going at their pre-volcano
levels."
   Privately, some U.S. officials say that Washington merely
seeks to keep its options open until damage from the volcano
can be assessed. Assurances of U.S. interest are necessary,
they say, to prevent an anti-bases faction in the Philippine
government from using the eruption to push for a U.S.
pullout.
   While assessments of current damage continue, the more
difficult calculation is the threat of future eruptions.
Subic received heavier ash falls and sustained more serious
damage, but only Clark is threatened by pyroclastic flows,
deadly avalanches of superheated gas, sand and rocks that
hurl down the slopes at speeds of as much as 100 miles an
hour.
   "We can't be assured that there won't be more major
eruptive activity," says Ed Wolfe, chief scientist at the
Cascades Volcano Observatory, established in Vancouver,
Wash., after the 1980 explosion of Mount St. Helens. "If
there is, Clark will be subject to the same sorts of threats
that it was in June."
   One of about a dozen U.S. scientists who helped the
Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology predict
the June eruption that forced the temporary evacuation of
Clark, Mr. Wolfe said that even if the volcano doesn't blow
again, it will continue spewing hot ash for several months,
and possibly for years.
   Ash emissions are a serious hazard to aircraft in flight,
particularly jets. On the ground, the powdery sand is a
maintenance nightmare that shorts electrical lines, jams
generators and corrodes machinery.
   During the June to October monsoon, Clark is downwind from
the ash emissions. Subic, on the other hand, is separated
from the volcano by a low mountain range and was only heavily
coated with ash because the main eruption coincided with a
typhoon that altered the prevailing winds.
   Both bases, and their adjoining cities, face serious flood
risks because streams and drains have been clogged with
volcanic sand. However, the danger is greater in Angeles
City, adjacent to Clark, where fast-moving slushes of water
and volcanic debris known as lahars are expected with the
first heavy rains.
   "All the solid material is up there in great abundance;
all we need is the triggering action," says Kelvin Rodolfo, a
Philippine-born U.S. geologist who heads the Pinatubo Lahar
Hazard Task Force.
   Massive lahars also are anticipated in a string of towns
along narrow river valleys north of Subic, but the navy base
and the adjacent city of Olongapo don't face a serious lahar
threat, Mr. Rodolfo says.
   Damage from ash fall and earthquakes at Subic and Olongapo
has nonetheless been severe. Fifty-five people were killed by
eruption fallout in Olongapo, including several who died when
the 200-bed city hospital collapsed beneath ash.
   On the naval base itself, a hail of sand smashed more than
200 structures, including dozens of warehouses and workshops
vital to the base's primary mission of repairing and
resupplying U.S. Navy vessels. The volcanic fallout also
shredded 37,000 acres of triple-canopy jungle, the last large
stand of virgin forest in Luzon.
   Protected from the illegal logging that has deforested
most of the rest of the island, the Subic jungle provided the
base with a vital watershed and a unique venue for
jungle-survival courses taught by aboriginal Aetas, a Negrito
people descended from some of the earliest inhabitants of the
Philippine archipelago.
   The jungle is now a wasteland of smashed trees and broken
ash-coated limbs, its once-teeming wildlife population either
scattered or destroyed. Monkeys that survived the eruption
have left the jungle to scavenge for garbage in other parts
of the base.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
