ID: 122	RANK: 25	SCORE: 11.535748
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890127-0036 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-01-27-89 0355EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a PM-WinterDrought Bjt   01-27 0752</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Winter Drought, Bjt,0775</SECOND>
<HEAD>Shellshocked Farmers Fear Another Dry Year Amid Winter Of Discontent</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By PAIGE St. JOHN</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Farmers shellshocked by the 1988 drought are worrying anew
whether the unusually warm winter will break, sending them the
precipitation they need for next year's crops.
   ``There's a pervading omen, a feeling of ominous concern. I sense
it with other farmers, I sense it with the salesmen of agricultural
products,'' said Joe Summer, a corn and soybean farmer in McLean
County in central Illinois.
   Parts of the county have received 25 inches less rain than
average in 22 months. For the first time in 45 years of farming,
Summer is taking out multiperil insurance on next season's crop.
   The warm, dry winter had something to do with that decision, he
said Thursday, but so did bad crops in six of the last eight years
in what used to be the nation's top corn-producing county.
   ``We're all beginning to get a little paranoid about it,'' the
62-year-old farmer said. ``There is no frost in the ground. This
unusually warm weather is strange. It is a harbinger of some sort, I
think.''
   According to the National Weather Service, severe to extreme
drought conditions continue in much of the northern Great Plains,
northern Rockies and parts of the Midwest.
   The weather service's most recent precipitation map shows extreme
drought in Montana, the Dakotas, central Minnesota, eastern Iowa,
northwestern Illinois and much of Wyoming, eastern Idaho, central
Washington and eastern Oregon, said meteorologist Dave Miskus of the
Climate Analysis Center in Washington, D.C.
   However, the most recent 30-day forecast calls for above-normal
precipitation, said meteorologist Edward O'Lenic, also of the
Climate Analysis Center.
   The northern Great Plains and northern Rockies need as much as 8
inches above normal rainfall to end the drought, while Iowa and
Illinois need 8 to 9 inches more than normal, Miskus said.
   The weather service will not release its spring forecast until
after the commodities markets close Monday, but O'Lenic said there
is no reason to expect more of the drought that hit the nation last
summer.
   Even so, farmers and Farm Bureau officials are worried.
   ``At this stage, we're hoping for a terribly wet spring,'' said
Minnesota Farm Bureau administrator Gerald Hagaman. ``There's
apprehension.''
   Farm Bureau officials in Indiana, Michigan, Wisconsin, Illinois
and Iowa say much the same thing.
   ``Our moisture levels are still down. We don't have adequate
moisture in the soil and we could have a problem if we don't have
above-average rainfall this spring,'' said Don Henderson, vice
president of the Indiana Farm Bureau.
   Indiana farmers are also worried about the mild temperatures,
which have averaged a relatively balmy 34.1 degrees this month. Such
weather ``doesn't kill a lot of the pests,'' Henderson said.
``That's a major problem to us.''
   In Wisconsin, ``the real question for farmers is how much snow
we'll get,'' said state Farm Bureau President Don Haldeman. ``We
came off the driest year we've ever had, and they're wondering if
we'll have another year of drought.''
   ``It's a major topic of discussion when farmers get together,''
agreed Jerry Snethen of the Farm Bureau in Iowa, which saw some of
the worst of the 1988 drought.
   Spring rains will moisten the top inches, but farmers have lost
deep soil moisture, their one insurance against drought, said Dennis
Vercler of the Illinois Farm Bureau.
   ``It sets up a scenario similar to 1988,'' he said.``This is
concerning a lot of people, even though it is fairly early. They're
edgy about it. We're going into the season needing just the right
rain at just the right time.''
   Farmers aren't the only ones affected by the winter of discontent.
   In Milwaukee, springlike temperatures and below-average snowfall
forced Icebreaker Winter Funfest organizers to move ice-sculpting
events inside a refrigerated ice house. The U.S. International Snow
Sculpting Competition, a major festival event, was saved only
because huge blocks of snow from a storm last month had been saved.
   In New England, the lack of precipitation forced ski resorts to
use machine-made snow until storms in the past couple weeks, and has
Boston officials concerned there may be a water shortage this
summer. The warm, dry weather has also cut heating and municipal
snow-removal costs.
   Maine had more familiar weather Thursday, when a driving
snowstorm dumped up to 6 inches of snow on the state, closing
schools and delaying flights.
   ``It's been an abnormal winter,'' said George Wiseman of the
weather service's Portland, Maine, office. ``This is closer to
normal.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
