ID: 122	RANK: 32	SCORE: 9.815344
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880616-0245 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-06-16-88 0914EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u f PM-Drought-Iowa 1stLd-Writethru f0019 06-16 0925</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Drought-Iowa, 1st Ld-Writethru, f0019,0951</SECOND>
<HEAD>Drought Threatening Iowa Livestock, Crops Hanging On</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: INSERTS 3 grafs after 5th graf pvs to UPDATE with Lyng's and
farm bureau spokesman's comments on morning news show, edits 6th
graf pvs for transition. Picks up 7th graf pvs, It's going ... SUBS
13th graf pvs, On Wednesday ... to delete first reference to Lyng.
Francl in 8th graf is cq. A version moving on general news wires.</NOTE>
<NOTE>With LaserPhotos</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By TOM SEERY</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Cattle farmers are sending cows to
slaughter and mowing roadside ditches to feed remaining animals
trying to survive one of the region's worst droughts since the Dust
Bowl. Crop farmers, meanwhile, can only wait.
   ``Everybody is culling every cow that they don't need. You're
seeing a lot of older cows going to market,'' said Malcolm
McGregor, a Nashua farmer and regional vice president of the
National Cattlemen's Association.
   In northeast Iowa on Wednesday, Vernon Kuhn worked in his
withering fields, which yielded 50 bushels of soybeans per acre
last year.
   ``If we get 35 an acre, we'll be tickled to death,'' he said.
``We need a week of rain.''
   Elsewhere in the nation's midsection and Southeast, farmers
turned to sometimes desperate measures to help relieve the drought
that's prompted widespread water conservation and threatened farm
yields, sending prices zooming on commodity exchanges.
   ``We get a daily report (on the drought) each day and I must say
most days since early May anyway those reports have not been
good,'' Agriculture Secretary Richard Lyng said today on CBS-TV's
``This Morning.''
   Asked if the situation was developing into a potential disaster,
Lyng replied: ``Emphasizing the word potential, yes, that's
correct. The major corn belt area, this is the most reliable
farming area in the world ... is threatened. It's a serious
matter.''
   Speaking on the same program, the American Farm Bureau's Terry
Francl said: ``We are reaching a critical phase over the next week.
If we do not have rain, that means there'll be substantial
reductions in yields.''
   But weather forecasters continued to bear bleak news after a dry
winter followed by a parched spring.
   ``It's going to be dry across the Plains and the upper Midwest
at least the next couple of days,'' Hugh Crowther, of the National
Weather Service in Kansas City, Mo., said today.
   In Clyde, Ohio, florist Cliff Doebel spurned traditional
forecasting science and invited Leonard Crow Dog, a Sioux medicine
man from South Dakota, to perform an Indian rain ritual.
   ``Crow Dog will use prayers and offerings to appeal to the four
winds of the Earth to bring the rain to Sandusky County,'' Doebel
said.
   Water levels on the Mississippi reached record lows, meanwhile,
stranding at least 750 barges. Twice that many could become mired
by the weekend, equaling ``a traffic jam of semi-trucks bumper to
bumper from New Orleans to Philadelphia (Pa.),'' said Michael
Logue, spokesman for the Vicksburg District of the Army Corps of
Engineers.
   Despite predictions of scattered showers and thunderstorms
today, forecasters see no significant relief for Iowa and the rest
of the Corn Belt.
   The area from Missouri to Ohio should get below-normal rain in
the next month, while dry conditions should ease with above-normal
rains in the South and southern Plains states, according to a
forecast by the weather service and U.S. Department of Agriculture.
   On Wednesday, prices for future delivery of soybeans, corn and
oats rocketed to their daily trading limits within seconds of the
opening bell at the Chicago Board of Trade, a reflection of Lyng's
gloomy assessment the day before.
   Lyng, calling the drought a potential national disaster, said
damage already had been done to wheat fields in Montana and the
Dakotas and that additional dry weeks of scorching temperatures
could cause severe damage in the Corn Belt and across the South.
   ``If you got hay to sell, you can get whatever (price) you can
ask. ... There just isn't any,'' said Al Luetmer, a Minnesota dairy
and grain farmer.
   McGregor, who recently attended a cattlemen's meeting in Denver
on the drought, said farmers in North Dakota and eastern Montana
have been forced to sell productive livestock to meatpackers
because of parched pastures and rising feed prices.
   Iowa's not far behind, he said. Meanwhile, cattlemen here are
trimming their herds.
   ``I don't see any liquidation yet, but it will be soon if we
don't get any rain,'' he said. ``There's certainly nothing growing
up here.''
   The USDA has allowed farmers in 96 of Iowa's 99 counties to feed
cattle on land originally left out of row crop production under the
federal set-aside program. A similar measure was taken in Missouri.
   ``The decision to allow haying and grazing on diverted acres was
a lifesaver for us,'' said Dorothy Tisdale, who has a herd of 70
beef cows on the farm she operates with her husband, Fred, near
Milton.
   Gov. Terry Branstad this week ordered the Iowa Department of
Transportation to allow farmers to mow ditches along roads near
their property and feed the hay to livestock.
   Farmers of row crops like corn and soybeans, meanwhile, are
still holding out for rain to salvage 1988 yields, despite one of
the worst droughts since the 1930s' Dust Bowl.
   Rep. Fred Grandy, R-Iowa, who played ``Gopher'' in TV's ``The
Love Boat,'' toured farms in his northwest Iowa district last
weekend.
   ``I saw stressed corn,'' he said Wednesday. ``The farmers
weren't quite concerned yet, but everyone said 10 days could make a
difference between having a serious condition and a critical
condition.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
