ID: 122	RANK: 47	SCORE: 9.137101
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890201-0124 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-02-01-89 1232EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a PM-ColdRdp 3rdLd-Writethru a0540 02-01 1162</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Cold Rdp, 3rd Ld - Writethru, a0540,1187</SECOND>
<HEAD>Record Highs Abruptly Turn Arctic In Plains, Midwest</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: SUBS 6th graf, `The party...', to add Seattle storm; SUBS 22-23rd
grafs, bgng `Where snow...', with 4 grafs to UPDATE with detail on Seattle
storm; new barometric high reading; FAA flight restrictions because of
high barometric pressure. Picks up 24th graf, `Before the...'.</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto DT2, LaserGraphic NY35</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By MIKE HIRSH</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Record-cold arctic air trapped over Alaska finally broke loose
and barreled into the lower 48 states, dropping a bitter winter into
the laps of springlike northern cities in a matter of minutes.
   Temperatures plunged by nearly 80 degrees in a day, with one town
reporting a 23-degree drop in one minute. High winds preceding the
cold front blew a toddler down a street in Lander, Wyo.
   The polar air outburst, accompanied today by blizzards driven by
winds over 100 mph, stunned residents of the northern Plains and
Midwest, where ski slopes and ice festivals had been abandoned for
golf courses and tennis courts.
   The frigid air, no longer trapped by a warm-air jet stream that
had strayed farther north than usual and left record-high
temperatures in 64 cities Tuesday, promised frigid weekend weather
for the East Coast and as far south as Arkansas, the National
Weather Service said.
   ``We're going to make up for the party we've been enjoying,''
said meteorologist Rick Brumer in Chicago.
   The party ended quickly on Tuesday, as arctic air rushed into the
balmy northern Plains, including Nebraska, North Dakota and Wyoming,
dropping temperatures to 10 to 20 below zero. High winds and blowing
snow knocked out power in Washington state _ Seattle got a rare
snowfall in the worst winter storm in more than three years _ and
parts of Montana.
   Valentine, Neb., reached a record high of 70 degrees and dropped
to zero degrees within 10 hours. The mercury plunged 33 degrees in
one hour after the cold front passed Valentine. In Russell, Kan.,
which had the national high temperature of 84 Tuesday afternoon, it
was 12 degrees this morning.
   In a 24-hour period beginning Monday morning, temperatures fell
79 degrees at Great Falls, Mont., from 62 above to 17 below zero.
The state braced for even colder weather today as the system
continued southward.
   ``It's the coldest air mass in the last five years, since
December of 1983,'' said Bruce Thoricht, a weather service
meteorologist at Billings.
   In the town of Cut Bank, about 100 miles north of Helena, a
Federal Aviation Administration official said the temperature
plunged 23 degrees in one minute, and 103 mph winds dropped the wind
chill to 75 below zero.
   ``It was a drastic drop, really fast,'' said Glacier County
Undersheriff Bill Barron.
   In Lander, winds gusting up to 86 mph dragged a 2-year-old boy
down the street, said his mother, Pamela Roberts, who chased after
him. The toddler was not seriously hurt.
   ``He fell and the wind dragged him along on his face,'' said
Roberts, 27. ``I was trying to hold him and trying to open the
door.''
   In the Plains, ranchers worked to secure cattle, particularly
newborn calves, in areas that basked in temperatures in the 60s
Tuesday but shivered in dangerous wind-chills down to 40 and 50
below this morning.
   ``It's a shock to anything's system, when you have a 100-degree
drop in temperature,'' said Tom Scott, executive director of the
Nebraska Beef Industry Development Board.
   In another way, the cold snap was good news for farmers who
suffered through drought last summer and faced more worries for the
coming season because of the dry winter.
   ``Given how dry it has been, it's better to have colder weather
because there's less chance of evaporation losses'' from the soil,
said Iowa state climatologist Harry Hillaker.
   Blizzards hit Tuesday in northwestern Minnesota, southeast North
Dakota and southern Montana. Cut Bank had 5 inches of snow and
Helena 4. Blowing, drifting snow dropped visibility to almost zero
in parts of Montana and Minnesota. Snowfall was light this morning
in most areas, but forecasters said more wind-whipped snow was
predicted in the upper Plains and Midwest tonight.
   The Minnesota state patrol closed a 50-mile stretch of highway in
the west-central part of the state for nearly 11 hours through this
morning, and troopers Tuesday night led about 100 stranded motorists
the 10 miles from Glyndon to Moorhead because Glyndon had no
accommodations for them.
   ``It was pretty treacherous going,'' said Dave Haug of West
Fargo, N.D., who drove the lead car in the convoy. ``I'm just glad I
got home.''
   Snow also fell in Washington state, where Snohomish and Spokane
got up to 5 inches.
   Two inches of snow were recorded in 24 hours at Seattle-Tacoma
International Airport, enough to close the airport for nearly an
hour this morning. About 200 minor traffic accidents were reported
by early morning in the region, police said. It was Seattle's worst
winter weather since November 1985, when 17 inches of snow fell in
the month.
   Where snow didn't fall, high winds fanned a prairie fire in
Nebraska that consumed 8,000 acres and burned several farm buildings
but destroyed only one house.
   The cold air had been trapped over Alaska by a dome of extremely
high pressure. The barometer at Northway, Alaska, rose to a North
American record high of 31.85 inches of mercury, the weather service
reported Tuesday.
   The pressure was so high that the FAA late Tuesday restricted
flights over Alaska. Airplane instruments that use atmospheric
pressure to calculate altitude are not designed for such high
pressure and may give innacurate readings, officials said.
   Before the warm jet stream shifted south and freed the arctic
air, high-temperature records were broken or tied in 64 cities from
Colorado to Ohio and from northern Texas into southern Minnesota.
Dodge City, Kan., soared to 80 degrees, surpassing the record of 76
set in 1911; Chicago climbed to 65, breaking its 1877 record of 56;
Louisville, Ky., hit 67, also breaking a 112-year-old record;
Detroit climbed to 60, breaking the mark of 54 degrees set in 1890;
Grand Island, Neb., reached 72; and Fort Smith, Ark., hit 77.
   ``The upper air wind patterns are normally different than they
would be this time of year,'' said Brian Smith of the National
Weather Service Severe Storms Forecast Center in Kansas City, Mo.
   ``Normally we have the jet stream across the continental U.S.
It's been further north. ... Weather systems couldn't move through.''
   Finally, he said today, ``we've had a buckle in it.''
   Authorities reported no deaths or injuries directly attributable
to the cold. However, on Tuesday the body of a man whose skiff was
swamped by high seas and strong winds off the coast of southeast
Alaska was found on a beach.
   The warmth that preceded the cold front was indirectly
responsible for the death of a Wisconsin woman Tuesday aboard a sled
that sank in a lake where warnings had been issued several times
about untrustworthy ice.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
