ID: 122	RANK: 5	SCORE: 25.023275
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911105-0012
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911105-0012.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Two Hundred Years of Farmerly Advice
   ----
   By Joanne Kaufman
</HL>
<DATE>
11/05/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16
</SO>
<LP>
   When people meet Judson Hale, they are almost always
disappointed. "They expect me to be wearing overalls," said
the editor of The Old Farmer's Almanac, which just came out
with its 200th edition, further cementing its position as the
oldest continuously published periodical in the U.S. "But
I've worn a coat and tie since the third grade."
   They expect him to be a farmer (Mr. Hale grew up on a farm
but avoided farming. "I would go down to the barn and WATCH,"
he said); they expect him to talk with a Maine accent (Mr.
Hale is of Boston Brahmin stock); they expect him to be
aphoristic ("Red sky at morning; sailors take warning" is not
the sort of thing that springs readily to Mr. Hale's lips).
And they expect him to be old. "I'm fulfilling that part
now," the 58-year-old Mr. Hale said cheerfully.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   In fact, Mr. Hale doesn't bother his head much about the
expectations of strangers and of talk-show hosts who are
always importuning him to appear on their programs holding a
rake. He has an almanac to put out, a task that seems to grow
more daunting every year. "I'm always scared to death when we
start a new issue," said Mr. Hale, who as 12th editor of the
Almanac is known in certain circles as Jud XII. "You can only
be as good as the last one. The 200th edition seems to have
been received well but I'm now nervous about 1993 and people
being let down.
   "I don't care if I disappoint marketing people or our
public relations people. I value advertisers, but my first
and foremost concern is for the readers and how they feel
about the publication."
   Indeed, readers have extremely strong feelings about The
Old Farmer's Almanac, which is, as it has been since
Washington's presidency, a compendium of weather forecasts,
astronomical calculations, recipes, planting tables and "new,
useful and entertaining matter" like "How to Get Rich Without
Doing Any Work," "What Hardly Anyone Knows About Ellis
Island," "The Facts and Fictions About Death Valley" and
"Peace and Hominy: Some Thoughts on Grits."
   According to Mr. Hale, longtime devotees of the Almanac
write or call the Dublin, N.H.-based publication to check the
optimum time for having surgery (folklore has it that one can
expect more bleeding when the moon is full). They weigh in --
with triumph -- when they catch mistakes in the sunrise
tables. And they make their feelings known -- with vigor --
when the Almanac makes unwarranted changes. "Dear Sir," a
Texas reader once wrote, "I have read The Old Farmer's
Almanac for the last 75 years and I wish the damned fool that
changed the reading of the moon's column had died before he
done it. Yours, respectfully."
   "People expect The Old Farmer's Almanac to BE The Old
Farmer's Almanac," said Mr. Hale, who's been editor for the
past 21 years. "I think readers feel they own it, that it's
one of their inalienable rights as long as they can come up
with the $2.95 to pay for it.
   "I think everyone who works at the Almanac sees it as a
responsibility," he added. "It's like owning a 17th-century
house. You shouldn't add a porch to it because the house
belongs to American architectural heritage as much as it
belongs to the present owners."
   Mr. Hale's success as editor -- the 1991 OFA sold four
million copies with sales of six million projected for '92 --
can be partly explained by his strong identification with
readers, partly by his strong identification with the Almanac
itself. "I think Jud embodies the values the Almanac has
represented for so long," said John Pierce, publisher of the
OFA. "He believes that if you work hard you'll do well, that
it's important to be part of your community, that by staying
in touch with some aspect of the natural world we stay in
touch with ourselves, and that man is inherently a decent
species -- and those are all the values of the Almanac."
   Then, of course, there is the short explanation, that Mr.
Hale is simply adhering to the policy set forth by the
Almanac's founding editor, Robert B. Thomas: "Our endeavor is
to be useful but with a pleasant degree of humor."
   Mr. Hale was born in Boston and grew up on a communal
organic farm in Vanceboro, Me., a venture that was largely
funded by his parents, adherents of the Austrian scientist
and philosopher Rudolf Steiner. Educated at Dartmouth, he
cast about for a career until deciding in 1959 to accept the
offer of employment from his uncle Robb Sagendorph, then
editor of the OFA and its sister publication, the magazine
Yankee.
   Since the beginning of his tenure as editor, Mr. Hale has
had to confront several misconceptions about the Almanac,
among them the belief that the periodical -- with its
signature yellow cover festooned with woodcuts, rococo
scrollwork, cameos and antiquated typography -- is a
nostalgia book. "It isn't," Mr. Hale said flatly. "I want
people when they read the Almanac 100 years from now to look
at the 1992 edition and know what life in the U.S. was like
in 1992. And they will. There are television trends and
fashion trends and the current state of the Earth.
   The most enduring misconception about the Almanac, said
Mr. Hale, is the belief that its raison d'etre is weather
forecasting. "It's 24 pages out of every issue and costs
$100,000 a year, which is more expensive than any other 24
pages," he said. "But it isn't the major reason for the
Almanac's existence and it never was."
   About those weather forecasts. They are the work of
Richard Head, a former NASA scientist, who relies on current
and historical solar observations along with space-probe data
to come up with predictions that are, he calculates, about
70% accurate.
   "We say our predictions are 80% accurate," amended Mr.
Hale, who is astonishingly adept at bending the weather to
fit the Almanac's forecasts. If, for example, he's giving a
speech in a region told to expect "cool, cloudy, chance of
showers" and things turn out hot, dry and sunny, well, the
waggish editor is ready to explain. "The air conditioner is
on so it's cool," he'll begin. "And I didn't get much sleep
so everything is cloudy, and we all took showers this morning
so we're on our way to 80% accuracy."
   Marginally imperfect (ahem) though its forecasting may be,
the Almanac sells briskly to prospective brides who want to
pinpoint the sunniest Saturday in June. Others are more
inclined to buy it for the recipes or for tips on growing
impressive vegetables. Some buy it just to hang up (the
Almanac has a hole in the upper left corner to accommodate
just such people). And there are those people who buy the
Almanac simply because it is 200 years old. "If this were the
fifth-anniversary issue it wouldn't be selling even half what
it is," said Mr. Hale.
   Clearly, Mr. Hale hopes to turn the curious into converts.
"I think we feel we're doing some good," he said. "The Old
Farmer's Almanac is a constant. With things in the world
changing as fast as they are, we feel we're giving people a
lift."
   They are. Wherever Mr. Hale travels carrying the little
yellow book, people nod and smile fondly. "The Old Farmer's
Almanac," they say, "My grandmother used to read that."
   ---
   Ms. Kaufman is a free-lance writer based in New York.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
