ID: 122	RANK: 52	SCORE: 9.051188
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880708-0280 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-08-88 1206EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r f PM-DroughtRdp 1stLd-Writethru   07-08 0732</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Drought Rdp, 1st Ld-Writethru,0755</SECOND>
<HEAD>Heat Wave Shatters Records, Chicago Ozone Warning Issued</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Subs the 18th graf, ``The Ohio River,'' to CORRECT that Mound
City is in Illinois. Also moving on general news wires.</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   A heat wave shattered temperature records in the Midwest, baking
already parched crops and prompting a pollution warning in Chicago,
while North Dakota officials said the drought could put 7,000
farmers out of business this year.
   Low water again kept barges from moving today on the lower
Mississippi River and part of the Ohio was closed.
   Thunderstorms dumped heavy rain overnight in western Texas,
including more than 4 inches at Odessa and 3.25 inches at Midland,
the National Weather Service said. The Texas rain caused street
flooding and more than 40 homes in Lea County, N.M., had water
inside, the service said. Windsor, Colo., got more than 3{ inches
of rain.
   But in the Southeast, no such relief is expected for central
North Carolina.
   ``Unless we get a hurricane or a tropical storm, it looks like
we're in for dry conditions right on through September,'' said
Larry Gabrick, a weather service meteorologist at Raleigh-Durham
Airport.
   In Chicago, which hit 97 degrees Thursday, stagnant air and
scorching temperatures helped push ozone concentrations to the
highest level in a decade, state Environmental Protection Agency
officials said.
   ``It just feels heavy on your lungs,'' said A.J. D'Angelo, a
27-year-old attorney, fresh from a workout in a downtown health
club. ``In the gym it wasn't so bad, but just walking around during
the day, it's just horrible.''
   Authorities issued a ``yellow alert,'' warning that
concentrations of the airborne pollutant were so high that the very
old, the very young, and those with respiratory ailments should
stay indoors. Agency spokesman Will Flower said the high levels of
ozone would continue today.
   ``I don't want to breathe this air. I'm not used to this,'' said
Sylvia Milosevic, 33, who moved to Chicago four months ago from Los
Angeles.
   Temperatures hovered near 100 degrees Thursday across much of
Indiana for the third consecutive day. With no rain predicted
through Sunday, officials said the week would likely close as the
hottest and driest this year.
   In Ohio, Columbus, Akron-Canton, Youngstown, Dayton, Findlay,
Zanesville and Mansfield were in the 100s, while Toledo posted 103.
Records were set at seven of the state's nine reporting cities,
forecasters said.
   Minneapolis reached 99 degrees, and the temperature at the
Duluth airport hit 97, breaking a record of 93 for the date set in
1980.
   And for the fourth straight day Thursday, Buffalo, N.Y., set a
record high temperature. The 94-degree reading broke the record of
93 degree set for the date in 1944.
   In North Dakota, as many as 7,000 farmers, most of whom took up
the trade in the last 10 years, could be forced out of the business
because of this year's drought, state Agriculture Commissioner Kent
Jones said.
   ``There's at least that many who are in real trouble,'' Jones
said Thursday. ``A lot of them are young farmers who got started in
the late 70s.''
   The estimate represents 22 percent of the state's 31,000 farmers.
   The Mississippi River remained closed to barge traffic at Black
Hills, Miss., about 20 miles south of Natchez, Miss., where water
had been as low as five feet.
   The Ohio River was closed periodically today off Mound City,
Ill., to allow crews to dredge sand and silt, Coast Guard Lt. j.g.
Jim Clifton said at Paducah, Ky.
   Authorities planned to open the channel for six hours, then
close it for 12 hours for dredging, for several days, Clifton said.
   ``It will just alternate back and forth like that until they get
it cleared through,'' he said.
   The drought has been deadly for many crops in Illinois.
   State Agriculture Director Larry Werries estimated that the
average corn yield of 119 bushels per acre had been cut in half by
the beginning of the week, and was dropping at a rate of 5 percent
a day.
   At that rate, a farmer with 500 acres of drought-stressed corn
would lose about $10,000 a day at current grain prices.
   ``By the weekend, we will have some farmers saying it's all over
_ and they'll be correct,'' said University of Illinois agronomist
Emerson Nafziger. ``I think it's safe to say there are going to be
fields with no yield at all.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
