ID: 122	RANK: 58	SCORE: 8.897635
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890202-0003 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-02-02-89 0006EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-ColdRdp 2ndLd-Writethru a0761 02-02 1123</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Cold Rdp, 2nd Ld-Writethru, a0761,1145</SECOND>
<HEAD>Alaska Blaster: Cold Wave Brings Big Chill to Ever-Widening Area</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: Leads with 9 grafs to UPDATE weather conditions in Western region,
Minnesota death; picks up 5th graf: `As the cold ...</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto PD1</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By POLLY ANDERSON</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Schools were ordered closed for the rest of the week in North
Dakota amid warnings that temperatures would go to 40 below, as the
Alaska-born cold blast pushed south and east, stretching the big
chill from the Pacific to Oklahoma.
   Closed roads and icy highways took their toll as at least one
motorist was killed in a 17-vehicle pileup in Idaho, a tour bus
crashed on an icy stretch of Sierra Nevada interstate and 100-car
string of accidents occurred near Seattle.
   ``February is going to be quite different from January,'' said
Bob Snider, a meteorologist at the National Weather Service in Ann
Arbor, Mich.
   Midwesterners who chuckled at the weather in Alaska over the
weekend while polishing their golf clubs got their comeuppance as
winter set in with a vengeance. The normally rainy Pacific Northwest
got a rare snowfall, and Easterners counted the waning hours of
springlike weather as the cold front moved their way.
   Bellingham, Wash., reported gusts over 100 mph early Wednesday
and 60 mph by midday, knocking out power to as many as 15,000
customers. Snow caved in the roof of Everett's soccer center,
causing $250,000 damage, officials said.
   At least 20 people were injured when a tour bus carrying about
two dozen passengers overturned on icy, wind-swept Interstate 80 in
the Sierra Nevada, and six people were hospitalized, the California
Highway Patrol reported.
   The big winter storm, with 60 mph gusts, knocked out electrical
power to a ``big chunk'' of Salt Lake City on Wednesday night, with
blackouts extending 40 miles to Ogden, said Utah Power &amp; Light Co.
spokesman Dave Eskelsen.
   Eskelsen said engineers believed the outage was the result of
``dirty rain'' coating insulators on power poles and blowing fuses,
and some crews had reports of burning power poles.
   In northern Minnesota, authorities blamed a night of minus
20-degree temperatures for the hypothermia death of a 31-year-old
woman whose frozen body was found on a sidewalk in Coleraine.
   As the cold pushed into the country Wednesday, temperatures fell
18 degrees in one hour at Ardmore, Okla., the National Weather
Service said. Russell, Kan., which shared the nation's high of 84
degrees Tuesday afternoon, had readings in the lower teens a day
later and wind chills in the 30-below-zero range.
   With North Dakota's wind chills expected to dip as low as 80
degrees below over the next several days, Gov. George Sinner ordered
all schools to close until Monday.
   ``The weather forecast for the next two days calls for bitter
cold to the extent that our young people are at risk, particularly
those being transported to school,'' Sinner said.
   A wind-chill reading of 90 below was recorded Wednesday morning
at Tioga, in northwestern North Dakota. The wind chill reading at
mid-afternoon was 67 below at Williston.
   In Idaho, where high winds and chill temperatures forced the
closing of many roads, crews worked to clear wreckage from a pileup
on Interstate 84. Eight semi trucks and nine other vehicles were
involved, and at least one person was killed, said Lt. David Neal of
the Idaho State Police in Twin Falls.
   Not counting Alaska, Cut Bank, Mont., was the nation's icebox at
midday Wednesday, with a reading of 31 below zero, and temperatures
in the state were forecast to dip below 40 below by Thursday
morning. Electric power in Great Falls, a city of 57,000, and
several smaller towns in north-central Montana was knocked out for
nearly an hour Wednesday morning when the Black Eagle hydroelectric
dam broke down.
   ``We don't know what caused it,'' said Cort Freeman, Montana
Power Co. spokesman. ``There's a lot of things that can happen in
weather like this.''
   In Alaska, where it all began as the thermometer went as low as
60 below over the weekend, temperatures moderated Wednesday over
much of the state except for the area near the Canadian border.
While Anchorage was reporting just 11 degrees below zero and no
wind, Northway on the Alaska Highway near the Yukon had a 7 a.m.
reading of 59 below.
   Northway posted an extreme of another sort when the barometric
pressure reached 31.85 inches late Tuesday, a record high-pressure
reading for the North American continent. The reading there eased
off Wednesday morning but was still a high 31.31 inches. It was the
effects of the high pressure system on the jet stream that created
the unusual weather pattern.
   The barometric pressure was so high that the Federal Aviation
Adminitration early Wednesday issued an order restricting instrument
and night flights over Alaska, saying that altimeters that use
barometric pressure might not calculate a plane's altitude
accurately at that high pressure.
   The snowfall at Seattle was enough to shut all runways at
Seattle-Tacoma International Airport for nearly an hour Wednesday
morning. The snowfall at the airport, 2 inches and counting at
midmorning, plus temperatures in the teens made it the worst wintry
weather in Seattle in more than three years.
   In the Plains, agriculture experts said the cold snap could
reduce the evaporation from farm fields, already dry from last
summer's drought and the dry winter. But that was the only good news
for farmers in the forecast.
   Fruit growers worried that trees had begun to bud in the warmth
and would now be in danger; the thirsty winter wheat crop in the
southern Plains faced new stresses without the blanket of snow that
usually keeps it safe during the winter; and ranchers across the
Plains worked Wednesday to shelter cattle from the sudden cold.
   ``Now we've got something that's unbelieveable _ record highs,
and suddenly within one day we go to cold temperatures,'' said Steve
Baenziger of the University of Nebraska-Lincoln agronomy department.
   But in the East, record highs continued to topple Wednesday. In
Buffalo, N.Y., normally known for its wintry weather, the record
high for the date of 53, set just last year, was broken at 3 a.m.
with a reading of 56 degrees. There was no snow on the ground, and
Lake Erie was not frozen.
   It was 66 in Boston; 67 in New York City; 67 in Newark; 59 in
Columbus, Ohio; and 70 in Roanoke, Va., all records for the date.
   As winter swept toward the Great Lakes region, ski operators said
it couldn't come soon enough.
   ``The crowds just don't see snow, and it stops them from coming
out,'' said Sherry Gerych, ticket office manager at Mount Brighton
Ski Area in Michigan. ``As soon as it hits, we'll get ourselves
fixed up again.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
