ID: 122	RANK: 66	SCORE: 8.743307
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910805-0098
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910805-0098.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Economy:
   Midwest Drought Hurts Farm Economy,
   Clouds Forecasts for Low Food Inflation
   ----
   By Scott Kilman
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
08/05/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A2
</SO>
<CO>
   GEB K
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
</MS>
<IN>
COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
FOOD PRODUCTS (FOD)
</IN>
<NS>
COMMODITIES MARKET (CMD)
</NS>
<RE>
IOWA (IA)
ILLINOIS (IL)
INDIANA (IND)
MICHIGAN (MI)
MINNESOTA (MN)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   CHICAGO -- A scattered Midwest drought is clouding
forecasts for low food inflation and aggravating the downturn
in the U.S. farm economy.
   Many of the nation's most productive corn and
soybean-producing counties in Iowa, Illinois and Indiana have
received less than one-third of their normal rainfall since
early June. Some crop analysts have lowered their estimate of
the U.S. corn crop by 10% to roughly 7.5 billion bushels. The
soybean harvest will shrink too if adequate rain doesn't
return within several days.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   With church congregations in small towns such as Eldon,
Iowa, praying for rain, the showrooms of tractor dealerships
are emptying of customers and banks are preparing for a wave
of loan problems.
   "I expect to see some farmers around here fail," says Mike
Fischbach, a 32-year-old Fowler, Ind., farmer who is mulling
whether to postpone plans to buy $18,000 of planting
equipment. "I know I'm going to be hurt."
   For consumers, the drought means that food price inflation
this year probably won't slow quite as much as most
economists were predicting just a few weeks ago. Donald
Ratajczak, a widely watched Georgia State University economic
forecaster, recently raised his projection of 1991 grocery
store price inflation to 4.0% from 3.8%.
   Paul Prentice, president of Farm Sector Economics Inc. in
Colorado Springs, Colo., said he will probably raise his 1991
food inflation forecast by half a percentage point. The
government's Consumer Price Index for food rose 5.8% in 1990
and 1989.
   Economists are raising their forecasts cautiously because
this drought's impact on consumers is difficult to gauge. The
dry weather materialized when crop prices were sharply
depressed by sluggish grain exports. As a result, corn and
soybean prices are still relatively moderate even though they
have climbed 19% and 23%, respectively, in the past four
weeks at the Chicago Board of Trade.
   At the same time, many foods companies that were quick to
raise prices during the 1988 drought are more reluctant to
pass along their higher costs during a recession. A Kellogg
Co. spokesman said Friday the breakfast cereal giant "will be
very conservative" about raising prices because it faces
"very competitive conditions."
   Gerber Products Co. hasn't any plans to raise its baby
food prices because of the drought even though the prices of
some vegetables, such as peas, are rising. "It's a little
more difficult to raise prices because of the recession," a
Gerber official said.
   This drought isn't as widespread as the spring and summer
drought of 1988. It suffocated poultry, singed tender plants
and pastures and eventually reduced the nation's biggest
crop, corn, by 30%. This drought started in June after most
crops were well established and leapfrogs entire counties.
   Grain traders don't expect much more significant damage to
the corn crop because it has completed the pollination stage,
which is when it is the most vulnerable to dry conditions.
The soybean crop, which is used to make everything from
cooking oil and livestock feed to ink, is more vulnerable to
damage if the drought lingers because its moisture needs are
greatest in August.
   For farmers in Minnesota and Michigan, where rainfall has
been adequate, the rally in grain prices is a boost. But for
many farmers elsewhere, the drought is coming on top of what
was already shaping up to be a disappointing year. Declining
grain exports and cuts in crop subsidy programs were already
expected to reduce net farm income by as much as 15% from
last year.
   Farmers don't expect as much help from the government as
they got during the 1988 drought. It was relatively easy for
the government to find disaster aid funds then because
soaring crop prices saved it money on crop subsidies. This
year, crop prices haven't jumped so high.
   In places such as Henry, Ill., where the corn crop is
expected to fall by as much as half this year, some farmers
are worried about harvesting enough of a crop this fall to
pay their bills. "We'll probably do a lot of restructuring of
debt," said Tom Rice, a vice president at Henry State Bank.
"Prices are still relatively low and that is putting people
in a bind."
   U.S. farm banks are generally in good shape to handle a
mild economic downturn. After several profitable years, the
sector is the healthiest part of the banking industry.
   Still, bankers are concerned that the drought is sending a
chill through the Main Street economy as farmers retrench.
"We've seen a real slowdown in business since it got dry,"
said Burton J. Zuege, vice president of Fowler State Bank in
Fowler, Ind.
   At the local Deere &amp; Co. farm equipment dealership, sales
last month fell by 65% from July 1990. Because of the dry
weather, a handful of farmers are delaying orders for
big-ticket items such as combines, which can cost $130,000.
"It really went dead in July," a salesman said. "A lot of
customers are just waiting to see what happens."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
