ID: 122	RANK: 91	SCORE: 8.446814
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880803-0063 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-08-03-88 0452EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a PM-Drought-Heat 1stLd-Writethru a0488 08-03 0716</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Drought-Heat, 1st Ld - Writethru, a0488,0733</SECOND>
<HEAD>Drought Of '88 Could Affect Crops Of '89, Farmers Fear</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: SUBS grafs 5-6 with 3 grafs to UPDATE with more temperature
records, heat-related hospital cases. Picks up 7th graf pvs, `It
was...'</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By ROBERT LEE ZIMMER</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   A new blast of scorching weather in the nation's midsection has
increased fears about fall crops that are already wilting from
thirst, and experts say the effects of the drought may extend into
next year.
   Despite scattered July showers, farmers say it will now take an
exceptional amount of rain the rest of the year to make up for the
huge moisture deficit caused by the hot, dry spring and summer.
   ``We've never had temperatures like this that I can recall. I'd
say we're going downhill real quick if it stays hot,'' said Indiana
farmer Dan Donathen, who tends 300 acres of corn and soybeans.
   ``I'd say we're in a real blowtorch pressure-cooker right now.''
   Temperatures soared Tuesday to tie or break records in 26 cities
in 12 states: Wisconsin, Minnesota, Michigan, Illinois, Ohio, Iowa,
Indiana, South Carolina, North Carolina, West Virginia, Tennessee
and New York, according to the National Weather Service.
   In Wisconsin, the city of La Crosse broke a 24-year-old record
for the date with 102 degrees, and tied a 1955 mark with its 35th
day of temperatures in the 90s or hotter. Columbia Hospital in
Milwaukee treated 86 heat-related cases in a 24-hour period Monday
and Tuesday. Its normal amount for an entire summer is 56, hospital
officials said.
   Minneapolis-St. Paul set a mark of 101 degrees and Chicago hit
100 for a record the seventh time this year.
   ``It was so hot ... I had to go outside to breathe,'' said
Willie Nabors, who abandoned his un-air-conditioned Milwaukee
apartment Tuesday to join thousands of other sufferers in a cool
shopping mall.
   In the Detroit area, hundreds of Chrysler Corp. workers felt the
same way, walking off their jobs at three factories when
temperatures reached up to 140 degrees near furnaces, United Auto
Workers union officials said.
   Farmers, meanwhile, caught between the heat and drought, worried
about what the weather conditions might do to their crop yield next
year.
   ``The key times for recharging are late fall and early spring,''
said Ken Kunkel, director of the Midwestern Climate Center in
Champaign, Ill. ``If we have a very dry fall, we will be in more
danger next spring.''
   That makes melting winter snow and early spring rain even more
critical in 1989.
   ``It's going to be tough to go into the spring with adequate
soil moisture,'' said Larry Dallas, who farms 560 acres in central
Illinois with his brother.
   ``What corn there is, the rain helped and we've got some decent
sized ears,'' said Dallas, who still expects no more than half a
crop. ``The soybeans perked up and grew a foot, but if it gets hot
and dry again, we'll lose all we've gained.''
   In Carroll County, Iowa, however, some farmers with
better-than-average rainfall were relishing the potential payoff
from grain prices pushed higher by the parched conditions.
   ``We've hit the jackpot at the end of the rainbow,'' county
Extension Director Dennis Molitor said Tuesday. ``It's definitely a
potential gain for a lot of producers.''
   Rain has soaked many fields in parts of Illinois, Indiana, Ohio,
and Kentucky in recent weeks. However, other parts of Illinois,
Iowa, Wisconsin, and Minnesota remained relatively dry, Kunkel said.
   ``Certainly, the drought is not over,'' said Kunkel. ``Soil
moisture reserves are very limited.''
   Late-July showers were also welcome in Kentucky and Arkansas.
   ``It's looking a whole lot better,'' said Kentucky farmer Homer
Hurst Jr. ``We actually cut some hay yesterday. ... We reseeded 65
acres of corn and we're hoping for a late fall.''
   But farmers in other drought states have not been as fortunate.
In South Dakota, experts said rains came too late to save most
crops and the state approved a program to help farmers and ranchers
replace dried-up water supplies.
   ``It's the same old story: we need rain; we're not getting
any,'' said Herb Halvorson, assistant agriculture commissioner in
Minnesota, who indicated heat now may be causing more damage than
drought.
   ``The impact on the corn and the soybeans and the canning crops
has been devastating.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
