ID: 167	RANK: 30	SCORE: 5.464907
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP881230-0179 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-12-30-88 2154EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-NewYear'sRdp 1stLd-Writethru a0645 12-30 0884</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-New Year's Rdp, 1st Ld - Writethru, a0645,0900</SECOND>
<HEAD>A Traditional New Year's Spiced Up with Some Things New</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: INSERTS 3 grafs after 12th graf, `At Manhattan's ..., to add
festivals planned in Boston and Rhode Island. Picks up 13th graf:
`At Patriots ...</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By THEASA TUOHY</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Petting animals, singing for peace and a massive steak fry and
rodeo have been added this year to the more traditional champagne
toasts and party-horn tooting as ways of greeting the New Year.
   There also will be fake snow for the unusually unwintry New
Hampshire and blankets for the homeless in usually warm Phoenix.
   In the Smoky Mountains of Tennessee, at least 100 couples are
planning to start off the New Year by hitching up with a new spouse,
according to the Rev. Ed Taylor, dubbed the ``marry-thon'' minister
of the Smokies.
   ``This takes the cake. This weekend has turned into the second
busiest time of the year,'' Taylor said Friday. He performed 113
marriages last Valentine's Day.
   ``We've got four ministers and three chapels going,'' Taylor said
of his interdenominational Gatlinburg Ministries Inc.
   West Virginia football fans in Arizona for the Fiesta Bowl game
Jan. 2 between the No. 3 ranked Mountaineers and No. 1 ranked Notre
Dame are planning the ``Superbowl of alumni parties,'' said Steve
Douglas, executive director of the West Virginia Alumni Association.
   A steak fry and private rodeo are planned Sunday for about 7,500
people, complete with fireworks, dancing and the Mountaineer mascot
parading on the back of a bull.
   The event, at Rawhide, a Western theme park in Scottsdale, is so
massive it is being staged in shifts. About half the crowd will have
dinner, while the other half is at the rodeo, and then they'll
switch, Douglas said.
   In the home of the New Year's tradition synonymous with the chaos
of the night's revelry, the ball to be dropped at the stroke of
midnight in New York City's Times Square will be different. The
wrought-iron ball replaces the red apple used in recent years
``because it's a more universal symbol,'' said Tama Starr, president
of Artkraft Strauss Sign Corp., which created the new ball.
   The dropping of the ball began in 1908.
   New Yorkers who party at a downtown nightclub called B2 will be
treated to a shower of dollar bills _ $5,000 worth _ that will rain
onto the dance floor at midnight. A quick-handed partygoer might be
able to recoup the $65 price of admission.
   At Manhattan's Cathedral of St. John the Divine, a free ``Concert
For Peace'' includes a prayer for peace being read by actor Jason
Robards and songs by folk singer Odetta.
   About 1,000 artists will exhibit and perform on Boston's public
plazas and storefront stages for the city's 13th annual First Night
celebration.
   ``It's an opportunity for everyone to come together to celebrate
the city's cultural life and feel a part of it,'' said Bruce
Rossley, the city's commissioner for arts and humanities.
   Rhode Islanders will have a choice of First Night and Last Night
celebrations. The fourth annual First Night in Providence is
expected to draw about 40,000 people for a variety of alcohol-free
festivities. The Last Night is a farewell party at the 100-year-old
Rhodes-on-the-Pawtuxet ballroom, which is closing for at least two
years.
   At Patriots Square, a new downtown park in Phoenix, there will be
space heaters and tents to keep some 1,000 partygoers warm as they
watch fireworks and bands New Year's Eve. Low temperatures in recent
days have been running in the 20s and 30s, unusually cold for this
time of year. Those who attend are being asked to bring blankets for
seating during the event, to then be distributed to the homeless.
   In New Hampshire, where snow is routine for New Year's, the city
of Concord is manufacturing the powdery stuff on the Statehouse lawn
for the ice sculptures to be featured in its First Night celebration
New Year's Eve. The downtown area will be roped off to traffic so
the thousands of celebrants can take in such events as band
concerts, dances, puppet shows, chorales, storytelling and trick
bike acts, climaxed by fireworks at midnight.
   Included in the First Night celebration in Portsmouth, N.H., will
be a petting farm featuring farm animals. The idea is to increase
the understanding of agriculture among schoolchildren.
   And to remind partygoers to keep it a happy new year, Mothers
Against Drunk Driving in Ohio is sponsoring a statewide ``Tie One
On'' program to tie red ribbons on antennas and rearview mirrors as
a reminder to motorists not to drink and drive.
   The program began Thanksgiving weekend and runs until the new
year.
   The Ohio State Highway Patrol plans to have 200 to 300 of it's
1,200 troopers on duty at any given time over this weekend.
   ``Our policy is visibility,'' said Lt. Dave Peters. ``The more
people we have out, the better it is,'' he said.
   In Albany, N.Y., area hotels are offering weekend party packages
that include dinner, entertainment, champagne, overnight
accommodations and a New Year's Day brunch.
   ``People are very verbal about not drinking and driving,'' said
Shelley Gould, director of catering for the Hilton Hotel in downtown
Albany. ``They don't want to worry about it. ... That's why they
take the whole weekend.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
