ID: 167	RANK: 44	SCORE: 4.887431
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920124-0070
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920124-0070.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Marketing &amp; Media -- Advertising:
   Lord Dentsu Is Surprise Winner
   Of Mazda Motor's Amati Account
   ----
   By Joanne Lipman
</HL>
<DATE>
01/24/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B2
</SO>
<CO>
   BMY CBS CCE DH F.EUC G.DAI GM IPG J.DEN J.MZD KO MSFT NWA
OMC PA TBSA TBSB VIA WNEWS WPPGY
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
FINANCIAL (FIN)
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)
AIRLINES (AIR)
AUTOMOBILES (AUT)
BROADCASTING (BRD)
BEVERAGES (BVG)
DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, CREDIT INSTITUTIONS (FIS)
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
FILM, TELEVISION &amp; MUSIC INDUSTRIES (MOV)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)
BROADLINE RETAILERS, DEPARTMENT STORES (RTB)
SOFT DRINKS, MAKERS OF NON-ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES (SFT)
SOFTWARE (SOF)
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
</IN>
<NS>
JOINT VENTURES (JVN)
PERSONNEL ANNOUNCEMENTS, PROMOTIONS, APPOINTMENTS (PER)
ACQUISITIONS &amp; MERGERS, TAKEOVERS, BOARD BATTLES (TNM)
</NS>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
CHINA (CH)
EUROPE (EU)
FAR EAST (FE)
FRANCE (FR)
GEORGIA (GA)
GERMANY (GE)
ILLINOIS (IL)
JAPAN (JA)
MICHIGAN (MI)
MINNESOTA (MN)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
GREAT BRITAIN (UK)
UNITED STATES (US)
WASHINGTON (WA)
WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)
</RE>
<LP>
   Lord Dentsu &amp; Partners, defying critics who questioned its
future, won one of advertising's biggest plums: Mazda Motor's
upscale Amati division, which is expected to bill about $75
million.
   Lord Dentsu bested four other agencies in snaring Amati, a
luxury line that will be introduced in the spring of 1994.
Chicago's Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, whose Santa Ana, Calif.,
office handles the Mazda account, had been considered a
front-runner. Others in the competition were Chicago's Tatham
RSCG; Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor of New York; and the Los
Angeles office of New York's Della Femina McNamee.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The win increases Lord Dentsu's billings by more than a
third to about $275 million, and gives its image a badly
needed boost. The agency, created a year ago by the merger of
two relatively weak shops, was considered a lightweight
competitor. Even some other agencies in the Amati pitch
figured it wasn't much of a threat. The agency is a joint
venture of Young &amp; Rubicam and Japan's Dentsu.
   But Lord Dentsu, based in New York, has been quietly
building strength, especially in its Los Angeles office. Last
summer, the office picked up the $30 million Dole account. In
August, Lord Dentsu brought in Leonard Pearlstein, who had
run his own now-defunct West Coast shop, as president and
chief operating officer of the company and head of the Los
Angeles office. That office will handle the Amati account.
   The Amati win "is going to help make this the next `place
to be,'" an exuberant Mr. Pearlstein said in an interview
yesterday. He said the agency is involved in several other
reviews, both in New York and in Los Angeles, and added,
"We've been cooking pretty good in Los Angeles."
   Richard Lord, Lord Dentsu's chairman and chief executive
officer, will also be actively involved in the Amati
business, although he is based in New York: "I'll be racking
up the frequent-flier miles," he said. The victory is
especially sweet for Mr. Lord, a respected veteran adman who
has had a difficult few years, most recently as he toiled to
meld a single agency from the merger that created Lord
Dentsu.
   At Amati, Richard Colliver, group vice president and
general manager, said Lord Dentsu was tapped because of its
"strategic thinking and planning." The account review was one
of the more unusual in recent years, because the ad agencies
never even saw the car. They instead were asked to create
hypothetical marketing plans for a hypothetical luxury
automobile. Among other attributes, the mythical car ranked
first in customer satisfaction.
   Lord Dentsu staffers were drinking champagne yesterday,
but the road ahead remains rough. Amati will introduce two
sedans in 1994 in an extraordinarily crowded market. The
Mazda unit's major competitors, Toyota's Lexus, Nissan's
Infiniti and Honda's Acura, beat it to the luxury market by
several years. It also must battle with the European luxury
imports, including Mercedes and BMW. And it will face more
competition from revamped American luxury cars from Cadillac
and Lincoln.
   Mr. Colliver says Amati expects to sell 20,000 units in
1994 and double that number in 1995. And automobile analysts
and enthusiasts have high hopes for the as-yet-unseen car.
One participant in the review characterized it as a
dependable car with sexy styling. Christopher Cedergren, an
analyst with AutoPacific Group in Santa Ana, Calif., expects
the cars to be priced between $28,000 and $45,000 in today's
dollars and predicts sales of 50,000 a year by 1996. Last
year, Lexus sold more than 71,000 cars, he says, while
Infiniti sold close to 35,000.
   The 1990s "back-to-basics" trend "has been exaggerated,"
Mr. Cedergren says. "We're still going to have a lot of
affluent people out there."
   In winning the account, Lord Dentsu creates a potential
conflict with half-owner Young &amp; Rubicam, which handles Ford
Motor Co.'s big Lincoln-Mercury division. Lincoln-Mercury
executives couldn't be reached for comment.
   But in the past, Ford has allowed its ad agencies'
subsidiaries to handle car competitors only if the
competitor's potential sales were less than half of Ford's
sales in the same segment. Lincoln-Mercury's upscale Lincoln
model sells about 200,000 cars each year, suggesting Amati
will become a problem only if it sells more than 100,000
cars.
   Some ad agency competitors suggested Lord Dentsu was
tapped because Japan's Mazda was comfortable with Lord
Dentsu's part-Japanese ownership. But both Lord Dentsu and
Amati dismissed those suggestions as sour grapes.
   The losing agencies may be tempted to run headlong toward
Mercedes-Benz, currently in the midst of a review for its own
approximately $88 million account. But a Mercedes spokeswoman
said four contenders already identified "are the finalists.
At this point, we aren't opening it up for any others." She
said a decision would be made late next month.
   ---
   Omnicom Buys Goodby
                                                                                                       

   Omnicom Group Inc., the advertising holding company,
bought San Francisco agency Goodby Berlin &amp; Silverstein.
   Terms of the transaction weren't disclosed. Omnicom has
owned 37.5% of Goodby's shares outstanding since 1989, an
interest it acquired in its white-knight acquisition of
British agency Boase, Massimi, Pollitt. In the latest
transaction, which Omnicom Chairman Bruce Crawford described
as "mainly cash," Omnicom bought the remaining 62.5% of the
company from its four principals, Andy Berlin, Jeffrey
Goodby, Richard Silverstein and Colin Probert.
   An extraordinary two years of new business wins have
bolstered Goodby's billings above the $200 million mark,
transforming it from a small regional shop into a national,
mid-sized agency. Agency Chairman and Chief Executive Andy
Berlin said, however, that because the agency hasn't handled
lucrative media purchasing for its clients, its revenues were
more like those of a small agency, $15 million to $18
million.
   Mr. Berlin said the acquisition brings the agency
"abilities a small San Francisco agency can't muster,"
including media-buying clout and additional marketing
services. "We are definitely expanding aggressively in New
York this year," he said. The agency's New York-area clients
include the New Yorker magazine, Heublein Inc.'s wine and
spirits and Royal Viking cruise lines.
   Goodby will operate as an independent Omnicom unit, as do
Omnicom's other agencies, including BBDO, DDB Needham and
Tracey-Locke. "They're a craft-oriented agency, like the
other agencies in our group," Mr. Crawford said. "They fit
the culture of our group."
   ---
   Coke's Global `Hello'
                                                                                                       

   In a media buying first, Coca-Cola Co. planned to kick off
its Olympics advertising blitz this morning with what it
calls the first global commercial, airing it simultaneously
on four continents.
   Called "Hellos," the 60-second, 12-language commercial,
from Interpublic Group's McCann-Erickson, was to appear on
cable networks CNN and CNN International at 6:00 a.m. EST
today, and in Europe, Asia, New Zealand and Latin America at
the same time. For the rest of the day, four new Olympics ads
were to air at different times around the world on CNN and
MTV. The spots will break on U.S. network television Monday.
   One of the Olympics spots depicts a fictional Lithuanian
cross-country skier at his first Olympics. The lush spot is
the first work of Gordon Bowen, the creative guru McCann
lured away from WPP Group's Ogilvy &amp; Mather last year to work
on its biggest account.
   ---
   Ad Notes. . . .
                                                                                                       

   SUPERBOWL SALES: CBS-TV said as of late yesterday it had
sold all but one 30-second commercial in Sunday's Super Bowl
broadcast. Late-buying advertisers included General Motors
Corp. and Bristol-Myers Squibb's Nuprin, industry executives
said.
                                                                                                       

   CAMPAIGN: Microsoft Corp. said it would launch its first
television ad campaign for Microsoft Windows operating system
and software applications, from the Los Angeles office of WPP
Group's Ogilvy &amp; Mather. The ads are intended to show
potential business customers how easy the system is to use.
The Redmond, Wash., company said it will spend $8 million on
the campaign from March to June.
                                                                                                       

   JOINT VENTURE: Interpublic Group's McCann-Erickson forged
a partnership with Guang Ming Newspaper Group, a daily
newspaper publisher in China, to form a joint venture ad
agency called McCann-Erickson (China) Ltd. McCann will hold a
51% stake in the new agency, with offices in Beijing and
Guangzhou.

   SUPER CHANNEL XXVI: Banks of televisions known as "video
walls" have been installed in Minneapolis's 20 miles of
indoor walkways and will show Super Bowl guests and others
ads from companies including Northwest Airlines, Prudential
Securities and Dayton Hudson Corp. units Target and Dayton's.
The spots, aired with highlights from the 1991 football
season, went for $9,500 for the 10-day run, reaching an
estimated 200,000 passers-by a day.
                                                                                                       

   WHO'S NEWS: Ave Butensky, age 58, executive vice president
of Fries Entertainment, was elected president of the
Television Bureau of Advertising this week. He succeeds James
Joyella, who resigned from the trade association last month.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
