ID: 167	RANK: 45	SCORE: 4.743406
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910125-0110
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910125-0110.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Letters to the Editor:
   War Atrocities Committed in TV Studios
</HL>
<DATE>
01/25/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A13
</SO>
<CO>
   MDEST
</CO>
<IN>
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
</IN>
<LP>
   History will judge that the U.S. fulfilled its destiny in
thwarting the dark side with orchestrated precision,
humanity, technology, diplomacy, perseverance, morality,
courage and intelligence.
   But several atrocities will never make the history books.
The broadcast media are responsible for breeding divisiveness
in our nation. The offspring of a generation of media that
affected the dying stage of a previous war, they are now
vying for a role as an additional antagonist -- not simply
serving the public interest.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   On Jan. 13, Charles Kuralt on CBS interviewed a young
reservist who declared herself a conscientious objector after
her unit was sent to Saudi Arabia. Mr. Kuralt never asked why
she waited to object until her unit crossed "Harm's Way" --
why she collected her reservist checks for all the prior
years.
   On Jan. 13, NBC allowed the Physicians for Social
Responsibility (in Los Angeles) to broadcast a 30-second
commercial showing a loaded body bag in an effort to rid the
American public of its will to exercise its national policy
and global obligations. Was this barbaric visual necessary?
   On Jan. 15, Tom Brokaw on NBC-TV interviewed wives of Navy
pilots in the Gulf. When their responses to his questions
illustrated courage, resolve and support, Mr. Brokaw told the
women how "well trained" they were.
   On Jan. 16, NBC's Bryant Gumbel attempted to stir the
embers of racial disharmony in the U.S. and perhaps on the
battlefield by broadcasting an interview with a black pastor
claiming that the ratio of blacks in the military was
discriminatory. Maybe he should have interviewed Chief of
Staff Colin Powell about our current volunteer force.
   On the evening of Jan. 16, Channel 13 in New York had a
guest who told viewers that by daybreak the Gulf area would
be the biggest POW camp ever or a cemetery.
   Just prior to the war's start, Joe Garagiola went to an
Army post to interview children of GIs in the Gulf, and asked
them if they missed their parents]
   The broadcast media are behaving like sharks in a feeding
frenzy -- mindless gnawing to get that extra ounce of flesh.
   Mike Greece
   Former USAF Officer
   New York
   ---
   I applaud the TV networks for their dedicated and often
insightful coverage of the Gulf war, but they are going too
far. In their efforts to outdo one another in dramatizing the
war, the networks are becoming a national-security risk to
the U.S., Israel and other allies. The most enthusiastic
viewer of all is probably Saddam Hussein, glued to a TV set
in his elusive command bunker.
   After the initial U.S. air attack on Baghdad, broadcasters
effectively taunted Saddam into retaliation. Network
commentary focused on the ease of victory, Saddam's
unexpected impotence and the probability of a short-and-sweet
resolution of hostilities. Newscasters noted that Saddam
seemed to have forgotten his promise of a retaliatory attack
on Israel. For a man whose leadership has been created and
perpetuated by images of machismo and power, such words could
provoke action.
   In the "dead spaces" between U.S. air raids and Iraqi
missile launches, the networks have summoned a veritable army
of experts to serve as military analysts-soothsayers-fortune
tellers. Entering the realm of video conferencing as a means
of military second-guessing can be a dangerous business.
Questions such as these were presented in the wake of attacks
on Israel: Which neighborhoods did Iraqi Scud missiles hit in
Tel Aviv, and what obvious targets were missed? If Israel
wants to make a strong statement to Saddam Hussein, what
targets should it select in Iraq?
   Probably even more shocking has been the media's obsession
with the potential use of chemical weapons. If this obsession
turns into a self-fulfilling prophecy, Saddam Hussein will
exploit his arsenal of nerve gas and other chemical agents
and provide us with television footage of unimaginable
suffering and death.
   At the beginning and conclusion of network newscasts, we
are met with bold, three-dimensional graphics bearing such
enticing titles as "The Desert Crisis" and "Showdown in the
Gulf." Stirring music plays as the titles advance and retreat
from focus, reminiscent of the video heraldry of the
Superbowl or the Olympics. Let us be reminded, however, that
this is not a sporting event. This is the ugly theater of
war, and the media have the power to get people killed.
   Jamie A. Grodsky
   Stanford, Calif.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
