ID: 167	RANK: 54	SCORE: 4.383933
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920114-0004
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920114-0004.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
   Washington Eyes Super Title No. III
   ----
   By Frederick C. Klein
</HL>
<DATE>
01/14/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   Washington, D.C. -- Looking for a gift to give the
Washington Redskins, the new champs of the National Football
Conference, may well strain your ingenuity. This bunch has
everything a football team can want, and more. It has big,
bulky guys and little, fast guys. It has a strong-armed
quarterback, sticky-fingered receivers and bouncy ball
carriers. It has the full complement of specialists: punter,
place kicker, place-kick holder, long-snapper and kick
returners.
   It even has a touchdown specialist, the square-built
veteran Gerald Riggs. In an eventful past life he's carried
the ball many times between the goal lines for various
employers. But here in D.C. this season, he has been
entrusted with it mainly when the end zone is close at hand.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   And he has done quite well, thank you. During
regular-season hostilities, he had 11 touchdowns in 78
carries, and in his team's two playoff outings to date he's
been about as efficient as anyone gets amid the semiorganized
chaos of the gridiron, with four TDs in nine chances.
   Against the Detroit Lions in Sunday's NFC title game here,
Riggs scored a perfect two touchdowns on two carries, of two
and three yards, respectively. They contributed to a 17-7,
second-quarter Redskin lead that was expanded to 41-10 by the
close of business. The win put Washington in the Jan. 26
Super Bowl against American Conference winner Buffalo, and
elicited a broad smile from the 31-year-old native of
Tilluha, La. "I miss the action {of carrying the ball a lot},
but I love the result," said he. "I can't say in words how
sweet this is to me."
   Indeed, if anything sets these Redskins apart from the
roiling pack -- as their league-best 16-2 won-lost record
certainly has -- it is their ability to apply a
competent-or-better professional to every task. "I think
we've had better individual players on some of our past
teams, but never one that's been as solid across the board as
this one," said Joe Gibbs, their bespectacled coach, whose
Indian name, if he had one, would be Sleeps in Office.
   Gibbs speaks with more than the usual coachly authority,
because this will be his IVth Super Bowl squad in his XI
years here. His Skins won SB XVII (in 1983) and XXII (in '88)
and lost XVIII (in '84).
   This one, scheduled for the Minneapolis Metrodome, is
XXVI, and off Sunday's showing the Skins will be favored to
win title No. III. Foe Buffalo lost narrowly (to the Giants)
in last year's game and wanted a return engagement in the
worst possible way. That's about the way the Bills got it, in
a 10-7 home squeaker over the Denver Broncos in which their
defense scored more points (seven) than their vaunted offense
(three).
   Displaying qualities of the local industry of diplomacy,
the Washington players had nice things to say about their
opponents-to-be. "Their defense must have been awesome
today," remarked quarterback Mark Rypien. But no one could
have blamed them for licking their chops a bit in
anticipation of the coming struggle.
   If the Redskins have any weak spots, they weren't in
evidence in their victory over the Lions or their 24-7
triumph over the Atlanta Falcons in their first playoff
outing. They ran and passed effectively in both games while
choking off a pair of run-and-shoot offenses that are similar
-- in style, at least -- to Buffalo's.
   It's hard to say which facet of the Skins' game has been
most impressive. The offense, which scored a league-high 485
points in the regular season, cranked out 345 yards Sunday
and was possessively perfect, surrendering no fumbles or pass
interceptions. The defense set up their first two scores -- a
touchdown and a field goalby recovering a fumble and
intercepting a pass deep in Lion territory, and scored the
last one outright on a 32-yard interception return by
cornerback Darrell Green.
   The defensive showing was all the more remarkable because
it was accomplished mostly with four defensive backs and
three linebackers on the field. Most teams counter the
fast-hitting run-and-shoot with five or six DBs, leaving
themselves vulnerable to the run, but the Skins gave away
nothing with their standard alignment. They held Barry
Sanders, the peerless Detroit running back, to 44 yards in 11
carries, and forced Lion quarterbacks Erik Kramer and Andre
Ware to stick to short passes that produced yards (264) but
not points.
   "Credit our front seven," said Rich Petitbon, the
Washington defensive coordinator. "Our linebackers can both
tackle and cover, and it's amazing what a good, fourman pass
rush can do."
   On offense, Washington performed as usual, alternating
Earnest Byner and Ricky Ervins at running back, and letting
QB Rypien throw both short and long. There may be better
individual backs around than Byner or Ervins, but used
alternatingly they make nice music. The same goes for Rypien,
a linebackersized (6-foot-4, 235 pounds) gent who this season
graduated from question mark to exclamation point.
   The final score fairly reflected the relative abilities of
the two teams, but the Lions, the season's NFL Cinderfellas,
made a game of it for a while. They trailed 10-17 at the
half, and 10-20 late in period three. At that point, though,
one play made the outcome certain: a 45-yard touchdown pass
from Rypien to Gary Clark, the Skins' most productive
receiver.
   Clark, who's so small (5-9, 173 pounds) it's lucky he's
fast, later said the play is called a "sprint bomb." He
explained: "Mark sprints out and I go long. If I get single
coverage, it can work. It didn't work in practice this week
-- not even once -- but Mark had a feeling it would today. In
the huddle, he said, `This is six.'" As in points.
   Added Clark: "I never thought I'd hear myself say this,
but I'm looking forward to going to Minneapolis. I don't care
if it snows 12 feet."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
