ID: 167	RANK: 56	SCORE: 4.355457
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911227-0080
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911227-0080.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
   Betting on the Playoffs
   ----
   By Frederick C. Klein
</HL>
<DATE>
12/27/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8
</SO>
<LP>
   Most years at playoff time, it has been my custom to
advise the National Football League on how to improve its
product. It has been the NFL's custom to ignore my advice.
   I have advocated eliminating kicking in all its forms and
letting the boys really play war between the goal lines. I
first opposed the review of officials' calls on the basis of
television replays because it demeaned field officials and
added another layer of controversy to a game that had enough
of these. But then I relented and recommended that, in the
interest of justice, every play be reviewed for infractions
from every conceivable angle while the game clock ran. I have
proposed stemming the annual quarterback-injury plague by
attaching stiff penalties to tackling quarterbacks who agree
to wear skirts.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   All were excellent suggestions, don't you agree?
   But even I grow weary of banging my head against a wall,
so this year I've decided to join the multitudes applauding
the league. Specifically, I like the rules changes, adopted
in 1990, that have trimmed about 10 minutes off the length of
the average game, and the success, mostly through selective
enforcement, of the current season's campaign to crack down
on celebratory demonstrations by players.
   Taking first things first, let's look a bit at length of
game. In 1970, NFL teams completed their contests in an
average of two hours 36 minutes, but that figure climbed
through the next two decades until, by 1989, it had reached
3:11. Some people said this was fine, reasoning that if a
little of something was good, more should be better. Others
pointed out that not only had the increases made more painful
the choice for many between football and family on a Sunday
afternoon, but the everlonger contests also wreaked havoc
upon the Sunday-night schedules of the TV networks that
carried them.
   You can decide which of those last two arguments swayed
the league's powers that be. Suffice it to say that in 1990
they reduced halftime breaks to 12 minutes from 15 and
ordered that, save for the last few minutes of each half,
game clocks be started when officials placed the ball after a
ball carrier had gone out of bounds, rather than when the
next play began. Average game length fell to 2:58 last
season, before edging back up to 3:01.
   The NFL believes that a whit less than three hours a game
would be perfect, and to that end is pondering a reduction of
the time allowed between plays to 40 seconds from 45,
starting next season. This also would counteract the loss of
about 10 plays a game that has accompanied the recent
speed-up. I concur with that proposal, if only because it
might eliminate some of the strolling around that takes place
on the field between plays.
   The business about curbing player celebrations by
enforcing a five-yard penalty against "excessive" ones was
announced last fall amid much fuss; journalistic condemnation
was near-unanimous, and the NFL was dubbed the No Fun League.
But some erstwhile transgressions, including players'
high-fiving fans and flinging balls into the stands, were
quickly defined away, and refs generally held their flags on
other stuff, calling only 25 such penalties through the first
15 weeks of the just-concluded season.
   I was at the Atlanta-Dallas game last Sunday, and
witnessed enough ball-spiking, high-fiving, fist-pumping,
muscle-flexing, chest-pounding and all-around King-Konging on
the field to satisfy the most permissive. About all the
players didn't do was celebrate successful plays with chorus
lines and song, which was where things were heading before
the supposed crackdown. And who wants to see those elephants
sing and dance, anyway?
   And so it's time to preview the playoffs, and for this I
rang up my usual expert, Mr. Lem Banker of Las Vegas, Nev. As
a living, breathing, bill-paying gambler of long standing,
Lem's opinion is better on such matters than that of the
players, coaches or commentators others tend to summon, I
think. That's because, unlike those types, Lem only gets paid
when he wins.
   Lem is anxious for me to point out that what follows are
his general views on the coming festivities, not necessarily
how he plans to bet. He takes his bets one at a time, with
full cognizance of the point spreads involved. If the spread
were right, he'd take the Colorado School of Mines over the
Washington Redskins.
   Lem reads the newspapers like the rest of us, and agrees
with the consensus that the Skins and Buffalo Bills are the
most likely Super Bowl candidates, even though he says the
Bills are easier to score on than the L.A. Clippers (they're
a basketball team, tee-hee). But it's no fun to pick the
favorites, so he chooses the all-Texas matchup of the Houston
Oilers and Dallas Cowboys as his SB-XXVI longshot special.
   He believes that in Warren Moon the Oilers have the
playoffs' best quarterback -- no small factor in these
matters. He deems their defense respectable, and says their
run-and-shoot offense, while no longer unique, still is
off-beat enough to pose a problem for opposing clubs. ("It's
like fighting a southpaw.")
   The Cowboys, he goes on, are quick and aggressive, and
enter the playoffs hot off a five-game winning streak.
Moreover, they're the only team to already have done what
somebody is going to have to do to reach the big game, which
is to beat the Redskins in Washington. "The best thing about
them is that they're young, meaning that maybe they won't
understand they're not supposed to do that again," Lem
offers.
   Lem isn't sure what he'd do if faced with an
Oilers-Cowboys game on Jan. 26 in the Minneapolis Metrodome.
He notes that the dome-homed Oilers love playing indoors, but
the Cowboys, likely underdogs, are this season's champs
against the pointspread with a 13-3 won-lost record. "With
all the trouble the S&amp;Ls are having, there are worse places
to put your money than on a team that's 13-3," says he.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
