ID: 167	RANK: 57	SCORE: 4.347164
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910124-0113
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910124-0113.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Business Bulletin:
   A Special Background Report
   On Trends in Industry
   And Finance
   ----
   By Pamela Sebastian
</HL>
<DATE>
01/24/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<CO>
   CBS FAIL
</CO>
<IN>
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
COSMETICS, PERSONAL CARE, OVER-THE-COUNTER REMEDIES (COS)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)
INDUSTRIAL &amp; COMMERCIAL SERVICES, LEASING, CLEANING (ICS)
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
</IN>
<LP>
   TALK RADIO finds a deeper voice in the wake of the Persian
Gulf war.
   Americans tune in for "talk therapy" in a move that could
help firm up ad rates and the image of ailing AM radio's big
breadwinner. "That's what it's all about -- delivering ears,"
says Bruce Bishop Cheen of Paul Kagan Associates. But will
those ears stay tuned? If so, networks may re-think radio
programming, he says. Veteran talk-show host Barry Farber
thinks his audience rose 80% in the first days of war, but
gains have since slowed. "Even if we keep 5% we will have
done a magnificent thing," he says.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   CBS Radio Networks tried the talk format for only the
second time ever last Friday and estimates 87% of its 600
affiliates took its live, two-hour show. Would CBS do it
again? "I think so," says Larry Cooper, head of network radio
news. Michael Harrison, editor of "Talkers" newspaper, says
station call volume initially rose some 300% but has cooled
as even hosts tire of the topic. But they netted some vital
first-timers. And while the war has eaten into television ad
time, radio talk shows always have room for commercials, Mr.
Harrison notes.
   Ad gap: A 30-second network TV spot costs about $100,000;
a similar radio spot about $1,500, says Mr. Cheen.
                                                                                                       

   FIX YOUR FACE, cosmetic firms urge, with an armload of
"repair" products.
   Aimed at the over-30 set -- in terms of age and income --
items like Estee Lauder's Advanced Night Repair ($40 for 0.87
ounce) and Revlon's Lash Repair (about $3.75 for 0.25 ounce)
jostle for shelf space. Most highlight skin care, a segment
that's likely to inch ahead of the industry with a growth
rate of 8% to 10% a year, says Deepak Raj, a Merrill Lynch
analyst. Not even the recession should blemish sector sales,
says consultant Allan Mottus. "People want to look well
groomed. It is usually one of the last things to go."
   Why "repair"? People like a "therapeutic approach" that
suggests something can be done about aging, says Diana
Temple, a Salomon Brothers analyst. For instance, Elizabeth
Arden says its Ceramide Time Complex Capsules help "repair
the natural barrier function of the skin." Such claims bother
Kim Gandy of the National Organization of Women. "Now, it's
not just `use this if you want to look beautiful.' It's `use
this or you'll stay broken,'" she says.
                                                                                                       

   LIGHTS] CAMERA] AUCTION? Movies snap up books, often
before publishers bid.
   Hollywood scouts new works, muddling the traditional
publishers' auction format with more competition and big
fees. Signed first for films: "The Firm," "Mama's Boy" and
"Private Lies." Doubleday Editor in Chief David Gernert
notes, "I hear as much about what's going on in publishing
and what books are hot by talking to movie people." He says
Doubleday and Dell snapped up "The Firm" for hard-cover and
soft-cover book rights just after the film deal -- for about
one-third of the movie rights.
   The economics of the two industries are coasts apart, says
Howard Kaminsky, head of Hearst Book Group, whose Morrow unit
is publishing "Lies." Sony's Tri-Star Pictures reportedly
bought film rights to "Lies" for over $1 million -- a steep
price for a book-to-be. Mr. Kaminsky says he paid
"considerably less." He adds the studio provides valuable
promotion. A possible triple play for publishers: hardback to
paperback to reissued paperback -- if the film succeeds.
   The three top-selling paperbacks are tied to films:
"Dances With Wolves," "Bonfire of the Vanities" and "Misery."
                                                                                                       

   FAILURE GROUP INC., a Menlo Park, Calif., firm that
examines business catastrophes like engineering or scientific
mishaps, succeeds in getting upgraded to a "buy" from a
"hold" by Prudential-Bache analyst Laura Conigliaro in the
face of recession and war.
                                                                                                       

   SUPERBOWL STATS of the marketing sort from image
consultants Landor Associates in San Francisco: The game
scores highest among 18-to-29-year-olds whose annual incomes
range from $25,000 to $50,000.
                                                                                                       

   SPENDING 101: Stanford University MBA students in a
philanthropy course decide how to allocate $10,000 to
charity. Funds come from the Peninsula Community Foundation,
San Mateo, Calif. Proposals come from other students.
                                                                                                       

   PURCHASING AGENTS eye lean inventory in an increasingly
ailing economy.
   Corporate buyers who stock everything from paperclips to
polypropylene are keeping inventories tight, says Robert
Bretz, head of the National Association of Purchasing
Management's survey group. He feels buyers' recession
strategies may now cut deeper if the war curbs consumer
spending and slices demand for their products.
   For many, supplies remain abundant. "I don't see any
shortages that mean I just can't go right back up" if orders
warrant, says Clarence Vensel of Bakerstown Container, a
steel-drum maker in Pennsylvania. Still, those who need
oil-related commodities worry despite the safeguards of
forward contracts, crackerjack computer inventory control and
stockpiles. "If the war goes on for a long time, or the oil
is bombed, we could be in for a lot of trouble," says one
benzene buyer.
   In December, inventories fell for the 25th consecutive
month, says NAPM.
                                                                                                       

   BRIEFS: Not for the same coffee table: Harry N. Abrams's
facsimile of "The Book of Kells," Ireland's most famous
manuscript, for $18,000 a copy and Pocket Books' "I Am
Elvis," guide to the King's impersonators at $8.95.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
