ID: 167	RANK: 63	SCORE: 4.050623
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920124-0144
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920124-0144.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
   The Lowdown on the Showdown
   ----
   By Frederick C. Klein
</HL>
<DATE>
01/24/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   Minneapolis -- What's Minnesota's state bird? There are
two -- the penguin in winter and the mosquito in summer.
   What does a Minnesotan do during the summer? Do you mean
before or after he shovels his walk?
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Why is Super Bowl XXVI in Minneapolis? Because all the
hotels in Nome were booked for a dog-sled race.
   So there; I have fulfilled my obligation to the
sportswriters' union. Each of us who is here to cover the
Washington Redskins-Buffalo Bills Super Bowl on Sunday is
expected to notice, and comment upon, the fact that frosty
Minny is not Miami, Los Angeles or New Orleans, the
warm-to-warmish sites of most SBs past. It is the least
amount of observation one can expect of a journalist.
   In further point of fact, though, Minneapolis isn't a bad
place. It has a large, clean downtown, made up mostly of tall
buildings in which people work, and many pleasant, clean
suburbs to which they repair when the day is done. It
produced popular liberal politicians when that model was in
vogue. You can get a good steak in a number of places and,
I'm told, a decent plate of spaghetti if you know your way
around. If you are from Fargo, N.D., you'll appreciate the
shopping.
   A rabid sports town Minneapolis is not. A friend of mine
who makes the big-time sports scene tells of having spare
tickets for a couple games in last October's baseball World
Series in Atlanta and here. When he made this known in
Atlanta, he was besieged by mobs waving handfuls of $100
bills. Here, the few people who expressed interest in his
ducats studied them carefully for location and professed
dismay at their face-value price of $45. He says he had to
work hard to sell his for that amount.
   "This is not New York or Philadelphia; people here are
shoppers first and fans second," confirms Dave Huffman, who
had an 11-season career as a Minnesota Viking offensive
lineman and survived with enough wit to host a daily program
on KFAN, the local all-sports radio station. "Before they
spend their money to see a sporting event, they expect a good
seat and a reasonable expectation their team will win. I'm
surprised they didn't ask your friend to guarantee they
wouldn't be sitting behind someone who's extraordinarily
tall."
   But the Super Bowl wasn't awarded to Minneapolis on the
basis of a civic beauty contest, or as a reward for fan
fervor. It is here because the National Football League, of
which the Vikings are a part, has a sizable contingent of
teams from Northern cities that might like to get their own
piece of the game's economic action one day. Their owners
want this so much they are willing to give up a January week
in the sun every decade or so to make their point.
   The game also is here because Minneapolis has an indoor
stadium in which to hold it; whatever the weather outside
here may be on Sunday, the temperature in the Hubert H.
Humphrey Metrodome will be 72 degrees, it will be dry, and
the artificial-turf field will look dandy on television. In
this respect, Minny has an edge over Miami and L.A., where
rain can spoil the NFL's parade.
   The real point of this Super Bowl has to do with the war
between sport and commerce, and I think it is worth making
even though, in the NFL, it has long since been decided in
commerce's favor. Its significant battles were as follows:
the expansion of the league's schedule into the deep-winter
months, the severance of the championship game from the home
cities of the two participants, and the widespread adoption
of the artificial-turf playing field.
   In the latter regard, the Metrodome's surface, like others
of its ilk, consists of half an inch of plastic over
five-eighths of an inch of padding on an asphalt base. That's
like throwing a carpet over a parking lot. "Artificial turf
is tough on every part of your body," notes Monte Coleman, a
Redskins linebacker. "It was not designed with the human
athlete in mind."
   The indoor stadium has been the capstone of the process;
it has turned football generally, and the Super Bowl in
particular, into an entrepreneur's dream -- a generic,
controllable product that can be rolled out anyplace,
anytime. Attendance is no problem; large football stadiums
are regularly filled in places like Fayetteville, Ark., and
Clemson, S.C., and television, the real patron, goes
anywhere. Thus we have SB XXVI in January, in Minneapolis.
   ---
   OK, so now to the game. I don't want to bore you with my
analysis of the contestants' offenses and defenses, or offer
a treatise on the Redskins' vaunted "counter-trey" running
scheme. Similarly, I will refrain from spoiling your
anticipation by telling you who will win.
   Rather, I'll again let the participants speak for
themselves through the Klein Quote Quotient, which is based
on the proposition that the team that gets off the best Hype
Week quotes will prevail on the field. It has predicted the
flat-out winner of six of the eight previous Bowls Super I
have covered, and the point-spread victor seven times. You
could look it up.
   As in the past several of these affairs, there is no
clear-cut winner of this year's KQQ. Both teams seem intent
on depriving their foe of inflammatory bulletin-board
material. Where is Jim McMahon when you need him?
   A couple of Redskins have given good accounts of
themselves. Matt Millen, a veteran linebacker, opined that
his club succeeds because it knows what to look for in
players. "We only hire guys like me -- handsome, elegant,
articulate," he said. Joe Jacoby, the massive offensive
tackle, said that while he appreciates the attention his
unit's "Hogs" nickname brings, he doubts the sanity of the
Washingtonians who attend games wearing pig snouts. "The
really scary thing is that some of those people work for the
government," he cringed.
   But Buffalo, a seven-point underdog, gets the nod on the
efforts of an assistant coach, of all things. He's Chuck
Dickerson, a beefy gray-haired fellow who tutors the Bills'
defensive linemen.
   "I can't speak for anybody else, but I'm takin' these
games one at a time," Chuck growled on Tuesday. "I'm gonna
dance with the guys that brung me. I'm gonna coach to the
best of my abilities. I'm gonna give it 110%, try to make my
contribution, shoot for a career day. If we can't out-finesse
'em, we'll out-gut 'em. Whatever it takes."
   He paused for effect, then concluded, "You people don't
have to do any more interviews now. I've said it all."
   Reason enough to be grateful.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
