ID: 167	RANK: 65	SCORE: 4.026793
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911008-0174
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911008-0174.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
   Skins Keep Winning and Keep Quiet About It
   ----
   By Frederick Klein
</HL>
<DATE>
10/08/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A20
</SO>
<LP>
   Chicago -- In the buttoned-down world of the National
Football League, few have things buttoned down as well as Joe
Gibbs, coach of the Washington Redskins. This, after all, is
a guy who sleeps in his office more nights than not during
the season, the better to ensure that no snippet of game film
goes unwatched and no X goes unO'ed.
   Joe knows the verities: Field position is vital, and not
just the part in the end zone; special teams are, well,
special; and, last but not least, defense creates offense.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Joe also knows that crowing about victories before the
Super One that's scheduled for the last Sunday in January
could be injurious to one's job. So when his unbeaten Skins
beat the Chicago Bears here Sunday afternoon, 20-7, to become
the first team to win six times this season, the bespectacled
NFL technocrat, who has two Super Bowl rings to show for his
10 seasons, eschewed the novice's urge to go
cock-a-doodle-doo.
   "We are one game closer to what our goal is, and that is
the way we are going to take it," he said. "If we start
thinking that we're better than we are, we're going to get in
real trouble. I think any team could beat us, and I think we
could beat any team, and I think that's the way it is in the
NFL today."
   Pete Rozelle couldn't have put it better.
   In truth, though, no one could blame the Skins for taking
just a peek down the path that this season will end in the
frosty North (Minneapolis on Jan. 26) instead of the tropical
South (and just whose idea was that, anyway?), because that
appears to be where they are going. In handing the Bears
their second loss in six outings, Washington topped a team
that's known for its persistence if not its skills, and doing
it on the road put an exclamation point on the effort.
   Moreover, the Redskins did it by playing Gibbsball to a T,
which means that they were so neat they needed no erasers to
rub away mistakes. They made sure the Bears began every
possession in their own territory, seven times (of 12) inside
their 25-yard line. They punted well and covered same
immaculately. They lost no fumbles and permitted no
quarterback sacks, and quarterback Mark Rypien's only
interception left the Bears with the ball on their own five.
   And when they had the ball, the Skins milked it for all it
was worth, making the crowd of 65,000 in prematurely chilly
Soldier Field squirm with exasperation. In one second-quarter
drive, which produced the touchdown that proved to be the
game winner, they faced four third-down situations and
converted all of them, racking up 64 of their 74 yards on
that penultimate play. The last, which gave them a 10-0 lead,
was a 26-yard pass from Rypien to the veteran Art Monk in the
right corner of the end zone on third and eight.
   That Washington made good on eight of 17 third- or
fourth-down plays in all was attributable mostly to Rypien,
whose continued development has been a key to the team's
success. This is a guy who showed up in the capital all but
unannounced, having been a sixth-round choice out of
way-out-west Washington State, in the 1986 draft. Most of
what early curiousity he stirred was because of his 6-foot-4,
235-pound frame, more appropriate for a linebacker than a
quarterback. Curiously, he proved brittle early on, missing
most of his first two seasons with injuries.
   Rypien finally got to play in 1988 when the incumbents,
Doug Williams and Jay Schroeder, proved inconsistent, but to
Gibbs's dismay he adopted the same tendency. One week he
could pass for 401 yards, as he did against the Bears in a
38-14 romp in 1989; another week he could throw five
interceptions, as he did against the Bears a year later (his
team won anyway, 10-9).
   This season, though, Rypien has been the soul of
consistency, coming here ranked second in the NFL's complex
QB rating system and leading the league in the key stat of
average gain per pass. "Mark gets more mature, more confident
and a better leader every week," says Monk. "Our feeling of
trust in him keeps growing."
   It doesn't hurt Rypien a bit that the fellows on the
receiving end of his tosses are among the best in
footballdom. They are Monk, Ricky Sanders and Gary Clark, and
they brought a total of 23 years' professional experience
into this campaign. They showed up here with 45 catches among
them, and left with 60. Nobody else but running back Earnest
Byner caught a Rypien heave Sunday. He threw 31 times and
connected on 18 for 168 yards and two TDs.
   It was fortunate for the Redskins that they passed well,
because the Bears, a team that has done little well except
win, pretty much bottled up a running attack that was ranked
second in the league going in. In fact, the Bears played
pretty good D all around, and managed to pull within three
points, 7-10, on their only sustained drive of the day, a
62-yarder capped by a Neal Anderson touchdown dive with less
than two minutes left in the third quarter.
   The home team held on Washington's next possession, and
started to move again. But on a second-down-and-six from his
own 36, Bear QB Jim Harbaugh had his pass tipped at the line
by defensive end Eric Williams and intercepted by his line
partner, Fred Stokes. The Redskins drove in from there, with
a Rypien-to-Monk 11-yarder, on a crossing pattern called a
"scram dig" (no fooling) providing the clincher. A couple
more interceptions kept the Bears from making the final score
closer.
   Gibbs-led Skins won Super Bowls in 1982 and '87, and while
he isn't much for comparisons he did opine, postgame, that
his current product has as good a defense as any of his big
winners.
   Linebacker Wilbur Marshall, a star of the Bears' 1985
Super Bowl champs who went to Washington in 1988 as a rare
NFL free agent when the Skins met a price Chicago wouldn't,
summed up why his present team has passed his former one.
"It's willing to do what it takes to win, and that means
whatever," said he. "We leave as little as possible to
chance."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
