ID: 167	RANK: 71	SCORE: 3.905928
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911224-0100
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911224-0100.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
   How the System Worked in Texas
   ----
   By Frederick C. Klein
</HL>
<DATE>
12/24/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A5
</SO>
<LP>
   Dallas -- Jimmy Johnson, who coaches the National Football
League Dallas Cowboys, and Jerry Glanville, who coaches the
Atlanta Falcons, don't agree on much. Johnson is a carefully
coiffed corporate type who plays 'em one at a time, loves
watching game films and, publicly, emits nothing but respect
for foes. Glanville is a self-styled renegade who parades
around in black, feuds with fellow coaches and leaves tickets
for Elvis.
   On Sunday, though, this ill-matched pair agreed
(separately, of course) on one thing: The System works.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "We weren't sharp today, but we won, and that makes us
11-5 {in the won-lost column}," noted Johnson after his
playoff-bound Cowboys beat Glanville's Falcons, 31-27, in a
Texas Stadium thriller. "That's quite an accomplishment
considering we were 1-15 two years ago, and everybody was
laughing."
   Across the way, Glanville was congratulating his
playoff-bound crew for a 10-6 season even as he was fuming at
the game's officials for a call that, if it had gone the
other way, coulda, woulda, and, he said, shoulda given it the
win. "I couldn't be prouder of this team," he declared. "When
you remember where we started {3-13 in 1989, the year before
he marched into Georgia}, you know how far we've come."
   With its downside-up annual college-player draft, and
scheduling reprieves for the down-in-the-standings, that sort
of improvement is supposed to be commonplace in a league
whose initials, Glanville says, stand for Not For Long. It
isn't, because it's easier for teams to talk about changing
their spot than doing it. But in the Cowboys and Falcons, who
have been among this season's exclamation points, the
league's honchos can say it can be done, even if it takes
some doing.
   For the Cowboys, America's Team before Ted Turner owned a
UHF station, the winning season and playoff berth end six
years of Christmases at home. This bunch was a playoff
fixture, and occasional Super Bowl champ, when Tom Landry,
the man in the snap-brimmed hat, ran things on the field. But
after three straight losing campaigns (1986-88), Landry was
run off and Johnson was run in, from the U. of Miami. It took
two more years in the dumper for him to turn things around.
   The Falcons took even longer. Their last winning record
and playoff entry was in 1982, nine years and four coaches
ago. That's an eon in football time.
   On paper, as well as on the field Sunday, the Cowboys look
to have a bit the better of it. Their offense, the key parts
of which were lassoed in recent drafts, boasts the league's
newly crowned best in moving the ball by both land and air.
Their man on the ground is stumpy Emmitt Smith, a human
billiard ball out of the U. of Florida. The Cowboys dialed
433 running plays this season and Smith got the call on 366
of them. He wound up with 1,563 yards, 15 more than Detroit's
Barry Sanders.
   Smith's Sunday numbers were 32 carries for 160 yards and
two touchdowns, including the one that gave the Cowboys their
final edge. He later said he'd celebrate his rushing title by
buying Rolex watches for his blockers. "Not bad for somebody
who was too slow and too small," he grinned. Not to mention
somebody named Smith.
   The 'Boys air marshal is wide receiver Michael Irvin. His
1991 yardage total of 1,523 was the NFL's seventh-highest
single-season mark, ever. On Sunday, he caught 10 passes for
169 yards and one TD, and praise from Atlanta's Tim McKyer,
who tried to cover him. "Irvin was being Irvin -- pushing,
shoving, grabbing, doing whatever it took to get free," said
McKyer. I think that's praise.
   One must make allowances for the Falcons' griping, because
that's their way. Their coach, Mr. Glanville, is of the
opinion (rightly, I think) that there's less difference among
NFL teams in talent than in attitude, and he's seen to it
that his boys give away nothing in the Nasty Dept. His lineup
includes the likes of McKyer, Deon Sanders and Andre Rison,
who lead the league in the unofficial categories of finger
pointing and celebratory boogeying.
   It helps that some of the Falcons can play. With Bo
Jackson out of football now, the
baseball-and-football-playing Sanders is America's foremost
two-sport jock. Like Bo, Neon Deon is much better at
football. Unlike Bo, he's versatile within the gridiron
sport, playing both defensive back and wide receiver, and
returning kicks. He did 'em all Sunday, and the ruling that
his diving catch in the end zone with 11 seconds left wasn't
legal because he'd run out of bounds before making it, turned
the game.
   While the Cowboys have thrived in the draft, the Falcons
made their biggest jump by avoiding it. They had first dip in
the 1990 pool, but traded it for wide-receiver Rison and
offensive lineman Chris Hinton, Pro Bowlers both, and a '91
choice that turned into Mike Pritchard, a useful receiver.
Throw in Mike Kenn and Bill Fralic, a couple of
offensive-line vets, and Chris Miller, a rapidly developing
fifthyear quarterback who's only 26 years old, and you have a
pretty good group.
   On a day that started rainy and ended bright, the teams
gave a crowd of 60,962 here its money's worth in the first
quarter, which included scoring passes of 58 and 67 yards,
and a 102-yard kickoff return by the Cowboys' Alexander
Wright. The 'Boys led 24-14 at one point, only to be passed,
24-27. Smith's six-yard TD run early in quarter four set the
final score, although Miller drove Atlanta from its 18 yard
line to the Dallas 16 and had three shots at the end zone
before time expired.
   Whom the Cowboys will meet in next weekend's playoffs
depends on who won last night's Chicago-San Francisco game.
Johnson said it didn't matter. "We're just happy to be
going," said he.
   The Falcons will play New Orleans, and Glanville, as
usual, took a different tack. "We try real hard never to lose
two in a row," he said. "If we succeed, that'd get us by next
week, wouldn't it?"
</TEXT>
</DOC>
