ID: 167	RANK: 77	SCORE: 3.801309
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910122-0144
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910122-0144.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
   Giants Kick Their Way Into Super Bowl
   ----
   By Frederick C. Klein
</HL>
<DATE>
01/22/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   San Francisco -- There were many reasons why the New York
Giants defeated the San Francisco 49ers here Sunday
afternoon, thereby earning a trip to the Super Bowl in Tampa.
Here are some of them:
   The Giants scored 15 points, all on (ugh) field goals by
Matt Bahr, while the Niners scored but 13.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   They ran with the football and passed it, while the Niners
only passed.
   Their defense contained the Niners' speedy pass receivers
as well as anyone has in years, in part by "chucking" them on
or just beyond the line of scrimmage. Those chucks should not
be compared with what one does to the underside of a baby's
chin.
   Their "water torture" offense produced enough yards in
drips and drabs to control the ball for almost two-thirds of
the contest. This upstaged SF's Joe Show by keeping
quarterback Montana offstage early, and an injury, on a
jolting sack by Leonard Marshall, filled that function late.
The Niners' Roger Craig, usually trustworthy, fumbled late in
the last quarter with his team ahead by a point and driving,
allowing the Giants to set up their winning, no-time-left
field goal.
   And then there was Mr. Reasons, Gary by name. He's the
Giant linebacker whose 30-yard, fourth-quarter rumble, on the
kind of fake punt your high-school team pulled, was his
team's longest gain from scrimmage. It set up Giant field
goal No. 4, without which field goal No. 5 wouldn't have been
the game winner.
   "It's my option to call that play {from his blocking spot
behind the line}," Reasons said later. "They'd lined up
strong left on a couple of our punts, leaving the right side
free. I figured it was now or never, and the hole opened so
big even a slow, white linebacker like me could get through."
   It was fitting that a linebacker emerged as an offensive
star of a game that Giant coach Bill Parcells said might not
have pleased "the artistic people," whoever they are, but was
one that "Woody Hayes and Bear Bryant would have loved,"
especially Woody. On the positive side, it put the
Parcellians back in the professional football championship
final for the first time since 1987. On the negative, it
meant that the 49ers, the game's best team of the 1980s, will
not be playing in their third straight Super Bowl or their
fifth in the past 10 years.
   In Tampa a week hence, the Giants will encounter the
suddenly mighty Buffalo Bills, 51-3 tramplers of the Los
Angeles Raiders in Sunday's early semifinal. This would make
Super Bowl XXV an all-New York matchup if you ignore the fact
that the Jints make their home in New Jersey.
   This season's extension of the National Football League's
regular campaign to 17 weeks from 16, done to increase its
television exposure and revenues, means that the Super Bowl
will be played with a one-week break for hype instead of the
traditional two weeks. This could work to the benefit of the
SB first-timer Bills by giving them less time to become
persuaded that the field in Tampa will be longer than usual,
or the goal posts narrower.
   Sunday's game had some unusual aspects, too, caused by the
Persian Gulf War. Police security was much in evidence,
banners were banned to preclude discord between people
displaying pro- and anti-war sentiments, and the 65,000 fans
at Candlestick Park sat through timeouts for television news
broadcasts in addition to ones for commercials. Unlike their
brethren in other sports, who have continued their schedules
with a minimum of to-do since war broke out, the NFL went
through considerable public hand-wringing before giving the
go-ahead for Sunday's contests. But it left the Candlestick
throng and an Armed Services band and color guard standing
for several minutes, anticipating the National Anthem, while
a painkiller ad played out on the home screens.
   Once the game commenced, though, folks who like
grind-it-out football got their money's worth. San Francisco
entered the fray a one-touchdown favorite, mostly off the
expected brilliance of Montana. But by continual harassment
of that worthy, and his passing targets, the Giants kept the
lead within reach until they could attain it, on the clock's
last tick. The Giants won more on balance and grit than
individual luster. Veteran running back Ottis Anderson, short
on dash but long on durability, led all rushers with 67
yards, 28 more than the 49ers could muster.
   Quarterback Jeff Hostetler, again filling in for the
injured Phil Simms, showed speed afoot and a nice passing
touch (15 of 27 for 176 yards). Hostetler was knocked out of
the game for a series with a hyperextended knee early in the
fourth quarter, but returned to engineer his team's winning
drive. When Montana left minutes later, breathing shallowly
with a bruised sternum caused by a tackle-from-behind by the
huge Marshall (it looked like Joe suffered whiplash), it was
for good.
   The game turned on two plays: Reasons's fake-punt dash
that led to the field goal that cut the Niner lead to 13-12,
and the Craig fumble, caused by a swipe by Giant lineman Erik
Howard and recovered by linebacker Lawrence Taylor. It came
on a 49er first-down play on the Giant 40-yard line with just
over 2 1/2 minutes left. One more first down and SF could
have run out the clock. Then Hostetler, a placekick holder
for most of an unillustrious, seven-year pro career, passed
19 yards to Mark Bavaro and 13 yards to Stephen Baker. Three
runs ran the clock down to four seconds, and Bahr, who has
gotten his kicks in several previous NFL stops, was
successful from 42 yards, with Hostetler holding.
   Simms's injured foot isn't expected to heal by next
Sunday, meaning Hostetler will lead his mates against
Buffalo. The long-faced U. of West Virginia grad later said
it was that prospect that led him to arise and return to play
after his injury.
   "The knee hurt, but at that point of the game, of the
season and of my career I wasn't going to let it keep me
out," he said.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
