ID: 167	RANK: 85	SCORE: 3.723649
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910125-0148
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910125-0148.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
   Hype Week: Security, Hospitality, Quips
   ----
   By Frederick C. Klein
</HL>
<DATE>
01/25/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10
</SO>
<LP>
   Tampa, Fla. -- On Monday, people entering the downtown
Hyatt Hotel here, a prime news-media roost for the Super
Bowl, were greeted by a banner over the entrance that read
"Hyatt Regency Tampa Honors Dr. Martin Luther King." Monday
was the holiday celebrating Dr. King's birthday, but in case
anybody missed the point the sign was up Tuesday, too.
   It was, of course, a sign of the times; the National
Football League, which for XXV years has strived to make
Super Bowl week different from all other weeks, went
political last year by threatening to yank the 1993 game from
Phoenix if Arizona voters didn't approve a measure
establishing the King holiday in that state. They didn't, and
one can only assume the league will do what it said it would.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   For better or worse, the NFL chose that issue. This week,
it is dealing with a political matter not of its choosing,
the Gulf War. Again, it's walking a tightrope anchored on one
end by the exigencies of commerce and on the other by the
desire to do the "right" thing. The interesting part is that
it helped stretch that tightrope itself by its past
posturings over the importance of the game, and the success
of same.
   To understand the NFL's predicament, one also should know
that the league is extraordinarily self-conscious; as far as
I recall, no other American sporting entity ever sponsored a
contest inviting high-school students to write essays on its
place in American history. It seemingly cannot do what our
other sports organizations have done since the war began,
which is, simply, to recognize that people go about their
business in the most trying of times, and to do the same.
   Thus, the NFL publicly agonized over postponing or
canceling last Sunday's conference-championship playoffs
until the morning of game day, and says it will do so again
this Sunday. "We expect to play Sunday's Super Bowl game
between the {Buffalo} Bills and {New York} Giants as
scheduled . . . {but} we will take events in the Middle East
into account up to kickoff," a league official announced.
Paul Tagliabue, the NFL's president, was said to have
consulted the White House before allowing last week's games
to proceed.
   Predictably, the latter intelligence was greeted with some
derision. "When Tagliabue said he called the president, he
probably meant Neal Pilson," said one of my press-box
colleagues before the Giants-San Francisco 49ers game. Mr.
Pilson is president of CBS Sports, which televised that game.
I've heard the same joke this week, with the name of Dennis
Swanson substituted for Mr. Pilson's. Mr. Swanson is
president of ABC Sports, which will televise the Super Bowl.
   In fact, the Super Bowl would be hard to put off. Unlike
the baseball World Series, the location of which is in doubt
until a few days before it is played, the Super Bowl is
scheduled years in advance, amid much hoopla. Hotel rooms are
booked accordingly, en bloc, and elaborate entertaining, much
of it corporate-sponsored, is planned around the game. The
NFL courts such activities, in part to assert its place among
the business elite, and would be loath to undercut them.
   Indeed, while the league has canceled as inappropriate its
gala "Commissioner's Party" Friday night, for which thousands
of shrimp, oysters and crabs annually give their lives, all
42 companies that have booked tents around Tampa Stadium for
pre- or post-game hospitality Sunday are proceeding as
planned, according to a spokesman for Regency Productions,
which runs the tent village.
   Other Super Bowl modifications will be made in the name of
what the league calls "perspective." In the half-time show,
staged by Disney, Mickey Mouse will wear red, white and blue;
each member of the cast will wear a yellow ribbon; and a
giant, inflated Pinocchio will be substituted for a
"Moroccan-themed" tiger balloon.
   And regrettably, but probably necessarily, stadium
security will be strict. Among other things, a six-foot-high
chain-link fence has been erected around the premises,
concrete barriers will restrict traffic flow, and spectators
will have to submit to metal-detection search before being
admitted. FBI and SWAT teams will be on hand, somewhere.
Blimp traffic will be tightly regulated -- remember "Black
Sunday"?
   War concerns even have penetrated Hype Week press
conferences. To their credit, most Bills and Giants players
have handled such queries well, saying that, like the rest of
us, they hope the conflict is settled quickly and
successfully, and with minimum loss of life.
   Sometimes, players' answers have been better than the
questions. Asked if he was "distracted" by the war news,
James Lofton, the Bills' veteran pass receiver, replied in
the negative. "It's not a distraction with me, it's a
preoccupation," he said. "Isn't it with everybody?"
   ---
   There almost certainly will be a game on Sunday, and, for
a change, it could be a good one. Therefore, I shall go about
my business and apply the Klein Quote Quotient, the premise
of which is that the team that gets off the best Hype Week
quips will win. Either in my mind or in print, it has
predicted the winners of six of the seven Super Bowls I've
covered, and the pointspread winner every time. Honest.
   The choice was tough, but the KQQ points to Buffalo. This
is despite the efforts of such guys as Giant safety Dave
Duerson, who, in answer to a question on how he and his mates
might disrupt the Bills' no-huddle offense, said it would be
nice if they could intercept the center snap.
   But Lofton carried the week for his team by taking full
advantage of his status, at 34, as the game's oldest player.
"I'm pretty old," he said. "I remember the days before ESPN
and USA Today. I was at the first Super Bowl. My dad took me,
but I tell my teammates I played and they believe me.
   "Has my game changed over the years? Oh, yeah. I used to
be faster. Taller, too. But this season has been very
satisfying, especially being named AARP player of the year."
   But seriously folks . . . Nah, why be serious? It's just a
football game, you know.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
