ID: 167	RANK: 94	SCORE: 3.605987
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920128-0115
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920128-0115.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
   A Super Hat Trick for Coach Gibbs
   ----
   By Frederick C. Klein
</HL>
<DATE>
01/28/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   Minneapolis -- I visited the ice palace at the St. Paul
Winter Carnival last week, and I can only call it super. A
16-story structure in the style of a medieval castle, made
entirely of blocks of ice, surely deserves that encomium,
although I'm glad I won't be around when it melts.
   The annual National Football League championship, the
latest edition of which was staged inside the Metrodome here
Sunday night, is called "super" before it is played, but it
usually is not. It's an athletic contest, and the
competitiveness of such things tends to be unpredictable. If
truth in advertising were applied strictly, it probably would
have to be called the Question-a-Bowl, or, in light of its
go-anywhere nature, the Port-a-Bowl. But it's only sports, so
it doesn't merit that kind of attention.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   What happened Sunday was the same thing that has happened
in most of the previous 25 games that carried the Super Bowl
label: One team played super and the other did not. The party
of the first part was the Washington Redskins, who defeated
the Buffalo Bills, 37-24. This was the 18th of 26 SBs in
which the winner beat the loser by at least 10 points, a
serviceable definition of a decisive margin.
   The truth of this one was that the Skins were better than
their scoring margin indicated. They had a touchdown taken
away when the men in the TV-replay booth ruled that Art Monk
came down with the edge of his tippy-toe out of the end zone
after he'd taken a pass from Mark Rypien for what would have
been the game's first score, and the Skins wound up not
tallying at all when the center snap went awry on a short
field-goal try. The ruling was the sort of
inspection-by-microscope that, I think, is ludicrously out of
place in the rough and tumble of the gridiron. And they led
37-10 before a couple of late Bills' scores earned them a
measure of respectability.
   Washington won because it dominated the line of scrimmage
when it had the ball, and when it didn't. The key statistics
here were its 125-43 edge in yards rushing, and 5-0 advantage
in quarterback sacks. Its defensive edge also was apparent
downfield, where Skin defenders smacked the Buffalo receivers
around with abandon. That practice had a downside-pass --
interference penalties figured in two of the three Bills
touchdowns -- but Rich Petitbon, the Skins defensive boss,
shrugged those off as the price one pays, and said he thought
his gang had gotten the better of the transaction.
   Buffalo Coach Marv Levy, whose team had lost to the New
York Giants in a rare SB thriller last year, attempted to
explain Sunday's larger setback in terms of game plans,
offensive-defensive balance and shifts of momentum. His
center, Kent Hull, who'd been in the midst of the fray, saw
it differently. "We went from angry to disappointed to
embarrassed," he said. "They were on top of us all day."
   "I don't remember everything about the game, but what I do
remember I don't like," said Bills quarterback Jim Kelly, who
spent much of the evening on his back.
   The game's most-valuable-player award went to Rypien, the
strong-armed winning quarterback. He played well, completing
18 of 33 passes for 292 yards and two touchdowns, but a
couple of observations seem pertinent here. One is that,
being the most conspicuous guys on the field, QBs usually get
most of the credit when their teams win (and most of the
blame when they lose); just as good an MVP case could have
been made for Washington linebacker Wilber Marshall, who made
or assisted in 11 tackles, caused two fumbles, broke up a
couple of passes, and was generally nasty to the Bills. The
other is that this was the third Super Bowl win recorded by
Washington under Coach Joe Gibbs, and each had a different
quarterback.
   The bespectacled Gibbs, adjudged to be the NFL's foremost
technocrat, later passed up an opportunity to use that fact
for self-aggrandizement. "It just shows we've had good
quarterbacks," he said of Rypien and his previous Super Bowl
signal callers, Joe Theismann (1983) and Doug Williams ('88).
"But," he added, "we've had good offensive lines and
receivers, too, and good defensive players."
   And pretty good coaching.
   The last time the Skins were in a Super Bowl -- in 1988 --
they broke open the game with a 35-point second quarter en
route to a 55-10 decision over Denver. They got less than
half that many in the period Sunday, but it was enough for a
17-0 halftime lead.
   The play that iced the win, though, was Buffalo's first
from scrimmage in the second half. Kelly looked to pass from
his own 20-yard line, but instead saw the helmet of Skins
linebacker Andre Collins headed for his sternum. He unloaded
hastily and Kurt Gouveia, another Washington linebacker,
intercepted and returned the ball to the Bills' two-yard
line. Touchdown specialist Gerald Riggs ran it in from there.
   Buffalo's offense fired up for a field goal and touchdown
later in the third quarter, only to have Washington pull away
again with an 11-play, 79-yard drive that ended with a
Rypien-to-Gary-Clark TD pass. Rypien passes accounted for 60
of those yards, with the last one covering 30. Two Redskins
field goals made it 37-10 before Buffalo got in its last
licks.
   Defensive coach Petitbon said that the Collins blitz play
was concocted by Larry Peccatiello, of his staff, on the bus
on the way to the stadium, and hadn't been tried in practice.
He declined to go into detail except to say the maneuver was
different from what his boys had been doing. Who knows when
opposing scouts may be listening?
   Thurman Thomas, the Buffalo running back who was supposed
to help block blitzing linebackers, said pretty much the same
thing. "We were set up to handle two people {blitzers}, but
three came," he averred.
   That'll stand as the Buffalo epitaph for the evening, I
think.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
