ID: 182	RANK: 51	SCORE: 5.581083
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900801-0208 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-08-01-90 1054EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>a a PM-AbortionBattleground Adv07   08-01 1087</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Abortion Battleground, Adv07,1127</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv07</NOTE>
<NOTE>For release Tues PMs, Aug. 7, and thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>Corpus Christi Becoming Focus of Anti-Abortion Activism</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By JOEL WILLIAMS</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>CORPUS CHRISTI, Texas (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   In just nine months, the Roman
Catholic bishop has excommunicated two abortion clinic employees,
the sheriff has prayed on the sidewalk while police pulled his wife
and other anti-abortion protesters from a clinic doorway, and
petitioners succeeded in forcing a vote on a city charter amendment
that would declare human life begins at conception.
   ``The Holy Spirit is doing something in Corpus Christi,'' says
Rex Moses, the man inspiring much of the anti-abortion activity.
``I think it's happening because God has picked Corpus Christi as a
beachhead.''
   His opponents say it's Moses, not God, who picked Corpus
Christi, which is Latin for ``body of Christ.''
   ``I think Rex Moses targeted the city,'' said Amanda Stukenberg,
president of South Texans for Choice, an abortion rights group. ``I
think the name itself helped make it a battleground.''
   Moses might agree. ``All names are significant,'' he said,
noting that reporters often ask him if Moses really is his name
``because it all seems to improbable.''
   ``God matched this person with that name,'' he said.
   It was in November that Moses, 35, brought his anti-abortion
crusade from Austin to this Gulf Coast city of nearly 300,000,
which is predominantly Catholic and Hispanic.
   Moses said he formed Body of Christ Rescue after losing the
support of religious leaders in Austin. He was convicted three
times there of criminal trespassing for blocking access to women's
services clinics with his Austin Rescue group.
   Moses has appealed a year's worth of jail sentences, but said he
expects he'll eventually have to serve the time. He asserts that
trespassing is not illegal if the trespasser is trying to save the
unborn from ``imminent harm.''
   One of Moses' first actions upon arriving in Corpus Christi was
a ``rescue.'' Twelve people were arrested for trying to keep
patients and staff out of one of the city's two clinics, where a
total of about 3,000 abortions were performed last year.
   But Moses wasn't arrested then, nor in the other 18 local clinic
blockades in which he has participated. And police have arrested
only a handful of his protesters.
   Police Chief Henry Garrett said only those who assault police
officers or force their way into the clinics will be taken into
custody. Mass arrests would only give the protesters more
publicity, he said.
   The police chief said he does not foresee having to arrest
Sheriff Jim Hickey or Hickey's wife, Jan, two staunch Moses allies.
   Hickey surprised visitors to the sheriff's department earlier
this year with Moses posters featuring a photograph of a
decapitated fetus and the caption, ``Legal Abortion Kills Baby
Boy.''
   Hickey won't send deputies to help police clear access to the
clinics, saying, ``I would be aiding in murder of babies if I did.''
   The Catholic sheriff credits Moses with inspiring him and others
in the city to get more involved in the anti-abortion movement.
   Tracy Cassidy, chairwoman of the Human Family Committee, which
sponsored the petition drive to force the vote next Jan. 19 on the
city charter amendment, is another Moses ally. She said she knows
adding a preamble to the charter would have no legal weight, but
``we will be making a statement as a community that we respect
human life in all stages.''
   The declaration states, in part, that ``Human life begins at
conception and extends to the moment of natural death.''
   South Texans for Choice will fight it.
   ``Statements about one's philosophies or religious beliefs do
not belong in the city charter,'' Ms. Stukenberg said.
   Moses helped promote ``a religious coalition that is directing
its congregations how to vote on a secular political document,''
she said.
   Rachel Vargas, one of the Corpus Christi residents
excommunicated by Bishop Rene Gracida, also blames Moses for the
stepped-up anti-abortion activism.
   Ms. Vargas links her excommunication to a statement she gave
last December during a Moses-organized ``rescue,'' when she told a
local Catholic newspaper that she was a ``pro-choice Catholic.''
   She said she believes more contraception would reduce the number
of abortions and that ``God breathes life into a baby at the moment
of birth.'' Moses and many of his followers oppose all forms of
artificial birth control.
   Gracida ``certainly had to make an example out of me, since I
publicly stated that I am a pro-choice Catholic,'' said Ms. Vargas,
who cried during an interview six weeks after her June
excommunication, which deprives her of church sacraments, including
Communion.
   ``Someone had to be a scapegoat,'' she said.
   Dr. Eduardo Aquino, an obstetrician, also received an
excommunication decree from the bishop earlier this year.
   Elva Bustamante, director of the New Women's clinic where Aquino
performs abortions twice a week, has received two warning letters
from the bishop, but no final decree. She sent the bishop a letter
last month telling him she would not quit her job, as he had
demanded.
   Church law states that those participating in abortions
automatically excommunicate themselves, with or without an official
decree from a bishop.
   Moses devoted his life to the anti-abortion cause shortly after
converting from what he calls ``fundamentalist quasi-Pentecostal''
beliefs to Catholicism in 1988.
   He gave away most of his possessions, he said, quit his
$200,000-a-year job designing pension plans, and sold his share of
the company for $1. He got rid of his assets in anticipation of the
lawsuits he believed would follow his protests, he said.
   He now owes more than $1 million in judgments to an Austin
clinic and an Austin police officer injured while trying to lift a
300-pound protester.
   He said he, his wife and their four children survive on
occasional cash and food donations, and his office space and duplex
are leased from former City Councilman Cliff Zarsky, a longtime
abortion foe.
   Moses contends his activities here have left the city with far
fewer doctors willing to perform abortions, and Ms. Vargas also
believes that many local prominent pro-choice figures now are
afraid to speak out.
   But not all members of the religious community, even those
opposed to abortion, support his tactics, Moses concedes. They cite
the biblical instruction to obey the laws of the land.
   ``The guy who wrote that was in jail when he wrote that,'' Moses
responds, referring to Apostle Paul. ``If a lot of people agreed
with what I am doing, I wouldn't have to be doing it.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Tues PMs, Aug. 7</NOTE>
</DOC>
