ID: 182	RANK: 56	SCORE: 5.490952
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880916-0158 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-16-88 1532EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a PM-HurricaneGilbert 7thLd-Writethru a0683 09-16 1049</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Hurricane Gilbert, 7th Ld - Writethru, a0683,1071</SECOND>
<HEAD>Death Toll Rises To 58 As Hurricane Gilbert Aims For Texas</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: SUBS 16th graf, `At 11 ...' to UPDATE position.</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos CIC1, VICX1, LaserGraphic</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By JOEL WILLIAMS</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>BROWNSVILLE, Texas (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Hurricane Gilbert's leading edge
lashed the coast and its 120 mph winds swirled toward landfall
today, as officials in the Caribbean and Mexico tallied billions in
damage from the giant storm blamed for at least 58 deaths.
   Thousands of residents along Texas' 370-mile coast, many
evacuated to higher ground after piling sandbags in the doorways of
their homes and boarding up windows, huddled in shelters and waited
for the news:
   When and where would Gilbert hit?
   ``We are going to sit and wait and pray for the best,'' said
Larry Brown, director of transportation for Brownsville, where
officials estimated that as much as one-fourth of the city of
110,000 could end up in emergency shelters.
   By Thursday evening, Port Isabel, a city of about 5,000 just
east of Brownsville, was a virtual ghost town. Officials also
evacuated the coastal resorts of South Padre Island and Galveston.
   More than a half dozen tornadoes accompanying the hurricane hit
the Brownsville area today in advance of the center of the storm,
blowing over at least two homes and injuring one person, a boy who
suffered a minor head wound. Scattered flooding was reported.
   Police were ordered to leave North Padre Island when water began
flooding the causeway to the mainland. The city had asked everyone
to leave the island but police Chief Robert Olson said he had heard
that about 10 to 15 residents remained there overnight.
   An estimated 25,000 people evacuated low-lying villages in
southern Louisiana and officials said they wouldn't let people
return home until they were sure Gilbert had run ashore elsewhere.
   A Coast Guard helicopter today rescued five people from a
fishing boat near Port Isabel and the Coast Guard sent a search and
rescue boat after seven people on a boat in Matagorda Bay. The boat
was found beached with no one aboard, and officials were searching
along the coast for the occupants.
   By early today, the storm had weakened since its destructive
assault on the Caribbean, and despite forecasters' predictions
Gilbert showed little sign of strengthening as it headed for the
area around Brownsville at the southern tip of Texas.
   ``It has not strengthened since it left Mexico, but we still
believe some strengthening is possible. It's not ever going to get
back up to Category 5 strength with 175 mph winds, but it very
possibly could reach 130 or 140 mph,'' said Jim Gross, a hurricane
specialist at the National Hurricane Center in Coral Gables, Fla.
   The Hurricane Center said if Gilbert continued in the same
direction, the eye of the storm would come ashore near the
Texas-Mexico border sometime this evening.
   According to a rough estimate, the eye of the hurricane will hit
the coast between 5 p.m. and 9 p.m., about 50 to 60 miles south of
Brownsville, said Dave Petrovich, a weather service forecaster in
Miami.
   Winds gusting up to 60 mph, accompanied by rain and squalls,
began pounding South Texas and northern Mexico today as preview of
the fury of Gilbert, which has left at least 58 dead, $8 billion in
damage and more than half a million homeless on several Caribbean
islands and Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula.
   The National Weather Service issued a hurricane warning for
Mexico's northern coast and the southern half of the Texas coast
from Brownsville to Port O'Connor, including 250,000-resident
Corpus Christi. A hurricane watch remained in effect for the
remainder of the Texas coast, from Port O'Connor north to Port
Arthur near Louisiana.
   At 2 p.m. CDT, the storm center was near latitude 24 north,
longitude 97.1 west, or about 130 miles south-southeast of
Brownsville, moving northwest at 12 mph, with maximum sustained
winds of 120 mph and accompanied by a 10- to 15-inch rainfall.
   Under state law, Brownsville officials could not order people to
evacuate their homes, but police Sgt. Dean Poos noted, ``Where are
you going to put 100,000 people anyway?''
   ``We have all kinds of people here, from those that need
Pampers, to those that need wheelchairs,'' said Ersel Lantz, who
was heading the Red Cross effort at the city's civic auditorium.
   Gov. Bill Clements dispatched Texas National Guard units to
McAllen, Alice and Corpus Christi.
   ``In terms of preparations, there's really nothing left to be
done,'' said Judy Oestrich, assistant American Red Cross chapter
manager in Corpus Christi. ``We're doing what we do _ taking care
of people.''
   Juan Garza, city manager of Corpus Christi, said 12 to 15
evacuation centers are full, with a total of 26 to be set up if
necessary.
   ``I think we're ready. What you do for a hurricane is you don't
manage it; you just kind of endure it,'' he said today on CBS's
``This Morning.''
   In Matamoros, Mexico, a city of 280,000 on the northeastern U.S.
border across from Brownsville, thousands of people crowded into
shelters set up at schools, churches and public buildings after the
hurricane left 17 dead in the Yucatan Peninsula.
   On the island city of Galveston, scene of the worst natural
disaster in U.S. history when a hurricane hit in 1900, killing
6,000, about 40 percent of the island's 65,000 residents were
evacuated by early today, said Galveston public information officer
David Hoover.
   To the north in Houston, NASA's Johnson Space Center all but
shut down Thursday, with most of its 9,000 employees sent home to
prepare for Gilbert.
   And in south Louisiana, 25,000 people fled the most vulnerable
villages despite being out of the high-danger area.
   Gilbert's sustained winds have died down from 175 mph in the
Caribbean to 120 mph after it passed over Yucatan on Wednesday. Its
ranking was lowered from Category 5 _ the most fierce _ to a
Category 3.
   The storm's earlier landfalls left at least 26 people dead in
Jamaica, five in the Dominican Republic and 10 in Haiti.
   In addition, a 3-year-old Rockport, Texas, boy drowned early
today after falling off his family's shrimp boat as it was being
moved to safe mooring. Calhoun County Sheriff's office spokesman
Rick Prush said the boy's death was indirectly related to Gilbert.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
