ID: 182	RANK: 78	SCORE: 5.150621
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880914-0202 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-14-88 2154EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-Gilbert-US 1stLd-Writethru a0815 09-14 0818</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Gilbert-US, 1st Ld - Writethru, a0815,0837</SECOND>
<HEAD>Evacuations Begin Despite Uncertain Course of Hurricane</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: SUBS 3rd graf, `Gilbert, already ..., to UPDATE with extent
of hurricane watch; SUBS, 19th graf, `In Corpus Christi ... with 5
grafs to UPDATE with cattle evacuations, school closings, quote
from wind expert saying damage could hit $7 billion. Picks up 20th
graf: ``It's almost...</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos HT1, HT2</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Several thousand people Wednesday evacuated the marshy,
flood-prone coast of Texas and Louisiana as Hurricane Gilbert
churned into the Gulf of Mexico packing twice the power of last
week's Hurricane Florence.
   ``This is very, very serious,'' said Wendell Curole, hurricane
coordinator for LaFourche Parish on the Louisiana coast. ``Gilbert
is a killer storm, something a lot of people have never
experienced, even in this area.''
   Gilbert, already blamed for at least 11 deaths in the Caribbean,
was on a path toward Texas Wednesday afternoon, forecasters said as
the National Weather Service issued a hurricane watch for the
state's entire coastline. But with the unpredictable storm three
days away, authorities met to review evacuation plans across
hundreds of miles from the southern tip of Texas to New Orleans.
   On the Bolivar Peninsula outside Galveston Bay, beachgoers and
about 3,000 residents were urged to leave by sundown and most were
cooperating, said Police Chief Farris Collier of Crystal Beach.
   The 1,600 students of the University of Texas Medical Branch on
Galveston Island and about 200 patients also were being evacuated,
said spokeswoman Leann Teymour.
   The Army was setting up a ``crisis action center'' in Washington
to coordinate dispatching active-duty military personnel and
equipment from Fort Hood in Killeen, Texas, and possibly Fort Bliss
in El Paso, to assist with evacuations, said Sen. Phil Gramm,
R-Texas.
   Andy Valence, mayor of the barrier island town of Grand Isle,
La., about 80 miles south of New Orleans, ordered a general
evacuation of the island's 2,100 residents and visitors.
   Mississippi's Gulf Coast residents kept officials busy answering
phone calls about Gilbert's path.
   ``I think people are concerned, particularly after the close
call with Hurricane Florence last week,'' said Dusty Perkins,
public information officer for the Jackson-based Mississippi
Emergency Management Agency.
   Tampa Bay area officials, still mopping up from four days of
torrential rains last week, worried that Florida's central Gulf
Coast communities were especially vulnerable to Gilbert.
   The ground remained water-logged, said Bob Anderson, Sarasota
County's deputy director of emergency management, and floodwaters
blocked the only two roads from Manatee County's barrier islands
and other evacuation routes.
   Gilbert is a much larger and more dangerous storm than Florence,
which hit southeastern Louisiana Friday night, flooding roads and
knocking down power lines but doing little major damage.
   ``You've got tropical gale force winds all the way out 250
miles'' from the eye of the hurricane, said Bruce Piercy of the
National Weather Service in Miami.
   Evacuations started earlier this week, when oil companies used
helicopters and crew boats to take an estimated 10,000 workers from
offshore rigs.
   More evacuation orders were likely Thursday morning, even if the
storm's path remains uncertain, authorities said.
   ``You cannot evacuate people at night and you can't evacuate
people when the winds and rain have already started,'' said Port
Arthur, Texas, police Lt. B.D. Spradlin.
   Grocery and hardware stores were swamped with shoppers and
lumber and water supplies were reported in short supply throughout
the region.
   New Orleans residents lined up 10 to 15 deep at check out lanes
in one hardware store where plywood for covering windows was the
hot selling item.
   A caravan of cattle trucks jammed a two-lane road out of coastal
Cameron Parish, La., where purebreds graze in the lush marshland.
   In Corpus Christi, Texas, school was canceled for the rest of
the week. In the nearby beach resort of Port Aransas, officials
handed out emergency passes to residents leaving town, to control
access and prevent looting in the event of a disaster.
   Most of the damage would be to homes and low-rise buildings,
which are generally designed to withstand winds of up to 90-100
mph, said Kishor Mehta, president of the Wind Engineering Research
Council and an associate at Texas Tech University's Institute for
Disaster Research.
   ``Gilbert could easily cause damage in the neighborhood of $5
billion to $7 billion if it hits the right place,'' Mehta said.
   U-Haul Marketing Co. President Alan Kirkhart described the scene
at the self-service rental center in Corpus Christi where his
office is located.
   ``It's almost like a mass panic situation,'' Kirkhart said. ``We
have so many people calling and coming in here that we had to start
a waiting list, and it keeps growing before we can get more
equipment in.''
   Because of a shortage of lumber, he said, some Corpus Christi
residents have driven as far as Austin and San Antonio to rent
trucks and trailers, bringing plywood back with them to board up
homes prior to evacuating.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
