ID: 90	RANK: 25	SCORE: 7.247096
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910104-0008
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910104-0008.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Heard on the Street:
   Investors Go on a Shopping Spree for Stocks
   Of No-Frills Retailers, but Caveat Emptor
   ----
   By Linda Sandler
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/04/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C2
</SO>
<CO>
   PCLB WBN ODEP SPLS COST HD
</CO>
<IN>
STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
HEARD ON THE STREET (HRD)
SPECIALTY RETAILERS (OTS)
</IN>
<LP>
   Warehouse clubs are a hot concept, but even they have
winners and losers. Remember all the look-alike hamburger
joints in the 1970s? Most have disappeared.
   Investors looking for winners in no-frills retailing now
have to pick and choose carefully among companies such as
Price Co., Staples Inc., Home Depot and their many imitators.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   With so many shoppers feeling poorer these days, the
no-frills specialty retailers are in big favor with
investors. Warehouse stores and home-improvement and
office-supply discounters offer people and small businesses
more value for a dollar. Some discounters with a profitable
niche have kept growing in recent years even in such
depressed places as Alaska and Texas, so they're stars in the
mostly dismal retail picture.
   "Good concepts gain market share in recession," says the
New York money manager Michael Esposito of BEM Management, a
big fan of Price Co., Waban, Office Depot and other specialty
discounters.
   Recently, Tiger Management boosted an already big stake in
Staples. Several Fidelity Investments funds have been buying
many popular specialty discounters for some time. "These guys
have built a better mousetrap; recession will impact most
retailers, but them less than most," says Michael Gordon, an
analyst at Fidelity.
   But what price should investors pay to play the no-frills
retailing fashion? Home Depot and Costco Wholesale, among the
fastest-growing specialty discounters, sell at around 20
times estimated profit for calendar 1991. In this market,
many unpopular stocks sell at less than 10 times earnings.
   Of course, many cheap stocks aren't going anywhere. "If a
company is growing three times faster than average, I say
it's a bargain" even if its stock costs twice as much, based
on earnings, as the average stock, contends BEM's Mr.
Esposito. But promises of growth don't always pan out.
   Earlier this week, shares of office suppliers Bizmart Inc.
and Staples got clipped after analysts cut their profit
estimates for those companies. (Both are buying stores from
HQ Office Supplies Warehouse, a weak competitor, and
Bizmart's December sales were disappointing.) And the
do-it-yourself home-improvement play, except for Home Depot,
has been a minefield for investors, with Hechinger and Lowe's
Cos. tumbling far from their 1990 peaks.
   The golden rule, says the California money manager Jim
Mair of Pasadena Growth Fund: Stick with leading companies
such as Price Co. and Home Depot. And beware of hot concepts
such as office-supply discounting, which so far is
"unproven," he says.
   Price Co., which pioneered warehouse clubs, is many
people's favorite. Its stock already has soared in recent
months, but the company seems to promise fast growth. It has
started opening a lot of new stores and its profit could grow
in coming years at 15% to 20% annually, says Fidelity's Mr.
Gordon. He thinks Price Co., at 38 1/4 yesterday, could earn
$3 a share in calendar 1991, and the stock could be worth 15
to 20 times that number, he says.
   Costco shares are hitting the ceiling that even
growth-hungry fund managers will pay, and in recent months
the venture capitalists who helped to bankroll Costco have
trimmed their stakes. As yet, few bears are bold enough to
bet against the warehouse dynamo. But its lightning growth
could slow if competitors make a grab for some of its
markets, some money managers say.
   Shares of Waban, with its BJ's wholesale clubs, are deemed
bargains. The company hasn't been thriving; its warehouse
clubs and home centers both are facing tough competition. But
some fans say Waban is on the right track now; others think
the company eventually will be taken over. Retailing giants
such as Wal-Mart Stores and K mart have been adding to their
warehouse clubs, of course, though recently, Great Atlantic &amp;
Pacific Tea's plans to buy half of shaky Warehouse Club fell
through.
   In theory, more shoppers in a recession will flock to all
kinds of specialty discounters. Fans of office suppliers say
they're good bets if they're well-run and financially sound.
Staples, for instance, intends to pay cash for nine new
stores in Los Angeles.
   But already some analysts see signs that small-business
customers are spending less at each trip to an office
supplier. (Sales at established stores are the trend to
watch; investors buy and sell retail stocks based on that.)
In tough times, bears say, many small businesses skimp on
paper and paper clips; others go out of business entirely.
   In home centers, the leader is Home Depot, a Wall Street
darling. But Michael Murphy, publisher of the Overpriced
Stock Service in San Francisco, has sold short Home Depot
stock, which was at 37 3/8 yesterday; he hopes to buy it back
eventually at as low as 20. Though Home Depot offers good
value and service, it has been expanding too fast in rocky
real estate markets, he thinks. People who are losing their
jobs or taking paper losses on their houses tend to delay
remodeling their homes, he says.
   Mr. Murphy expresses many investors' misgivings when he
says that people who own high-priced shares such as Home
Depot and Costco have sky-high expectations: "When they get a
disappointment in sales, the stocks could get smashed."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
