ID: 90	RANK: 43	SCORE: 6.538532
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890422-0085 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-04-22-89 1430EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u w AM-NorthTrial 2ndLd-Writethru a0521 04-22 0897</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-North Trial, 2nd Ld-Writethru, a0521,820</SECOND>
<HEAD>EDS: Subs 4th graf from bottom, ``Similarly, on, inserts dropped
word to clarify quote</HEAD>
<HEAD>Jurors Recess For Weekend Without Reaching Verdict</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By LEE BYRD</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   A federal jury weighed the guilt or innocence
of Oliver L. North for part of a second day Saturday, then took the
rest of the weekend off as the former presidential aide awaited his
fate on 12 felony counts stemming from his role in the Iran-Contra
affair.
   The nine women and three men, guided in their deliberations by a
95-page set of instructions from District Judge Gerhard A. Gesell,
arrived bright and early Saturday to resume work in an 18-by-12
room on the sealed second floor of the U.S. Courthouse.
   But there were no clues as to their progress by the time they
quit at 12:10 p.m. to return to their downtown hotel to relax,
under constant supervision of U.S. marshals, until resuming work
Monday.
   The jurors, who were asked by the judge to begin by 9:30 each
morning, were driven in a van to the courthouse at 8:20 a.m. and
started their work at 8:45.
   The jury had deliberated for six hours on Friday.
   So far, only requests for copies of Gesell's instructions _ one
for each juror _ and for pencils, paper, and paper clips have
emanated from the jury room, along with the question Friday, ``Is
lunch at 12?''
   They got the materials, and the early lunch.
   Writing supplies remained a concern Saturday. An unsigned note
which covered the jury's return of some documents to the court for
safekeeping had this ``P.S.: Please sharpen pencils. And we need
more pencils, and highlighters.''
   The jurors will be allowed family visits, under marshals'
supervision, at their hotel on Sunday. The jurors are forbidden to
talk about the case, even among themselves, when they are not in
the jury room.
   North's trial, nearly three months long, is the first stemming
from the late 1985-early 1986 sale of arms to Iran _ at a 270
percent markup in price _ and the siphoning off of some of the
proceeds to the Nicaraguan rebels.
   Three other men, former National Security Adviser John
Poindexter, businessman Albert Hakim, and former Air Force Maj.
Gen. Richard Secord are awaiting separate trials. Another former
national security adviser, Robert C. McFarlane, has pleaded guilty
and received two years' probation and a $20,000 fine for
withholding information from Congress about the episode.
   North, a former Marine lieutenant colonel who served as deputy
to both McFarlane and Poindexter, is charged with 12 felony counts,
including withholding information from Congress, lying to Attorney
General Edwin Meese III about his activities, destroying and
altering documents, misusing money entrusted to him and accepting
an illegal gratuity _ a $13,800 security system at his home.
   North, a decorated Vietnam War veteran, testified he was a mere
``pawn in a chess game played by giants'' and was following orders
throughout, even as he was the action officer in both major
elements of the Iran-Contra scheme. ``I was not stepping in,'' he
said. ``I was brought in ... basically it was a handoff _ `you've
got the ball, now run with it.'''
   But independent prosecutor John W. Keker told the jury ``You
have heard a lot about courage at this trial. There's another kind
of courage: courage, to admit when you are wrong; courage to admit
personal responsibility, courage to admit guilt where appropriate.
He has not admitted any of those things; it's time for you do to it
for him.''
   In his instructions, Gesell set specific guidelines for the
jury's consideration of each specific count.
   For example, on the count that North obstructed Congress by
making false or misleading statements to two House committees,
Gesell said, ``A false or misleading answer to a question may be
taken by you as an obstruction if it was made corruptly, with the
specific intent to impede the investigation ... it must be
established beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant acted for
the specific purposes of obstructing or impeding.''
   Similarly, on four counts that North made false statements to
Congress or Meese, Gesell said the jury could convict only if it is
convinced that ``when the defendant made or caused to be made the
false statement or representation, he was acting willfully, that
is, deliberately or on purpose and not because of mistake,
inadvertence or accident.''
   As for the document destruction charge, the judge said the jury
could convict only if it believes North altered or destroyed the
materials ``with knowledge of the illegality of his conduct.'' But
``the defendant did not have to know the exact terms of the law, if
he knew that he was prohibited, by departmental or agency rule or
regulation, from destroying official records.''
   To convict North for accepting an illegal gratuity _ the
security system _ Gesell said the jury must first be satisfied that
North ``specifically intended to receive the security system for a
past or future official act or acts, and not for reasons wholly
unrelated to his official employment.''
   Most of the charges carry penalties of five years in prison and
$250,000 fines upon conviction. One charge is punishable by a
maximum of 10 years, one of three years and one of two years _ with
the total possible punishment being 60 years and fines of $3
million.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
