ID: 90	RANK: 80	SCORE: 5.833942
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911220-0085
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911220-0085.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Medicine:
   Research Teams Devise Tiny Pancreas to Fight Diabetes
   ----
   By Michael Waldholz
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
12/20/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
</MS>
<IN>
MEDICAL SUPPLIES, EYEGLASS MANUFACTURERS (MDS)
</IN>
<NS>
NEW PRODUCTS &amp; SERVICES (PDT)
SCIENCE &amp; TECHNOLOGY (SCN)
</NS>
<RE>
MASSACHUSETTS (MA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
RHODE ISLAND (RI)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Two competing research teams have developed separate
versions of a miniature artificial pancreas that may
revolutionize diabetes treatment.
   In reports published independently in two scientific
journals this week, each research group said it had
successfully implanted into laboratory rodents what amounts
to a tiny plastic factory continuously producing exact
amounts of insulin needed by a diabetic. The researchers said
they believed that within a few years they could scale up the
plastic devices for testing in people.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   An earlier device operating on the same principle was
reported last spring. But that device, about the size of a
hockey puck, must be surgically attached to abdominal veins.
The latest device, a wire-sized cylinder about an inch long,
can simply be inserted under the skin.
   About one million Americans with juvenile, or Type I,
diabetes require daily insulin shots to regulate sugar levels
in their blood because their own insulin-making pancreas
cells are impaired.
   "The great hope is that by secreting exactly the amount of
insulin as the body needs it, we can avoid the terrible
complications, such as blindness, heart and kidney damage,
that often occur with injected insulin," says Paul E. Lacy, a
diabetes specialist at Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis.
   Dr. Lacy developed one of the devices in conjunction with
researchers CytoTherapeutics Inc., a small, closely held
company in Providence, R.I. Their report in today's journal
Science comes several days after the publication of a
remarkably similar experiment by scientists at BioHybrid
Technologies Inc., also a small closely held company, which
is based in Shrewsbury, Mass. The BioHybrid report was
published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences.
   Both scientific teams said they implanted into diabetic
rodents permeable plastic membranes, about the size of
paper-clip wire, into which were inserted several hundred
pancreas cells that naturally manufacture insulin. The
plastic-wrapped cells, acting like a minipancreas, were able
to sense the precise amount of insulin needed to offset blood
sugar levels and then pump it out into the surrounding
bloodstream.
   Research teams around the world have tested a variety of
ways to transplant pancreas cells into animals and humans.
But those experiments have been hampered by rejection from
the body's immune system. The new devices represent a
significant advance, because the plastic capsules hide the
pancreas cells from detection and rejection by immune system
cells.
   BioHybrid had also reported earlier the hockey puck-sized
artificial pancreas, which was tested successfully in dogs.
The company continues to test that device, but said the
newest device would more likely gain use if it succeeds in
human tests. BioHybrid's plastic was developed in a joint
venture with the giant chemical company W.R. Grace &amp; Co., New
York.
   In one experiment, researchers at Washington University
and CytoTherapeutics inserted the encapsulated pancreas
cells, which were extracted from rats, into mice whose own
pancreas cells had been inactivated. For a 60-day trial
period, the mice were able to process blood sugar as if they
had a healthy pancreas. When the devices were removed from
beneath the mice's skin, the rodents' blood-sugar levels rose
sharply, reacting as if they were suffering from severe
diabetes.
   In several experiments reported in the BioHybrid paper,
researchers said they inserted plastic-enclosed cells that
had been extracted from dogs, cows and pigs into the abdomens
of laboratory rats. Those cells kept diabetic rats healthy
for months without triggering an immune response.
   "The great news is that we could implant cells from across
such a wide range of animal species" without triggering an
immune reaction, says William Chick, a founder of BioHybrid
who led the company's research. "It is what makes us believe
we could eventually implant {cow or pig} cells into people."
   The scientists say the success of both teams' research
relies largely on the design of the plastic material housing
the cells. Both research teams have been working for years to
produce a porous plastic that allows nutrients, blood glucose
and oxygen from tiny blood capillaries in the body to nourish
the encapsulated cells. Remarkably, the cells can sense the
levels of glucose circulating in the bloodstream, and secrete
the right amount of insulin back through the plastic fiber's
tiny holes.
   Both groups said the recent breakthrough in design
occurred when they were able to make a membrane with an outer
surface so smooth its pores don't get clogged from growth
from tissue and cells near where the plastic is implanted.
   "The {membrane's} great advantage is that nutrients and
insulin can pass in and out, but the pores are too small to
let in cells from the immune system," says Dr. Lacy of
Washington University.
   Dr. Lacy and several other medical teams over the past few
years have successfully transplanted insulin-making cells
from the pancreas directly into a handful of patients. But
those patients must be simultaneously treated with
immune-suppressing medicines, which can produce side effects
and must be taken for life.
   Both BioHybrid and CytoTherapeutics say they have begun
testing their devices in dogs, and hope to proceed to
primates and then to people over the next few years.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
