ID: 215	RANK: 82	SCORE: 9.813830
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910627-0080
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910627-0080.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Software Glitches Cripple
   Parts of 2 Phone Systems
   ----
   By Mary Lu Carnevale
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
06/27/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10
</SO>
<CO>
   BEL DIGI PAC
</CO>
<MS>
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
UTILITIES (UTI)
</MS>
<IN>
COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (CMT)
TELEPHONE SYSTEMS, INCLUDING CELLULAR (TLS)
SOFTWARE (SOF)
</IN>
<GV>
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION (FCC)
</GV>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
MARYLAND (MD)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PENNSYLVANIA (PA)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
TEXAS (TX)
UNITED STATES (US)
VIRGINIA (VA)
WEST VIRGINIA (WV)
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA (DC)
</RE>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- Software glitches crippled portions of two
regional Bell telephone networks, raising new questions about
the reliability of the nation's phone service. Bell Atlantic
Corp. reported that an apparent software bug at its
Chesapeake &amp; Potomac Telephone unit shut off most local phone
service in Washington, D.C., Maryland, Virginia and West
Virginia for much of the day. On the opposite coast, Pacific
Telesis Group's Pacific Bell unit was plagued by a similar
problem that disrupted local service in the Los Angeles area
for more than two hours.
   Bell Atlantic's troubles began before noon EDT, and
technicians had the network fully restored by 7:20 p.m. A
spokesman said officials were monitoring the situation
throughout the night to ensure that the problem didn't recur,
and the company was setting up a task force to find out what
went wrong. Officials declined to predict how long it might
take to detect what caused the problem.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Yesterday, many callers got busy signals or their lines
went dead when they tried to dial local numbers. The outage
didn't harm the federal government's phone network, but it
prevented many government employees from making calls to
outside numbers.
   The massive problems are similar but believed unrelated to
a software glitch that shut down American Telephone &amp;
Telegraph Co.'s long-distance phone network a year and a half
ago. Both the local and long-distance problems were traced to
software problems in the so-called common-channel Signaling
System 7, a system for telling telephone switches where to
send calls. All phone companies are installing the system to
shorten the time it takes to connect calls and to offer a
variety of new services such as Caller ID, Return Call, Call
Trace and advanced business services.
   The glitches interrupted service to millions of customers.
Bell Atlantic's Chesapeake &amp; Potomac unit reported that more
than 6.3 million of the 7.1 million telephone lines in its
territory were affected. The problem in the Los Angeles area
-- involving area codes 213, 818 and 805 -- disrupted service
to more than three million phone lines, a Pacific Bell
spokesman said.
   Bell Atlantic officials said they believe the problem
began after the company installed software in a computer that
controls the signaling system in the Baltimore area. The
problem spread to another computer in Baltimore and then to
computers in Washington that were closely linked to the
Baltimore computer while the system was being updated.
   "If it had worked right, we would have had double-double
security," said John Seazholtz, Bell Atlantic vice president
for technology and information services. "But that didn't
happen."
   Bell Atlantic officials at network control centers began
noticing trouble around 11:30 a.m. as the network stopped
handling most calls. Local calls routed through a single
central office could be completed, but those involving more
than one central office couldn't.
   Bell Atlantic said the equipment and software that control
its signaling system are made by DSC Communications Corp.,
Dallas. A spokesman said the customer service and technical
personnel were working to help Bell Atlantic identify the
problem and restore full service. He declined to comment
further about the disruptions, saying it may take some time
to pinpoint the problem. It couldn't be determined who
supplied Pacific Bell's signaling software.
   The Federal Communications Commission will study both
outages carefully. "Any time there is a significant
disruption in telephone service, the FCC is concerned," said
FCC Chairman Alfred Sikes, adding that the agency has been in
touch with the phone companies and will work with them to
find the cause. "If actions by the FCC can prevent or
minimize its recurrence, we will not hesitate to act," he
said.
   Gene Kimmelman, legislative director for the Consumer
Federation of America, said the incidents' timing was ironic,
coinciding with a Capitol Hill hearing on whether local phone
companies should be allowed to provide cable television and
other services.
   "Phone companies are arguing that they need congressional
help to enter the information age when they can't even run
their basic local phone networks," he said.
   Bell Atlantic and Pacific Telesis reported that emergency
911 service continued to work throughout the breakdown but
that callers may have had a difficult time getting through
because of increased calling volumes. Moreover, both
companies said that increased attempts by callers to make
local calls exacerbated the problem, apparently causing
delays at some 911 centers.
   The C&amp;P crash was the biggest software problem ever to
strike a local phone network, though local companies have
been hit from time to time by massive local outages, such as
a cable cut that crippled service in the New York area, a
fire in a major switching hub in Hinsdale, Ill., and natural
disasters such as Hurricane Hugo and the San Francisco
earthquake.
   To get around the problem, many companies and residential
consumers turned to long-distance carriers, calling operators
or dialing access codes for most local calls. Others pulled
out their cellular phones, but the increased calling volume
led to delays and interrupted service on them as well, a Bell
Atlantic spokesman said.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
