ID: 215	RANK: 95	SCORE: 9.640858
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890302-0248 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-03-02-89 0849EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>a a PM-LinguisticGridlock Adv08   03-02 1172</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Linguistic Gridlock, Adv 08,1204</SECOND>
<HEAD>$Adv08</HEAD>
<HEAD>For Release Wednesday PMs, March 8, and thereafter</HEAD>
<HEAD>Towering Babel of Languages Strains Southern California Services</HEAD>
<HEAD>With LaserPhoto</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By E. SCOTT RECKARD</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>LOS ANGELES (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Mayor Tom Bradley proudly calls Los Angeles
``the new Ellis Island,'' where waves of immigrants have produced
amazing cultural diversity.
   But increasingly schools, courts and businesses throughout
Southern California are struggling to cope with scores of languages
that threaten to create a metropolitan Babel.
   Examples abound:
   _The Los Angeles Unified School District tries to teach most
courses in the students' native languages until they develop fluency
in English. The task is monumental: 160,000 students have as their
primary tongues more than 80 languages, from Afghan, Afrikaans and
Amharic to Urdu, Yoruba and Yiddish.
   _During last year's fire in the city's tallest skyscraper,
emergency announcements were in English and largely useless. Nearly
all the 50 people in the building that night were janitors who spoke
only Spanish.
   _In Orange County, commonly associated with surfers and
Disneyland, minorities make up more than 40 percent of public school
students, and a recent poll found the 100,000 Vietnamese residents
felt their top need was English-language classes.
   Police in the Orange County cities of Westminster and Garden
Grove have recruited Vietnamese speakers to investigate tight-knit
Asian gangs. The Santa Ana school district had to turn away about
half the 800 Spanish-speakers who waited in line, some overnight, to
sign up for English courses.
   _Tens of thousands of Soviet Armenians and Jews have poured into
the area in recent years as the Soviet Union relaxed emigration
policies. Overwhelmed social workers say the refugees must be
educated quickly or risk becoming permanently dependent on the
government.
   The number of refugees streaming into Los Angeles County from
around the world has tripled since 1985, reaching a high of 19,011
in 1988. But federal funds to help the newcomers dropped from $7.1
million in 1985 to $2.8 million last year.
   _In Glendale, for decades another white suburban bastion, a
survey last spring found that 54.5 percent of the students in city
schools came from homes where English was not the primary language;
more than 60 languages were spoken.
   On rare occasions, the problems can be comical. Glendale teacher
Matilda Mardirossian was glad that Michael Dukakis lost the
election, not because of politics but because of his name, which is
pronounced the same as an off-color phrase in Armenian, the first
language spoken by many of her students.
   ``They were giggling over his name,'' she said. ``I definitely
didn't want to hear it for the next four years.''
   Most skirmishes in the war of words are more serious.
   Last month, Executive Life Insurance Co. dropped an English-only
rule for employees rather than fight a civil rights suit filed by
the local chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union and the
Asian Pacific American Legal Center of Southern California.
   ``Los Angeles, and California as a state, are at a turning point,
as far as being a global center of many cultures,'' said Stewart
Kwoh, the founder of the legal center. ``And while English is the
principal language through which we converse, it is not going to be
possible for us to play a leadership role if we cannot accept other
languages and cultures.''
   But acceptance can come slowly in cities like Monterey Park, 10
miles east of downtown Los Angeles. The city of 62,000 became known
as the ``first suburban Chinatown'' or the ``Chinese Beverly Hills''
as Asians, many of them affluent, supplanted Anglos and Hispanics as
the majority group.
   Most signs along the Atlantic Boulevard business strip are now in
Chinese as well as English, with Ai Hoa Supermarket and Bank of
Canton of California competing for attention with Security Pacific
Bank and Pic 'n' Save. Chinese-language newspapers outnumber English
papers in sidewalk news racks.
   Monterey Park Mayor Barry L. Hatch has loudly called for a ban on
immigration into the United States, supports a law making English
the official U.S. language, and crusades against non-English books
at the library.
   ``Monterey Park is a beautiful little suburban town, almost rural
in some parts. And now we drive through our little commercial area
and feel like we're in Hong Kong,'' he said. ``When you're an Anglo
or Hispanic and you can't read the signs, it makes you feel like a
second-class citizen.''
   Other nearby cities have reacted with laws dictating how much
English must appear on signs: Temple City (100 percent in English
downtown, 50 percent in outlying areas), Arcadia (70 percent),
Pomona and Rosemead (50 percent).
   ``Historically, immigrants have come to America with the
understanding they're going to have to give up their primary
language,'' Hatch said. ``Now we're looking at floods of immigrants
who say to hell with the process _ we'll do it our way.''
   Inevitably, disputes wind up in court.
   One lawsuit that failed in state court in 1987 wanted the Los
Angeles school district to immediately provide English classes to
40,000 foreign language speakers, despite the fact that 200,000
people already were enrolled in such classes and the district said
state funds for them had run out.
   A suit pending in federal court contends aliens are deprived of
their rights in Southern California immigration courts by inept
interpreters and a practice of translating only parts of deportation
hearings.
   Seven people worked as translators for Los Angeles County courts
in 1962. Today 453 do, interpreting 70 languages and dialects, with
257 Spanish translators by far the most numerous.
   Ed Johnson, director of interpreter-translator services, said
about 300 interpreters work in the county's municipal and superior
courts on a typical day. The 1962 translation budget was about
$30,000, he said; this year's is about $6 million.
   Sophia Zahler, who heads the federal court translation service
here, says Spanish speakers account for 95 percent of interpreters
used in federal courts nationwide. But in California, the ``other''
category jumps to 20 percent, with demand for Korean, Tagalog, Thai,
Armenian, Cantonese, Mandarin, Farsi, Hebrew and even Tongan.
   Some profit by the linguistic gridlock, such as accent-reduction
teachers who charge $60 to $85 a session for a dozen individual
sessions. There are hundreds of takers.
   Others see benefits in language differences.
   At Edison Elementary School in a Hispanic section of Santa
Monica, kindergarten and first grade pupils are taught in Spanish
except for one oral English class, regardless of whether students'
parents speak English or Spanish. English-language classes are
gradually added, working up to a 50-50 language mix in sixth grade.
   ``The Edison School project assumes that both Hispanics and
Anglos will emerge competent in both languages,'' said Russell N.
Campbell, a UCLA linguistics professor.
   Similar programs may be set up in Koreatown, Little Tokyo or
Chinatown, but Campbell acknowledged they will remain special.
   ``It just isn't possible in a class where a teacher is facing 15
kids who speak different languages,'' he said. ``And what do we do
about those classes with the single kid who speaks Lao or Hmong?''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Wed PMs, March 8</NOTE>
</DOC>
