ID: 129	RANK: 17	SCORE: 17.769209
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910927-0035
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910927-0035.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   My Brother the Scrabble Whiz
   ----
   By Paul B. Carroll
</HL>
<DATE>
09/25/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8
</SO>
<LP>
   The first-ever World Scrabble Championship begins tomorrow
in London, and leading the U.S. delegation will be a
35-year-old who won a tense victory at the biggest U.S.
tournament in Cincinnati last month. He happens to be my
older brother, Charles.
   Chuck has come a long way. He had seemed normal as a
toddler -- at least to our parents -- but our father got an
inkling of what was in store when he asked five-year-old
Chuck how he did on a test. Laconic even then, Chuck replied:
"Let's see. Four columns. Sixteen rows. Sixty-four questions.
Missed one. Got 63 out of 64 right." By first grade, he was
helping our babysitter with her algebra. By third grade, he
was doing our father's budgets for his part of Westinghouse's
public-relations operation.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   In high school outside Pittsburgh and in college at
Carnegie Mellon, Chuck earned full credentials as a math nerd
and computer weenie, but the game of bridge had become his
passion. He, a partner and two innocent bystanders once drove
two hours to a dog track, and the two partners discussed a
single bridge hand the entire trip. After betting for four
hours, Chuck and his partner resumed in mid-sentence and
discussed the same hand the whole way back. Chuck became a
Life Master, bridge's highest rank, at age 20 and finished
second in a national event. Then, in his mid-20s, he became
bored and dropped the game cold.
   Rubik's Cube fascinated him briefly. During a lull as he
and I toured New York some 10 years ago, I noticed he was
scribbling strings of numbers and letters on a scrap of
paper. I finally figured out that he was trying to
mathematically work through the cube's permutations.
   Chuck soon moved on to gambling, quitting his job as a
computer programmer to move to Las Vegas for four months. He
made money counting cards at blackjack and lightening the
wallets of the drunk tourists at the poker table. But he lost
much of the money by experimenting with systems for betting
on sports.
   The interest in gambling ended abruptly, too, and Chuck,
by now a manager for a computer company in Minneapolis, took
up Scrabble. His assault on the game began with some
simple-enough pointers: 1) Learn the 86 two-letter words
because they let you connect to existing words; 2) Pay more
attention to what's on the board than what tiles are in your
rack; 3) Worry about what tiles you're stuck with after you
play a word. But most of his approach falls into the
don't-try-this-at-home-kids-because-this-is-for-
professionals-realm.
   Among other things, he has used a computer to generate
lists of words that include seven of the letters he is most
likely to find on his rack, plus one more letter. Chuck
drills himself on those words to keep them fresh in his mind.
He plays Scrabble six hours or so a week and studies for more
than an hour a day. The image that endures of him is of the
dutiful father strolling around his living room carrying a
screaming infant in a Snugli and studying his flashcards. At
his first nationals, in 1988, Chuck finished 16th. "Lucky,"
he said. The next year, he slipped to 19th. "Unlucky," he
explained. Last year, in his third try, he finished eighth
and had clearly become a force in the game. When a friend of
our father's went to a tournament and asked a player to point
him toward Chuck, he got the sort of stunned silence he would
have expected if he had wandered into a Little Italy social
club and asked to see John Gotti.
   This August, against the toughest field assembled in
years, Chuck was on a roll. Although the tournament didn't
carry the imprimatur of Milton Bradley, Scrabble's owner, it
did include all the big names, such as Robert Felt, the
reigning official champ because he won the 1990 national
tournament.
   In one game, Chuck's first three plays were "bronzier,"
"oracular" and "notturni," giving him three 50-point bonuses
for playing all seven letters in his rack. The score at that
point was 215 to 26. In another game, Chuck's opponent got
50-point bonuses -- known as "bingos" -- on his first two
turns but found himself trailing Chuck by 190 points. Chuck
had scored a career-high 212 points on one word, "landform,"
which hit two triple-word scores. Other games produced the
words "zoeae," "codeia," "tirrivee," "duvetyn," "beigy" and
"qaids" (the latter, which according to the Official Scrabble
Player's Dictionary means "Far Eastern rulers," turns out to
be one of the most common plays in high-level Scrabble).
   Nobody much watched the tournament, with its 160
contestants huddled over their boards for 20 hours over 4 1/2
days in the ballroom of a Cincinnati hotel. "Too boring,"
Chuck said. But there was plenty of tension going into the
final day's play, as Chuck's 18-6 record tied him with three
others for first. He was ahead on the tiebreaker, the spread
between the points he had scored and the total his opponents
had scored, but he also was worried. He had to start off
against Peter Morris, a former champion who Chuck describes
as "the smartest person who plays Scrabble."
   Chuck played "yclepe," which was a "phony," or fake word,
that looked like two Old English words. But Morris is a
graduate student specializing in Victorian literature and
caught it right away. Chuck lost big after Morris challenged.
When Chuck and Morris both won their next games, they were
pitted against each other in the final game. Chuck not only
had to win, he had to win by 143 points to have the better
spread. "A hundred-to-one shot," Chuck said.
   But Chuck got both blanks in the final game and played
four bingos, including "klavern," a Ku Klux Klan cell. Things
got tight when Chuck drew the "q" right at the end with
nowhere to play it, especially because Chuck describes Morris
as "the best end-game player in the history of the world."
Still, Chuck won by 152 points.
   Chuck collected his check for $3,900 and celebrated by
taking the bus to Pittsburgh. He used the time to study
words. It's a good thing, since players at the world
championship will be able to use words from all official
English-language Scrabble dictionaries, so Chuck had 20,000
words to learn by this week.
   ---
   Mr. Carroll covers the computer industry for the Journal
in New York.
   910925-0103
</TEXT>
</DOC>
