ID: 129	RANK: 43	SCORE: 10.492926
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920311-0087
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920311-0087.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Mad for Mah-Jongg
   ----
   By Susan G. Hauser
</HL>
<DATE>
03/11/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   Portland, Ore. -- Mah-jongg is all the rage in this neck
of the woods. I had to wait three whole months to get into
one of the local how-to classes, which are churning out
mah-jongg foursomes faster than you can say, "One bam West]"
   By all accounts, the last time this happened was about 70
years ago. A 1924 article in the Oregonian stated that
mah-jongg mania was spreading like a contagion: "Matrons and
flappers have fallen for its wiles, and fallen hard."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   A lot has changed in 70 years, and today's players can
fall for any number of mah-jongg variations, including
Chinese, Japanese, Filipino, Jewish and Wright-Patterson.
   Me, I learned the Jewish version -- also known as American
or international -- mah-jongg. Its rules are Greek to my
friend Carol, who is Chinese. As for my friend Rod, he plays
by Wright-Patterson rules, which originated in the 1920s at
an Air Force base of that name near Dayton, Ohio.
   Unfortunately, as things stand we can't play together.
About all we can recognize from one game to another are the
decorated tiles and the various suits. But the number of
tiles used for each version and the names for them differ.
Rod says "character," I say "crak," Carol says "wan."
Likewise, "bamboo," "bam" and "tiao" are different words for
the same thing.
   At a glance, mah-jongg resembles a cross between gin rummy
and Scrabble. The playing pieces are plastic tiles,
originally made from bone or ivory with bamboo backs.
Everybody draws tiles in turn and sets them up on racks. Out
of the view of the other players, they attempt to create a
particular combination of the numbers or images shown on the
tiles.
   The first player to compile a winning hand cries,
"Mah-jongg]" and the game ends. Depending on the type of
game, the winner then can collect praise (my teacher taught
us to applaud and exclaim, "Mah jel tov]"), points or money.
   Nobody seems to know why people are brushing off their
dusty sets of mah-jongg tiles and going at it again after all
these years, but I suspect it has something to do with the
popularity of Amy Tan's book "The Joy Luck Club," in which
the people play mah-jongg (Chinese version), and the film
"Driving Miss Daisy," in which Miss Daisy plays mah-jongg
(Jewish version).
   Mah-jongg mavens of all stripes say there is more interest
in the game than ever. Helen Kelly, president of the
Officers' Wives Club at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, told
me orders for their rule books are coming in from air bases
and embassies around the world. This pleases Mrs. Kelly, who
can always find a foursome wherever her husband is stationed.
   Ruth Unger, president of the National Mah Jongg League in
New York City, which was founded in 1937, says the league's
world-wide membership is 150,000 and climbing. For members,
the high point of each year is the mah-jongg cruise, which
finds hundreds of women sailing around some exotic locale
(this year it's Acapulco) that they never notice.
   "Many of the ladies don't get off the ship when we hit
port," said Mrs. Unger. "Or they don't go to sleep. They just
sit and play."
   Mrs. Kelly liked the idea of a cruise, but, loyal Air
Force wife that she is, suggested that Wright-Patterson
players could board a plane instead, then circle the globe
for the time it takes them to play their fill.
   Mrs. Unger said she has never played by Wright-Patterson
rules, even though the league supplies the air base with
mah-jongg sets. But Mrs. Kelly said she once tried
international mah-jongg.
   "It was foreign to me but I played because I wanted to
play mah-jongg," she said. "Any port in a storm, you know."
   Both women made it clear that with mah-jongg, when you
gotta play, you gotta play. They said the game is like no
other in that real bonding occurs during mah-jongg. There is
no such thing as, say, canasta bonding.
   "I don't know if it's the magic of the tiles or what,"
said Mrs. Unger. "But mah-jongg is special. It's really more
than a game, I'd say."
   Some mah-jongg enthusiasts love the game so much that they
wax poetic. Here is a sampling from Mrs. Unger's mailbag: "I
love playing mah-jongg/I love it a lot./ But my head is just
spinning/With crak, bam and dot.
   Another mah-jongg bard's heart was in the right place,
though her meter wasn't: "Our friendship started with one
bam,/ Two dot and a West./But has grown close over the
year/And is absolutely the best."
   I hate to put a damper on this love fest, but in my
conversations with mah-jongg enthusiasts around town, I did
detect a tinge of rivalry between the various loyalists. Some
say their version of mah-jongg requires more brain power than
the others.
   Brains? No one said anything about brains in my class. In
fact, my teacher said, and I quote:
   "There's one thing you have to have in order to have a
successful game. You have to have nosh."
   You know, good food. Good food, good friends, good tiles.
What more could you ask? Mah-jongg forever]
   ---
   Ms. Hauser is a free-lance writer based in Portland, Ore.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
