ID: 129	RANK: 92	SCORE: 8.033679
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910912-0121
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910912-0121.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
   Doomsday Financial Advice
   ----
   By Susan Lee
</HL>
<DATE>
09/12/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16
</SO>
<LP>
   The real trick -- and satisfaction -- to making money is
to make it when almost nobody else is. Even if your portfolio
has gone up 15% since the beginning of the year, your
achievement will be diminished if your silly sister-in-law's
portfolio is up 16%. But if you're up 15% and your
sister-in-law and your dopey uncle are down 10%, it's bliss.
(In fact, there's a whole industry of misanthropes known as
short-sellers who delight in profiting from others' misery.
They're in ecstasy when the market drops like a stone.)
   What, then, could be more desirable than a book that
promises a strategy to profit in hard times? And, as best
sellers all the way to Harry Browne (remember him -- buy gold
and stash it in your fallout shelter) prove, what could be
more lucrative? Enter, James Dale Davidson and Lord William
Rees-Mogg with their second publishing try at the
pessimism-can-be-lucrative market.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But before you pounce on "The Great Reckoning: How the
World Will Change in the Depression of the 1990s" (Summit,
574 pages, $22), consider the three wickets of this genre.
First, since good times outnumber bad, a really convincing
doomster case must be made. Second, if the case is plausible,
the investment advice must have some solid insights. Third,
if the first two wickets are passed through, then the timing
must be on target.
   As for the first, Messrs. Davidson and Rees-Mogg's case is
cloudy. They begin their theory of "megapolitics" with a
hedge: "Either an economic deflation will cause the financial
system to implode, or a political inflation of an extreme
kind will obliterate much of the value of debts denominated
in dollars."
   Hundreds of pages are then devoted to geopolitical chat,
much of it familiar to readers of op-ed pages: the decline of
the U.S., the rise of Japan, the new Germany, Europe after
1992 and the East-West division of world politics replaced by
a North-South division. The general idea is that because the
world is becoming a fragmented, "multipolar" place, no one
nation will be able to stabilize the world economy, thus
exposing it to the same "danger of deflationary collapse that
transpired in 1929."
   This change, according to the authors, will be accompanied
by massive amounts of violence and terrorism. Indeed, the
spread of lawlessness may result in Canada splitting apart,
with some of its provinces allying with the U.S., although
the "survival of the U.S. government will be widely
questioned."
   But, after all these pages describing the world's nations
behaving like so many children at McDonald's after the french
fries run out, the authors are still hedging about whether we
are to have an inflationary or deflationary depression.
Apparently Mr. Rees-Mogg inclines toward inflation, Mr.
Davidson toward deflation, so they encourage readers to
prepare for either outcome. This sort of Tweedledum and
Tweedledee approach doesn't wash. It makes a difference.
Especially when talking about making money.
   That brings us to the second consideration -- their
investment advice. Since the two Tweedles agree that the
outcome will be a depression, and that the deflationary kind
requires more preparation, they offer 15 guidelines that
focus on deflation. Some is just sensible, all-purpose advice
-- "put your business on a sound footing; diversify assets
outside your home country; maintain adequate insurance."
Others will hardly raise an eyebrow -- accumulate cash, think
of selling your house.
   Since the Tweedles think the Dow could drop to 500, surely
they should talk about short-selling. But their mention of
short-selling is brief in the extreme ("seek professional
guidance," for instance).
   Beyond these guidelines, the Tweedles offer little in the
way of nitty-gritty advice. They list some stuff that won't
do well in a deflation -- durables, capital goods,
construction, restaurants, media companies, medical and legal
services. But when it comes to what will do well, the
Tweedles are even more tight-lipped-pawn shops, repair shops
and Tupperware.
   Having gotten through the hard part, the authors' lips
loosen up again and they flap through 15 steps to survive the
revolution of the 1990s. Some of their advice is spiritual
(reread the Ten Commandments); some is dietary (cut out
alcohol and eat plenty of green and yellow vegetables daily);
some is peculiar (stop watching TV and play Scrabble).
   As for the third wicket, timing, the authors allow
themselves plenty of leeway -- a whole decade. The depression
could come next week or 468 weeks from now. While this
generous allowance is meaningless for useful forecasting, it
could make for personal disaster given their disagreement
over the precipitating cause. Consider the poor bloke who
takes Tweedledee's view that deflation is coming and dumps
his bonds, sells his house and retires to munch on carrots.
If inflation rages for the next nine years, he or she may not
last until the promised land of depression comes. Ditto for
the bloke who, taking Tweedledum's advice, gets ready for
inflation and breaks out his Scrabble board only to be decked
by a nine-year deflation.
   In short, you can probably do better with your money by
listening to your silly sister-in-law or your dopey uncle. Or
by taking Auric Goldfinger's advice to James Bond: "The
safest way to double your money is to fold it twice and put
it in your pocket."
   ---
   Ms. Lee, an economist, is the DeWitt Wallace Fellow at the
American Enterprise Institute.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
