ID: 110	RANK: 76	SCORE: 6.976496
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910405-0175
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910405-0175.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Records:
   From Mitchell to McShann
   ----
   By Jim Fusilli
</HL>
<DATE>
04/05/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   Few contemporary musicians own a legacy as rich and
deserved as Joni Mitchell's, and sharing her growth as an
artist has been a delight: She's been adventurous
challenging, bold, self-assured, open. Her latest album,
"Night Ride Home" (Geffen), shows she's still growing, still
reaching and still succeeding.
   While it may lack the commercial verve of her 1988
release, "Chalk Mark in a Rain Storm" (Geffen), "Night Ride
Home" is a very special recording. A mature work, it casts
Mitchell as surveying the landscape of middle age: "Oh I am
not old/I'm told/But I am not young/Oh and nothing can be
done," she sings in "Nothing Can Be Done" and asks, "Must I
surrender with grace/The things I loved when I was young?" In
"Two Grey Rooms," she adds, "No one knows I'm here/One day I
just disappeared." And, looking back, she sings, "We really
thought we had a purpose/We were so anxious to achieve/We had
hope, the world held promise/For a slave to liberty" in "Come
in From the Cold."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The 10 songs on "Night Ride Home" are intensely delivered
by Mitchell over simple arrangements; the recording has the
hypnotic feel of her 1976 masterpiece, "Hejira"
(Elektra-Asylum). Her guitar is a seductive drone, while
Larry Klein provides an alluring, unorthodox bass and Alex
Acuna adds a gentle percussion. Wayne Shorter, a frequent
Mitchell guest, contributes a flitting, bird-like sax on
several numbers.
   On "Black Top Blues-A-Rama, Vol. 3 and Vol. 4" (Black Top
Records) you'll find plenty of the fire that's often lacking
in today's mainstream rock. Caught live at Tipitina's in New
Orleans in 1989, these two recordings of raucous soul and R&amp;B
revues are as loose and as hot as they can be, and they brim
with the real thing: redhot guitarist Bobby Radcliff; the
blues vocalist and former Guitar Slim and Albert Collins
sideman James "Thunderbird" Davis; organist Ron Levy, with
guest Anton Funderburgh; and Grady Gaines and the 10-piece
Texas Upsetters, whose tornado of a revue is the subject of
Vol. Four. (The original Upsetters were Little Richard's road
band, with Gaines on sax, and they backed the likes of Otis
Redding, Jackie Wilson, Little Willie John and Sam Cooke.)
What you get is shouting, sweating, pushing, wrenching soul,
blues and R&amp;B; nobody's the least bit restrained on these
albums. And the cozy production -- in the background, glasses
tinkle, people cough, the bandleaders count off the songs --
puts you right in the club.
   There's more than a little fire on the jazz side, too, in
Jay McShann's Paris AllStar Blues' live tribute to Charlie
Parker (Music-Masters). Led by pianist McShann, the band
storms its way through numbers written by the likes of
Parker, Benny Moten, Count Basie and McShann. The music is
brazen and brassy, and while soloists Clark Terry, James
Moody, Jimmy Heath, Terence Blanchard, Phil Woods and Benny
Carter excel, the bold ensemble playing glows. And what a
treat it is to again hear vocalist Ernie Andrews, whose style
is as timeless as the songs he sings.
   Danny Gatton has been revered by guitar aficionados for
years. His new album, "Elmira St." (Elektra), may bring him a
wider audience. The Washington, D.C.-based Gatton tackles
rock-a-billy, country, blues and straight-ahead rock with an
almost out-of-control passion -- hence his nickname, "The
Humbler," granted by another guitarist. An in-your-face horn
section consisting of Bill Holloman on all saxes, trumpet,
clarinet and trombone gives him a sturdy backboard to bounce
off. (As if six horns and reeds weren't enough, Holloman also
plays all keyboards and vibes.) Just when Gatton threatens to
burn down the house, he offers an unexpected gem: a sweet,
twangy rendition of Brian Wilson's "In My Room." There's a
touch of Carl Perkins here, a Duane Eddy lick there, maybe
some Scotty Moore, but in the end Gatton's eclectic style is
all his own, and it's hot.
   Speaking of influences, Detroit's Mr. Fiddler mixes a
smattering of styles to come up with a winning debut album,
"With Respect" (Elektra). But, as it was for Mr. Fiddler's
influences -- August Darnell's Kid Creole and the Coconuts
and George Clinton's P-Funk Circle, to name two -- the music
may be too smart for Top 40. But it's more than good enough
for a listen: The vocals by Joseph Amp Fiddler are sharp, the
'70s-dance-meets-the-New-Jack-Swing backing tracks jump,
Chris Bruce's guitar is slinky funk, and the attitude is
cocked fedora all the way.
   And finally, "Selling Water by the Side of the River"
(Island) by Evan Lurie is an album that grows more compelling
with each listening. A clue to Lurie's sound is in the
quintet's instrumentation -- violin, classical guitar (played
by the brilliant Marc Ribot), upright bass, piano and
bandoneon, the typewriter-like accordion -- which creates
music that is as intriguing as it is charming. On the album,
the music gallops along merrily, sweetly, then suddenly turns
cold and distancing; a brightness is followed by despair; the
almost nine-minute long "Ballad of a New York Peasant" is an
album in itself. In all, the recording is evocative,
European-imagine the soundtrack to the film "The Third Man"
with a thrilling accordion instead of the zither-touching,
never less than interesting, wonderful.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
