ID: 110	RANK: 91	SCORE: 6.867186
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880830-0202 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-08-30-88 1318EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>s e BC-APArts:Dylan ADV04-1stLd-Writethru-1stAdSemiticgraffittionwallsand
nday 08-30 1221</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-AP Arts: Dylan, ADV04-1st Ld-Writethru-1st Add,1244</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv04</NOTE>
<NOTE>For Release Sunday, Sept. 04, and Thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>BEVERLY HILLS, Calif.: double-hard.</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   ``I don't write about things,'' he says. ``I write from inside
of something, and I sing and play the same way. It's never about
that `something,' hoping to touch it. It's rather from the inside
of it reaching out.''
   Dylan said he does have five or six songs for a new album. And
he's part of an incognito group, The Willburys, that includes
George Harrison, Roy Orbison and Tom Petty and has an album coming
out later this year.
   In the past few years, he's concentrated on touring _ with the
Grateful Dead, Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers, now with this
pared-down band that has Dylan alone out front most of the time,
performing selections from the vast catalog of an almost 30-year
career. Nobody would blame him for just putting his feet up for a
while.
   ``I really don't have anyplace to put my feet up,'' he laughs.
``Well, we want to play 'cause we want to play. ... Why tour? It's
just that you get accustomed to it over the years. The people
themselves will tell you when to stop touring.''
   This tour has brought Dylan the critical praise that seems
tougher for him to come by than it is for other artists. He seems
to be held up to a higher standard because of his own
bigger-than-life image, and that irritates him.
   ``It's irritating. It's real irritating,'' he says. ``It's not
that somebody can't come and not like what you're doing, that's OK.
But I've done tours before where people got real personal with
their reviews in a real early time when we were on the road, and
for some reason all the towns that we were about to play, they'd
like to pick these things up. So it was like intentionally telling
people to stay away.
   ``I don't know. I go through a lot of that, and then even when
you're not doing what they say you're doing, people expect to see
that. It's like when we were playing after being booed in Newport
or something (in 1965 he brought an electric band to the folk
festival). I mean, for the next six months, people want to see that
same show that got booed, and they want to boo, too.''
   He is interrupted: Does he have a request for the restaurant's
violinist? Sure, he says, ``Love Me or Leave Me.''
   Dylan's unexpected tastes and perspectives often perplex his
public, though he insists he is not, as frequently described,
``enigmatic.''
   ``I don't know what that word means,'' he protests.
   ``I would like to think that I couldn't be categorized. Who
wants to be categorized? That happens because of all the stuff I
do, not because of who I am or anything. And I don't even know if
that's a true fact because that's nothing much to concern me. You
can't make it too long on being an enigma.''
   If his critics can't categorize him, they certainly can't accuse
him of playing it safe. He seems to depend on literary and
spiritual references that keep him constantly searching for new
influences.
   He stunned the public in 1979 when he came out with the
emotional, gospel LP ``Slow Train Coming.'' The lead song, ``Gotta
Serve Somebody,'' won him his only Grammy, an honor he considers
``an accident.'' The album was one of Dylan's strongest ever and
went platinum (1 million copies sold).
   ``Gospel music is about the love of God. And commercial music is
about the love of sex,'' Dylan says.
   After following up with ``Saved'' and ``Shot of Love,'' Dylan,
who was born Jewish, seemed to drift away from the Christian
message, though themes of redemption tinged ``Infidels'' and
``Empire Burlesque.''
   His current religious leanings are the object of speculation.
``Religion has nothing to do with faith,'' is all he'll say
publicly on the subject. But another of his gospel songs, ``Death
Is Not the End,'' turned up on ``Down in the Groove.''
   So did the Tin Pan Alley tune ``When Did You Leave Heaven?'' And
at a recent concert he delighted the crowd by bursting into ``I'm
in the Mood for Love.''
   Last year, he appeared on a PBS tribute to George Gershwin. He
was surprised when the producers invited him to participate. ``I
said, `Are you sure? You sure there might not be another Bob
Dylan?'''
   Dylan has always been intrigued by Gershwin's music, he says,
``'cause it sounds like sophisticated city stuff, but there's a
country, backwood, alley cat element to it that for some reason he
was able to capture.
   ``There are smells and tastes in those songs for some reason.
And I was used to hearing Nina Simone sing a lot of George Gershwin
songs a few years back, and they were very close to the folk songs
that I was singing.''
   Folk songs have an honored place in Dylan's current repertoire,
a purposeful homage to his roots. He plays the standards ``Barbara
Allen'' and ``Golden Vanities'' on stage, and included his own
arrangement of ``Shenandoah'' on ``Down in the Groove.''
   Earlier this year, he was inducted into the Rock 'n' Roll Hall
of Fame and played ``Like a Rolling Stone,'' the anthem of the rock
generation, at the ceremony. But folk music is in his heart. He
contributed a cut to the recent LP honoring Leadbelly and Woody
Guthrie.
   Born Robert Zimmerman in Minnesota _ he later legally changed
his name _ Dylan migrated to New York in part to visit Guthrie in
the hospital. He soon became a sensation playing his songs of
biting social commentary in Greenwich Village coffee houses. But he
infuriated folk purists when he took up the electric guitar by the
mid-'60s. Ironically, Dylan is now in a better position than the
purists to champion folk music in the '80s.
   ``People don't know folk songs anymore,'' he says. ``I mean,
hardly anybody sings them anymore, and people think that people who
play the acoustic guitar and write their own songs are folk
singers, but that's not necessarily true. They're writing their own
songs, but they're not really based on anything. So I thought,
well, if I'm going around again, I'm going to sing folk songs,
because first of all, I love 'em, and the lyrics in them are _ I
mean, they're incredible stories, and that's where I got a lot of
my stuff from in the early years _ and still do. Folk songs are
still better, even though they're not commercial, they're still
better than 90 percent of the stuff you hear on the radio.
   ``Have you ever seen a Shakespeare play? I mean, it's like the
English language at its peak where one line will come out like a
stick of dynamite, and you'll be so what-was-that! But then the
other stuff is rolling on so fast you can't even think, and then
you have to struggle to catch up to where you are in the present.
And folk songs are pretty much like the same way.
   ``Of course, nobody writes like Shakespeare either,'' he said.
``But, you know, it don't matter. Those things can still be
performed. They don't have to be written _ just like folk songs.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Sunday, Sept. 4</NOTE>
</DOC>
