ID: 110	RANK: 93	SCORE: 6.862331
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910924-0082
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910924-0082.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   After All This Time,
   Female Fans Swoon
   When Frankie Sings
   ---
   Frankie Yankovic, That Is,
   The Patriarch of Polka,
   On Tour for 61 Years Now
   ----
   By Clare Ansberry
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
09/24/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
BIOGRAPHY (BIO)
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)
</IN>
<NS>
BIOGRAPHY (BIO)
</NS>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   MONROEVILLE, Pa. -- Busloads of swooning fans mob a
theater to hear their idol, tan and blue-eyed, play the music
they've come to love:
   "I don't want her, you can have her, she's too fat for
me," sings a smiling Frankie Yankovic. He pumps his accordion
and charms them into joining along, "Oh, she's too fat for
me."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "He's the king," sighs 66-year-old Dorothy Rigatti, who
has just bought two compact disks and three tapes from
Frankie's wife, Ida, during intermission at a show here. Mrs.
Rigatti and 39 other admirers from the South Park Senior
Citizens have been Yankovic groupies since the 1940s when
American Legion, Polish Falcons and Slovenian social halls
throughout the Midwest were hopping to polkas by Frankie
Yankovic and the Yanks.
   And the beat goes on. Mr. Yankovic, who just turned 76,
still does 150 to 200 polka shows a year, putting thousands
of miles on a van that is equipped with a queen-size bed. His
latest loop, which included a one-nighter for the Eistentein
Bushwachers Snowmobile Club in Park Falls, Wis., went like
this: Ohio to Wisconsin to Michigan, back to Wisconsin, then
to Nebraska, Colorado, Wyoming, Ohio and then Pennsylvania.
That was August.
   Mr. Yankovic has been on the road for 61 years. He's on
his third marriage -- his first two wives couldn't stand him
being away 11 months a year. Now his third wife, Ida, travels
with him. He broke his back in a 1963 car accident and had
triple bypass surgery seven years ago. Arthritis is cramping
his left hand, and he travels constantly with his Advil.
   "The poor guy should be sitting at home," says Mario
Mosti, a Yankovic fan and one of the nation's last accordion
repairmen. The rest, he says, "are too old or dead." But, Mr.
Mosti says, Frankie "wants to die playing the accordion."
   Mr. Yankovic has a mission. "I went on the road to keep
polka alive," he says. In the course of his crusade, he won
the first Grammy for polka music in 1986 and at last count
was in three polka halls of fame. "You can call him the
godfather, the polka music god," says one worshiper, Carl
Rohwetter, publisher of the Polka News, a bimonthly
newsletter.
   "Polka music is the happiest music this side of heaven,
and when I see people happy I forget about travel and pain,"
says Mr. Yankovic, who inherited his first accordion from a
Slovenian boarder living at his parents' house in Cleveland
as payment for a bar bill.
   The son of Slovenian immigrants, Mr. Yankovic envisioned
making polka less babushka league and more all-American. He
was the first to sing polkas in English; traditionally, they
were performed in Croatian, Polish and Slavic. He traded the
heavy, ethnic Oom-pa-pas for smoother Ee-ii-ee-ii-ee-ii-oos,
and polished the polka look. Unlike other accordion players,
who were about as lively as metronomes, Mr. Yankovic hopped,
smiled and clapped. He once fired a poker-faced polka player
and supplied toupees for two bald banjo players because he
thought they looked silly singing love songs.
   Mr. Yankovic performed for Gen. George Patton and did TV
commercials for Teeny Weeny Weiner. He led the hit parade
with his 1949 favorite "Just Because," which sold a million
copies and was second that year only to Gene Autry's "Rudolph
the Red-Nosed Reindeer." Young women used to tear at his
clothes when he appeared in record stores in the '50s.
   With Mr. Yankovic's touch, polka entered its era of glitz.
When the Mocambo, a Hollywood haunt, decided to jazz up slow
Monday nights, it dumped swing bands and brought in Frankie
Yankovic and his Yanks. Apprehensive at first, Mr. Yankovic
lured stars like Rosalind Russell and Milton Berle onto the
floor with a familiar fox trot and midway through switched to
polka. "If you can cha-cha, you can polka," Bob Hope gushed
to a Hollywood columnist.
   Stella Lemard ("the `-sky' was taken off years ago," she
explains) knows polka. The 76-year-old, who is with Mrs.
Rigatti at the Yankovic show, grabs a matron from her table
and whisks her out to the floor. When her first partner
tires, Mrs. Lemard waltzes to the next table and grabs
another woman as Mr. Yankovic barrels into the Pennsylvania
Polka. "I love him," she says, her blue, cut-glass earrings
bobbing and white, thick-heeled sandals stomping. "I like
rock 'n' roll too," she whispers.
   Even those who can't hop and slide are energized by Mr.
Yankovic, hokey-pokeying in their seats. "It keeps the
circulation going," says Mary Dolinich, thrusting her right
arm in and her right arm out. Years ago when Mr. Yankovic
performed at a Canadian hospital, patients polka-ed in
wheelchairs.
   This sold-out matinee's crowd, where older women outnumber
older men by 10 to one, is typical of Mr. Yankovic's
following. They remember watching his "Polka Varieties" show,
the MTV of polka in its day, and listening to his hits on the
radio, like "When banana skins are falling" ("I'll come
sliding back to you"), and "How many burps in a bottle of
beer?"
   It's not that Mr. Yankovic hasn't tried to groom young
listeners. He's the only polka leader known to play "Born in
the U.S.A." on the accordion, and a few years back he revved
up "Hello Dolly" for his disco accordion album.
   But once rock 'n' roll came along, many producers,
recording companies and disk jockeys dropped polkas and Mr.
Yankovic like a hot kishka. (By the way, the kishka of the
famous polka "Who Stole the Kishka?" is a sausage of blood
and rice that apparently tastes so good it invites larceny.)
   Rock had its Woodstock, but polka had only Oktoberfests,
and somewhere along the line Polka became more a punchline
than an idiom. "It's the same thing as Polish jokes," says
Charles Keil, an ethnomusicologist at the State University of
New York at Buffalo, who is writing a book called "Polka
Happiness." "The ethnic working class has never been real
popular here."
   Still, Prof. Keil is amazed at the resiliency of Mr.
Yankovic, who has lasted longer than Mitch Miller's bouncing
ball, and of the polka itself. Thousands of small polka
bands-like The Polka Band Called Fred and Stas Bulanda and
his Average Polka Band -- thrive, as do polka cruises to
Hawaii and the Caribbean. Tony Petkovsek's daily radio polka
program is still going strong in Cleveland after 30 years,
and a professional dance company in Maryland holds polka
seminars in the Poconos.
   Polka fans, who have been waiting for a national hit
almost as long as Cub fans for a World Series, are now
looking for a polka rebirth. Events in Eastern Europe could
well inspire a return to ethnic roots, and a coming album
called "America, This Song's For You" will raise funds, a la
Farm Aid, to promote polka music as "American Music for the
1990s." A Polka News correspondent is urging polka lovers to
start a type of polka chain letter, with each fan promising
to bring a non-polka friend to an Oktoberfest.
   Meanwhile, Mr. Yankovic is doing his part to preach the
polka, spending up to eight hours a day returning fan mail
and listening to tapes submitted by aspiring 13-year-old
accordion players. He freely admits he's not the best
accordion player. But he's still America's favorite.
   It's a title he earned in the late 1940s. At that time,
each of the major recording studios decided to enter their
best polka band in a contest to name America's polka king.
Mr. Yankovic won 8 to 1. Then the contest was broadened to
include other forms of music, such as jazz, pitting Mr.
Yankovic against Duke Ellington.
   Mr. Yankovic beat the Duke and has been King since.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
