ID: 240	RANK: 63	SCORE: 15.056149
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT921-8178</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CBSB3ABSFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920219
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  19 FEB 92 / Arts: Sport of a sort - but it may not sound like cricket /
Television
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTOPHER DUNKLEY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
After England's 31-13 victory over France in the Five Nations contest on
Saturday, Bernard Lapasset, president of the French Rugby Federation,
declared that 'British teams have a certain conception of the game, and
referees with certain ways of interpreting the rules. There is clearly a
large gap between our conception of the game of rugby and that of the
British . . . they are not interested in the game being spectacular or
attractive.' Millions of Britons recognise that as French grapes of the
sourest sort, and hypocrisy of the highest order, because we had seen
Gregoire Lascube stamp on Martin Bayfield's face.
Indeed, the Dunkley video archive, like many others no doubt, now contains a
record of that bit of viciousness which led to Lascube being sent off,
because we were taping the match for the only member of the household who
was not present. She was actually at Parc des Princes watching from the
stand, but naturally asked us to record the match so that she could see what
had really happened. The hysterical Lascube clearly had no idea, as he
repeatedly kicked Bayfield's head, not only that there was nothing between
him and the touch judge, Owen Doyle, who alerted the estimable referee,
Stephen Hilditch, but that there happened to be a television camera with a
vantage point very similar to Doyle's. Consequently millions of us saw what
happened, and then saw it replayed again and again in the following hours as
it was discussed by studio commentators. (What has happened, incidentally,
to the little 'R' in the corner of the screen which used to tell you that
you were watching instant replay? These days you never know whether they are
carrying on with the game or showing a replay from a different angle).
The amount of sport now being delivered to British sitting rooms via
television is unprecedented. This is particularly noticeable, of course, for
those with satellite dishes since there are three entire channels dedicated
to sport: Eurosport, running 24 hours a day; Screensport, which provides 18
hours a day during the week and 24 hours at weekends; and Sky Sports which
is on screen for about 20 hours virtually every day. True, most viewers
still have no dish, but even they can find more sport than ever before,
delivered by the four terrestrial channels. The BBC alone in the next couple
of months will be showing, in addition to its routine sports programmes, the
rest of the Five Nations championship, the fifth and sixth rounds of the FA
Cup, the European Indoor Athletics Championship, the World Figure Skating
Championships, the Grand National, the Boat Race, the start of a new season
of grand prix motor racing, the US Masters, the women's hockey Cup Final,
and the London marathon.
As with every other aspect of life touched by television (music, politics,
drama) sport is not merely conveyed to us via the medium, it is changed by
it. Some of the changes are simply in the way that we perceive the events
and are unexceptionable. The Lascube stamp was a microcosmic example; not
only does television take us closer to the activity than was previously
possible, it provides a multiplicity of viewpoints for all of us on our old
green sofas. The opening races to decide who will challenge for the
America's Cup are being covered for Sky Sports by cameramen who have been
taking their motor boats breathtakingly close to the competing yachts,
providing the viewer with an account of the racing that has literally never
been available before, except to the competitors themselves. Those standing
beside the bobsleigh run at the Winter Olympics can see each bob only for a
moment as it flashes past whereas we at home follow it all the way down.
True, we have to put up with the inanities of some of the commentators.
Helen Rollason, who seems to have been doing Desmond Lynam's share of the
BBC anchor work in the Winter Olympics as well as her own, keeps saying she
will be 'seeing' us later which is, of course, nonsense. David Vine
described one competitor in Val d'Isere as 'A big tall racer', his emphasis
implying that most of the competitors were big short men. But that is not
such a terrible price to have to pay. Other changes, however, are not
welcome. Having originally brought us such startlingly beautiful pictures of
the English countryside from race meetings such as Saturday's at Chepstow,
which would otherwise have looked like a sequence of animated oil paintings
by Stubbs, television has ruined the effect by renting space to advertisers
who install huge, garish hoardings beside the course.
A similar phenomenon now occurs in athletics and skiing. Kit manufacturers
pay top competitors huge sums to wear their goods but cameras do not
normally dwell on the feet, so the moment the winner crosses the line he
tears off his shoes or skis and holds them up beside his face so that any
picture of his winning smile is, willy nilly, also an international
advertisement. It is no exaggeration to say that in the last few days we
have spent longer looking at the striking (and doubtless copyright) design
on the skis of 16-year-old Toni Nieminen, the flying Finn, than we have
looking at him ski-jumping. Even one of those rare sports which,
technically, maintains its amateur status is treated by the BBC in the same
way that they treat Radio 1: it is made to seem commercial by the
promotional packaging. Thus Saturday's rugby match was preceded by, among
other things, an assembly of Guscott/Carling clips which 'sold' the two
players to a disco beat.
But the most annoying thing is the slow but inexorable manner in which the
packaging of sport for television eventually starts to overtake the sport
itself. The classic example is American football, a game which, even though
it is played before huge crowds, is organised entirely to suit American
television with its frequent commercial breaks. The tedium of the game
results almost entirely from this arrangement. Screensport is currently
running a trailer which urges 'Get your skates on every Monday and get up to
date on the National Hockey League' meaning, of course, the North American
ice hockey league. This is accompanied by pictures of a fight between two
players and a third sliding up the ice and crashing into the goal post - no
skill, but much mayhem.
So what's new, ask the American and Australian broadcasters who are bringing
us growing quantities of this sort of thing, sport has always meant
spectacle. Now they are driving cricket down the same road. Time was when
cricket was one of the few truly beautiful experiences to be had from
television: to lie back in a cool room during a hot summer, in front of a
screen consisting of two-thirds blue and white and one third green, and to
spend the day following a Test match, used to be a civilised and civilising
experience. Indeed it still is. But this coming Friday the Cricket World Cup
begins on Sky Sports and we are warned that matches will be played under
artificial light, the players will wear pastel coloured 'pyjamas', the sight
screens will be black and the ball white, there will be a miniature camera
built into the stumps, and microphones buried at the crease. The return to
the pavilion of anyone who is out without scoring will be accompanied on the
screen by Cholmondeley, the weeping cartoon duck.
That may be sport of a sort - television sport - and perhaps I shall find
myself hooked on it, but it does not sound much like cricket. Those who
scoff and declare that it is time for television to lead cricket out of the
dark ages might pause for a moment and think about the way television led
darts out of the dark ages. Cricket was not and is not in any sort of dark
age, and television's spin doctors will not improve the game, they will
merely improve television's ratings which is, anyway, their sole object.
And you do realise, don't you, that you ain't seen nothin' yet: on July 25,
in the middle of the fourth Test, the 1992 Olympics open in Barcelona . . .
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 17
</PAGE>
</DOC>
