ID: 201	RANK: 7	SCORE: 46.855812
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900516-0233 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-05-16-90 2312EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-Obit-Henson 5thLd-Writethru a0852 05-16 1342</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Obit-Henson, 5th Ld - Writethru, a0852,1379</SECOND>
<HEAD>Muppet Creator Jim Henson Dead at 53</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: INSERTS 2 grafs after 32nd, `His condition...,' to UPDATE
with spokesman commenting on why Henson might have allowed health
to deteriorate.</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos NY37,39; LaserColor NY40</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By LARRY McSHANE</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>NEW YORK (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Puppeteer extraordinaire Jim Henson, who gave
his voice to Kermit the Frog and his elfin spirit to a multitude of
Muppets as they taught and delighted millions worldwide, died
unexpectedly Wednesday. He was 53.
   Henson, who lived in Manhattan, died at 1:30 a.m. of
complications from pneumonia, said a statement issued by New York
Hospital. Henson had been admitted to the hospital early Tuesday
with ``galloping pneumonia'' untreated for at least three days, the
hospital said.
   ``There's a lot less sunshine in the world today,'' opera diva
Beverly Sills said.
   Henson's creatures first appeared in 1954, and he watched them
explode from a local television favorite to a worldwide phenomenon
and multimillion-dollar industry.
   His ``Sesame Street'' characters, from Kermit to Oscar the
Grouch to Big Bird, were welcomed into homes around the United
States each morning for the past 21 years. It was too soon to
assess how his death would affect the show, said spokeswoman Mary
Sue Holland.
   ``The Muppet Show,'' which starred Kermit and Miss Piggy and
debuted in 1976, became the most widely seen television program in
the world, attracting an estimated 235 million viewers in 100
countries. His magic touch was evident again this year with his
work on the box office smash ``Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles.''
   ``He was our generation's Charlie Chaplin, Mae West, W.C. Fields
and Marx Brothers, and he drew from all of them to create a new art
form,'' said Joan Ganz Cooney, chairman of Children's Television
Workshop, which produces ``Sesame Street.''
   An emotional Lena Horne, who appeared frequently with Henson's
characters over the past 20 years, said she had missed the
puppeteer Tuesday night at a gathering of the ``Sesame Street''
cast and friends. But she had no idea Henson was near death.
   ``This has just overwhelmed me,'' she said. ``We just can't
afford to keep losing our great people.''
   ``I never met a kinder, gentler, wonderful soul in the
entertainment industry or anywhere,'' said Erwin Okun, a friend and
spokesman for the Walt Disney Co.
   ``We are deeply saddened, profoundly shocked at a great loss for
the world,'' Okun said. ``He was a giant in the entertainment
industry. We are also grieving for his wonderful family.''
   Henson married his wife, Jane, in 1959, and they had five
children.
   Under an agreement signed last summer, the Walt Disney
entertainment empire purchased the rights to blend Kermit the Frog,
Miss Piggy and other animal characters created by Henson into its
theme parks, movies, TV shows and retail merchandising products.
   Henson created the Muppets 36 years ago, but they became
immensely popular after their debut in 1969 on ``Sesame Street.''
Kermit, Cookie Monster, Bert, Ernie and Grover delighted parents
while instructing their children.
   While Miss Piggy was modeled after Mae West, his characters had
star appeal that attracted diverse performers, such as opera singer
Placido Domingo and actor Danny DeVito. Characters such as ``Meryl
Sheep'' were named after celebrities.
   ``Puppets have the same sort of graceful aging that cartoon
characters have,'' Henson said in a 1986 interview. ``I'm sure
Kermit will stay younger a lot longer than I will.''
   Henson's work with the Muppets earned him many awards, including
a Peabody for excellence in television programming and a Grammy for
a Muppet album. His Saturday morning cartoon show, ``The Muppet
Babies,'' won four consecutive Emmys for outstanding animated
program.
   Henson admitted the word ``muppet'' was something he just made
up, although to appease interviewers he would say it was a
combination of ``marionette'' and ``puppet.'' In addition to
Kermit, he did the voices of Ernie and game show host Guy Smiley.
   Millions of children grew up on ``Sesame Street,'' which is seen
in more than 80 countries and has 15 international co-productions.
   The show is aimed at children 1 to 5, teaching basic math and
English to children around the world. Although the program was
initially intended to assist inner-city children, its popularity
far transcended that.
   Henson educated adults as well. ``Not only was Jim a good friend
for 20 years, he was the person who taught me more than anyone
else,'' said Bob McGrath, a ``Sesame Street'' regular for two
decades.
   Bob Keeshan, television's ``Captain Kangaroo,'' said Henson
``never talked down to children, he never degraded children, and
that's why his work was universally accepted.''
   ``His contribution was not just to children's TV,'' Keeshan
added. ``Jim's work really was universal and appreciated by adults
as much as children.''
   Fred Rogers, host of another children's program, Mister Rogers'
Neighborhood, noted Henson's enormous contributions to public
television.
   ``You could feel those puppets come alive when he put his hands
and himself into them,'' Rogers said.
   Peggy Charren, founder of Action for Children's Television, a
lobbying group, said, ``I can hardly believe it. He was so young
and there was so much ahead for him to do.''
   Henson's death was the third to strike Sesame Street in the last
year. Joe Raposo, who wrote many of the songs for the popular
children's series, died last year at age 52. A televised tribute to
Raposo was scheduled for Wednesday night. Former cast member
Northern Calloway, who played David, also died recently.
   First lady Barbara Bush, who recently appeared on ``Sesame
Street'' to promote her literacy campaign, released a statement
saying:
   ``Mr. Henson's pioneering contribution through the educational
and entertaining Sesame Street and Muppets characters was unique in
the history of television.
   ``His dedication to wholesome children's programming has
enlivened the minds of young and old alike. Mr. Henson's
originality and creativity will influence entertainers, educators
and, most important of all, children for generations to come.''
   Dr. David M. Gelmont, who treated Henson at the hospital, said
Henson apparently came down with the flu on Friday in North
Carolina, and was examined by a doctor there who did not find the
pneumonia.
   His condition worsened and Henson returned to New York on
Monday, but the pneumonia ultimately resulted in multi-organ
failure, Gelmont said. In response to a reporter's question,
Gelmont said the pneumonia was ``categorically'' not AIDS-related.
   Asked why Henson might have allowed his health to deteriorate
for several days without seeking further help, Susan Berry, a
publicist for Jim Henson Productions, replied:
   ``My guess is he was totally absorbed, he couldn't be bothered.
He was very cavalier with his health. I've known him for five
years, and I think he was sick twice during that time.''
   Henson was born in Greenville, Miss., on Sept. 24, 1936.
   The Muppets first appeared on a local Washington, D.C.,
television program ``Sam and Friends.'' Kermit made his debut on
the show, which won a local Emmy in 1959.
   During the 1960s, Henson and his troupe appeared regularly on
``The Jimmy Dean Show'' and ``The Ed Sullivan Show.'' Rowlf, a
talking dog, frequently carried on conversations with Dean.
   Things broke wide open for Henson when his characters appeared
on ``Sesame Street'' in 1969. He introduced ``The Muppet Show'' in
1976, and it captured three Emmys during its five-year syndicated
run.
   The Muppets also appeared in the first year of ``Saturday Night
Live'' in 1975. The creations for that show included the idol-like
Mighty Fuvog.
   His recent television work included ``The Ghost of Faffner
Hall'' on HBO and ``Fraggle Rock'' for cable TV. He won another
Emmy for ``The Jim Henson Hour,'' a special on NBC.
   Henson's puppets moved to the big screen in 1979 with ``The
Muppet Movie,'' followed by ``The Great Muppet Caper'' in 1981 and
the 1984, ``The Muppets Take Manhattan,'' which ended with the
marriage of Kermit and Miss Piggy.
   Henson also directed the fantasy films ``The Dark Crystal'' in
1982 and ``Labyrinth'' in 1986. He co-directed the former with
Frank Oz, the voice of Miss Piggy.
   His family said plans for a memorial service will be announced
later.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
