ID: 201	RANK: 97	SCORE: 19.172852
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911112-0016
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911112-0016.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Lost Sparkle:
   Disney Hits Bad Patch
   After Eisner's Six Years
   Of Giddy Expansion
   ---
   Theme Park Attendance Slips,
   Some Movies Are Bombs;
   Film Library Peters Out
   ---
   Future May Still Be Bright
   ----
   By Richard Turner
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
11/12/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<CO>
   DIS U.DIS
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)
STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
</IN>
<NS>
ANALYSTS COMMENTS ON STOCKS, INDUSTRIES &amp; COMPANIES (ANL)
CORPORATE PROFILES (PRO)
STOCK &amp; OTHER MARKET NEWS (STK)
</NS>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
EUROPE (EU)
FAR EAST (FE)
FLORIDA (FL)
FRANCE (FR)
JAPAN (JA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
GREAT BRITAIN (UK)
UNITED STATES (US)
WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)
</RE>
<LP>
   BURBANK, Calif. -- Many of the executives who work in the
new "Team Disney" corporate headquarters building here, the
one with seven huge stone dwarfs on the pediment, say they
hate the place.
   They don't say it too loudly, though, because it is the
pride and joy of Michael Eisner, the chairman of Walt Disney
Co. A patron of ambitious architecture, he has been compared
to the Medicis.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   From the outside, the neoclassical structure is a striking
and original monument to Disney's successes of the past
decade. Inside, people call it a "rabbit warren," because of
all the isolated little hutches and cold, uncommunal
corridors.
   Disney has become the butt of particularly nasty jokes. It
is a regular object of ridicule by the satirical magazine
Spy, for instance, which notes that disaffected Disney
employees describe their workplace as "Mauschwitz." Others
say the building is claustrophobic, like being trapped in a
cartoon nightmare with the walls closing in.
   In a sense, the walls are closing in on Disney. After half
a dozen years of giddy expansion, Disney has raised ticket
prices at its theme parks about as high as they can go ($33
for a one-day adult ticket to Walt Disney World). Its
home-video division has squeezed much of the value out of
what had been an underexploited film library. Even as Disney
announced a plan last week for a $600 million studio
expansion, its movie-production rate has reached capacity.
   Businesses that once were unique -- feature-length
animated films and Disney Stores -- are facing unprecedented
competition from such entertainment giants as Time Warner
Inc. Disney's nascent record business is off to a terrible
start. Disney wants a major presence in recording, with that
industry's low overhead and big rewards. But getting into it
is expensive, with record labels such as Geffen and A&amp;M
fetching $500 million or more. Hollywood Records, started by
Disney from scratch last year, reportedly has gone through
$25 million this year, with little to show for it, except an
underwhelming comeback by the rock group Queen and records by
such artists as WW3 and The Scream.
   And Disney's management has been found to be mortal after
all. Mr. Eisner, Disney President Frank Wells and Jeffrey
Katzenberg, the chairman of Walt Disney Studios, no longer
are treated as gods in Hollywood or on Wall Street.
   So, in a business that lives on image, the buzz about
Disney is depressing. News articles skewer the company for
everything from a cold streak in movie making to its menacing
three day-care centers with threats of lawsuits for depicting
Disney characters on their buildings without permission.
Disney executives have been criticized for fighting with the
late Jim Henson's cuddly Muppets, which Disney was to
acquire. Negotiations with the Henson family broke down into
recriminations after Mr. Henson's death. Disney tussled with
singer Peggy Lee over song royalties. Miss Lee, confined to a
wheelchair, was awarded $2.3 million by a jury. Disney is
appealing.
   Reviews of a new Disney film, "Billy Bathgate," have
critiqued the company's management style along with the
movie. Vincent Canby in the New York Times said the film,
while "not a disaster," seemed "homogenized" and influenced
by "the front-office types who shadowed its production. . .
."
   The film business has won Disney the most unwanted
attention lately. Many film makers, actors and agents say
they feel stifled by the way Disney asserts its control over
every little detail of movie production. (Studio chief
Katzenberg chose Richard Gere's collar stays in "Pretty
Woman.") And some people say they won't work with Disney. The
week before "The Rocketeer" opened to disappointing
box-office returns last summer, director Joe Johnston
publicly blasted Disney's micromanagement and said he would
never do another film for the studio. Alec Baldwin, star of
the poorly received "The Marrying Man," told anyone with a
tape recorder: "In my opinion, Disney doesn't know
{expletive} about making movies."
   Early this year, Mr. Katzenberg moved to cut budgets.
"Dick Tracy," which cost $100 million to make and market, had
been a watershed, he said: It was a departure from Disney's
policy of making films with tight budgets and reasonable
returns, not huge hit-or-miss blockbusters. At Hollywood
Pictures, the hard-luck new Disney film division with the
Egyptian logo ("If it's the Sphinx, it stinks," wags say),
the average film budget has been cut to less than $15 million
from more than $20 million. The new plan is embodied in films
like Disney's Touchstone remake of "Father of the Bride"
starring Steve Martin and, from Hollywood Pictures, a
thriller called "The Hand That Rocks the Cradle."
   A week ago, a longtime bull on Disney stock, analyst
Richard Simon of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co., took Disney off his
recommended list, and the same day a First Boston Corp.
analyst quietly downgraded it from "strong buy" to "hold."
Analysts have been lowering earnings estimates ever since
theme-park attendance started slipping more than a year ago.
Yesterday, Disney closed at $114.625 a share in New York
Stock Exchange composite trading, down 25 cents.
   "Look, you take a couple of smart guys, and you hand them
one of the great franchises in America," says Emanuel Gerard,
a securities analyst and former Warner executive. "They
figure out how to skin the mouse more ways than you can skin
a mouse. But they've done it all. They've gotten big, and
their overhead has gotten high. So a consumer recession
happens, and they get hit by a buzz saw."
   "It's more interesting reading about a company like ours
tripping up," Mr. Eisner grouses, while conceding certain
minor public-relations failures. "We're the big guy on the
block, not some sleepy little company in the Valley anymore.
{Movie chief} Jeffrey {Katzenberg} runs it strong, and we
protect our copyrights. We've had some bad luck."
   But, he adds, "We do a lot of research about exposure, and
there are no indications of {ill will}. Our esteem is higher
than ever."
   Disney has done a lot that's right. It has been innovative
in corporate financing, letting investors foot the bill for
much of its film output (and now for some of its television
programs), without giving up control or too high a return.
Its film division under Mr. Katzenberg had an unmatched
record of consistent box-office success, producing films with
efficiency, restraint and -- crucially -- a minimum of
expensive flops. Disney beat rival MCA Inc. in building a
Florida movie-studio tour, and went off on an unprecedented
hotel-building jag, adding nearly 10,000 lucrative rooms on
its own property in Orlando.
   Disney is an easy target because it has been so successful
in the past six years under Mr. Eisner. Goldman Sachs's Mr.
Simon says his removal of Disney from his recommended list,
where it had been most of the time since 1985 -- has nothing
to do with long-term expectations. "I'm just saying that at a
multiple of 20 times earnings, I don't want to be a buyer,"
he says. "I don't mean to suggest it's a fragile company."
   Indeed, the analyst predicts that the $3.6 billion Euro
Disney, a huge theme park opening April 12 on former sugar
beet fields outside Paris, will be packed from the start.
(Disney owns 49% of Euro Disney; 51% of its shares are
publicly traded in Europe.)
   Mr. Eisner says he runs Disney for parents who buy its
stock for their children at birth with the expectation it
will pay for college. "I like to think in 50-year periods,"
he says. He hasn't backed down from his pledge to produce 20%
earnings growth and return on equity compounded annually. But
Disney executives lately haven't been willing to say just how
many years Mr. Eisner is talking about. He used to say
"five."
   Bad vibrations and Disney's slippage have caused the
company to shed some of its hauteur. Mr. Katzenberg has held
conciliatory meetings with other Hollywood filmmakers and
their representatives. But few expect Disney executives to
embrace a new humility. "We're Type-A people," Mr. Eisner
says. Another senior executive asks: "What are we supposed to
do -- write on the blackboard 25 times `We will be less
aggressive?'"
   Mr. Eisner recently asserted control of the theme park
division, which he had more or less left alone for five
years. Theme parks are responsible for 60% to 65% of Disney's
operating income. Reportedly concerned that the culture of
the division had become too insular, too Old Guard, he
promoted his corporate chief financial officer, Judson Green,
to head the division -- running it from California instead of
Florida. Though he won't discuss it, Mr. Eisner was said to
be distressed that Disney World attendance has been off as
much as 20%. (Disney doesn't release figures.) Executives at
MCA's Universal Studios Florida believe their competing
attraction will have as many as 300,000 more visitors this
year than Disney's studio tour.
   Upending tradition, Disney has been discounting furiously:
Florida visitors to Disney-MGM Studios get a free
videocassette of "Fantasia." Disneyland was mobbed last
weekend with kids who were admitted free with a $25 grocery
receipt from Vons, the biggest chain in Southern California.
Disney has expanded the commissions paid tour operators and
hoteliers.
   Disney executives see themselves as first and foremost in
the software business: They concentrate on stories and
characters that live forever (the new, eagerly awaited
animated film "Beauty and the Beast" is meant to be in that
category), not distribution systems that get overtaken by new
technologies. Disney is especially proud that it didn't fall
into what Mr. Eisner calls a "shark frenzy" of bidding to buy
movie theaters a few years back.
   One of Disney's proudest achievements, its home-video
division, is the uncontested leader in the rich
"sell-through" business, selling videos directly to
consumers. It is widely admired for aggressive marketing. But
future business will more nearly track the success of
Disney's current theatrical releases, because the vaults once
full of Disney classics are practically empty now. (They do
still have "Snow White" and "101 Dalmatians.")
   Disney has mapped its future far into the next century.
And while films will remain a big part of the picture, the
company will continue to be centered on theme parks. After
Euro Disney, Disney plans to build a second theme park in
Southern California, and possibly a third.
   The master plan calls for a second Japanese park, too, yet
another one in Florida, and yet another in Europe. That's
probably it for the giant parks, but Mr. Eisner muses about
creating smaller attractions in major cities, to bring the
"California dream" of open space -- "people looking for
something safe, clean and fun" -- back to increasingly
crowded and stressful cities. But others doubt that, as a
practical matter, Disney will find it opportune to stretch
itself that thin and risk cheapening Mickey Mouse with less
than spectacular parks.
   Though Disney has long been mentioned as a possible buyer
of a TV network, some analysts believe Mr. Eisner will simply
never make a big, expensive acquisition with the company's
$1.5 billion in cash or from the $3 billion to $4 billion
that it could comfortably borrow. Besides that, owning a
network isn't crucial if those who own the networks right now
need Disney's programming.
   Mr. Eisner says a big acquisition isn't his mission: "It's
not to be the biggest, to have the most toys, to own things
writers think are important and sexy like networks, cable
companies, satellites and countries. Our mission is to grow
our own. We can have a nice respectable 20% without having to
impress anybody."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
