ID: 285	RANK: 41	SCORE: 15.865162
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910827-0087
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910827-0087.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Lost and Found: The Saga of the Sacred Buffalo Hide
   ----
   By Amy Gamerman
</HL>
<DATE>
08/27/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10
</SO>
<LP>
   Macy, Neb. -- On the last day of the Omaha tribe's 187th
annual powwow, the dancers cleared the dirt-packed arena for
three men in suits and ties, bearing a muslin- and
bubble-wrapped bundle the shape of a king-size pillow.
   Under the eye of Marion A. Tyndall, captain of the Omaha
tribal police, the men carefully unwrapped a small buffalo
hide the color of yellowing cream, its spine embroidered with
a row of shell discs and buttons, with bits of fading
weave-work tied to its little hooves. They draped the hide
over a willow frame and assembled a curious pipe, its red
stone bowl shaped like a stylized buffalo hoof.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The suits stood back, and a pan of smoldering cedar
needles was set on the ground. Lawrence Gilpin, a tribal
elder, fanned the fragrant smoke over the hide and pipe with
an eagle feather, and prayed to them in the Omaha language.
   "He's thanking God for bringing the hide back to our
people," said David Tyndall, a dancer dressed in a "fancy
dance" costume fringed with black and yellow yarn, who
translated in between snapping pictures. "He's asking the
buffalo to watch over us, to give us guidance, to lead us to
something good."
   Almost a century after it was stolen, the sacred white
buffalo hide, a symbol of Omaha survival and one of the
tribe's most revered objects, was back home. But not everyone
on the reservation was happy about it. Outside the arena,
small knots of dancers stood waiting for the hide to return
to its bubble-wrap.
   "My elders told me to stay out of the arena," said
21-year-old Sandro Lovejoy. "I won't dance if it's in there,"
agreed Felicia Phillips, powwow princess for the Lincoln
Indian Club.
   The return of this antique buffalo hide after generations
of obscurity in a Bronx storage house caps a colorful story
of thieves and unscrupulous collectors, of diligent detective
work and serendipitous discoveries. But it has also come to
symbolize the Omaha's ambivalent and sometimes painful
struggle to regain a cultural heritage most know little
about.
   There are few more poignant emblems of that heritage than
the sacred white buffalo hide and pipe. For generations (the
hide itself may be as much as 300 years old; the pipe is even
older), these relics presided over the seasonal buffalo hunts
on which this tribe of hunters and farmers depended for
survival. They were celebrated in a four-day ceremony of
songs and prayers, traveled in the care of a special keeper
and resided in their own tent. Tribe members won honor for
their families by offering buffalo tongues to the hide.
   But by 1898, the buffalo tongues had run out. The
near-extinction of the buffalo herd, combined with pressure
from local missionaries, all but wiped out the rituals that
had united the Omahas for centuries. No longer worshipped,
the hide and pipe remained in their sacred tent guarded by
their last keeper, 83-year-old Wakonmonthin, or Walking
Sacred One. He was prepared to bury the relics until two
anthropologists, Alice Fletcher, a Peabody fellow, and
Francis La Flesche, a native Omaha, convinced him to let them
store it in a "great brick house," dba the Peabody Museum.
But days before Wakonmonthin was to give over the sacred
objects, thieves stole them from their tent.
   "The grief of the old keeper was most pathetic," Fletcher
and La Flesche recounted in their 1905-06 report on the
Omahas. "For months every morning he went out and while yet
the morning star hung in the eastern sky he wailed as for the
dead. His sorrow shortened his days, for he survived only a
season or two."
   After some searching, the writers located the hide in the
possession of a Chicago collector, but couldn't persuade him
to sell it back. The "white skin of a sacred bison" and the
pipe were later deposited in the Chicago Academy of Sciences,
until the owner decided to sell them in 1925.
   That was the last word of the pair until 1976, when Gary
Galante, then an inventory technician at New York's Heye
Foundation, stumbled across them in the Heye's Bronx
storehouse during the first-ever inventory of its collection.
(The almost one million artifacts have since become the
property of the Smithsonian Institution, which will open the
National Museum of the American Indian in the year 2000.)
   Although Mr. Galante reported his discovery, the Heye
Foundation kept mum. Then in the early '80s, Dennis Hastings,
director of the Omaha Tribal Historical Research Project,
requested a list of the Heye's collection of Omaha artifacts.
   "It was listed as an albino hide," he said. "When I saw
it, I knew that was it. I was constantly searching for it."
   Mr. Hastings, a massively built man who returned to the
reservation 11 years ago with an anthropology B.A. from
Berkeley, has spent more than a decade tracking down such
artifacts. Two years ago, he helped secure the return of the
sacred pole -- a wood staff topped by a human scalp that was
revered for centuries as a symbol of the Omahas -- along with
280 other artifacts deposited at the Peabody Museum by
Fletcher and La Flesche. And this October, the tribe will
reinter 92 Omaha remains, returned from the University of
Nebraska (the tribe has permitted university scientists to
study them first).
   Inspired by those successes, the tribe appealed to the
Smithsonian for the return of the sacred hide and pipe in
March. In keeping with the institution's policy on ill-gotten
artifacts, the board of the nascent American Indian museum
agreed.
   This homecoming is partly symbolic: Since the tribe has no
safe place to keep repatriated artifacts, they have all been
stored 127 miles away at the University of Nebraska in
Lincoln. In the meantime, Mr. Hastings is trying to raise
money to build a museum on the reservation. The museum, to be
designed by Frank Gehry, would house returned Omaha objects
-- including, Mr. Hastings hopes, the Smithsonian's remaining
90-odd collection.
   This $5 million-$6 million project poses an enormous
challenge for this cash-poor tribe. Their reservation, a
52,000-acre patchwork of rolling hills and farmland, is a
choice piece of eastern Nebraska. But signs of poverty
abound, from the decaying HUD houses to the boarded-up shops
dotting Macy's main street. Of the 2,700 Omahas who live here
(there are 5,200 nationwide), 75% are unemployed, according
to Doran Morris, the tribe's chairman, and more than half are
alcoholics.
   By winning back artifacts such as the sacred pole and
hide, Mr. Hastings hopes to strengthen his tribe's fragile
sense of cultural identity. He has a lot of work to do. Few
tribal members know much about these sacred artifacts. And
while some Omahas have welcomed their return, others view it
with dread.
   "I tell you, that pole, there were a lot of people afraid
of it," said John Lesley, who had set up camp on the powwow
grounds, where stray dogs wandered amid the scores of tents
and teepees. It didn't help matters that the man who oversaw
the pole during its celebratory return died of a stroke soon
afterward. "People said, `That's what you get,'" said Mr.
Lesley.
   On the eve of the return of the sacred hide, the
whispering had started again.
   "I heard people talking about the robe, saying, `What's it
going to do, kill more of us?'" said Lt. Ben Cline, as he
drove to the city of Omaha the last Sunday of the powwow to
escort the relics to Macy.
   Operation Sacred Hide had kicked off the night before,
when Mr. Galante, now assistant curator of the National
Museum of the American Indian, flew in from New York with the
painstakingly packed hide and pipe strapped into the seat
beside him. In Omaha, he was met by two Smithsonian
associates and Lt. Cline's police escort.
   The frightened drummers refused to play when the hide was
brought into the arena, but otherwise the ceremony went off
without a hitch. Soon, the relics were on the road again, to
join other Omaha artifacts in a storage cabinet in Lincoln.
(Out of respect for its powers, the sacred pole has been
placed in another building.)
   "I feel like 20 pounds just left my shoulders," said Mr.
Hastings, as the tribal police car sped back toward Macy.
   But the real work was still ahead. Mr. Hastings now has to
find the money to build his museum. "I've got a 14-foot wall
in front of me, and now I've got to figure out how to get
over it," he said. "It scares me, but then taking on this
whole project scared me. . . . It's going to work. I'm
optimistic."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
