ID: 285	RANK: 45	SCORE: 15.066916
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910531-0072
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910531-0072.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Western-Art Show
   Challenges Beliefs
   Of Frontier Images
   ---
   Critics of Capital Exhibit Say
   Pioneers Are Defamed
   By Thomas of Collection
   ----
   By James M. Perry
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
05/31/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4B
</SO>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)
</GV>
<RE>
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA (DC)
</RE>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- William H. Truettner, a curator at the
National Museum of American Art, pauses in front of Frederic
Remington's famous painting, "Fight for the Water Hole."
   "This painting," he says, "is not just about five cowboys
defending a water hole against Indians." It's "about fear of
the impending industrial era. These `last-stand' paintings
were popular with the wealthy patrons who bought them. They
had a lot to lose with social change."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Mr. Truettner organized the exhibit, "The West as America,
Reinterpreting Images of the Frontier," of which "Fight for
the Water Hole" is a small part, to reinterpret western art.
"We wanted to show these paintings were a part of the
nation's expansionist philosophy, which overwhelmed Indian
and Hispanic cultures. . .," Mr. Truettner says.
   What has developed, though, is another springtime dust-up
over federal arts policy. Last year at about this time,
critics charged the National Endowment for the Arts with
peddling obscenity and pornography. Now they accuse the
National Museum of American Art of staging an exhibit that
defames pioneers who crossed the prairies and won the West.
   The museum, which shares space in the old Patent Office
Building with the National Portrait Gallery, is a part of the
Smithsonian Institution. And it is the federal government's
oldest art collection. In its peaceful 160-year-history, the
museum has never sought, or received, much adverse publicity
-- until now. "I think you've got a political agenda," Sen.
Ted Stevens (R., Alaska), told a nonplussed Robert McC.
Adams, the Smithsonian's secretary, at a recent hearing of
the Senate Appropriations Committee. "You're in for a
battle," Sen. Stevens said. "I'm going to get other people to
help me make you make sense." (The museum is seeking $7.2
million from the government for the next fiscal year. But
museum officials are quick to note that this exhibit, which
runs through July 7, was financed entirely out of private
funds.)
   "The interpretation of these paintings amounts to knocking
the whole Western experience by saying that it was a bad
thing, and it would have been better to leave it in a state
of nature," says Sen. Slade Gorton (R., Wash.). "That's an
easy statement for Eastern art critics to make a hundred
years after the fact."
   Even more damaging are remarks of historian Daniel
Boorstin, former librarian of Congress, recorded in a
"comment book" available to record visitors' reactions.
"Perverse, historically inaccurate," Mr. Boorstin writes.
   Other visitors agree." The commentaries are `politically
correct' garbage," writes E. M. Otto, of Emigrant, Mont.
   Mr. Truettner, a curator at the museum since 1966 and a
specialist in Western art, is astonished at this emotional
response. "It just serves to demonstrate how deeply imbedded
was the idea that these pictures were truthful. Well, they
are truthful, to the extent that people in the 19th century
believed them to be truthful. But we are trying to suggest
something else. . . . Consciously or unconsciously, these
painters were propagandists. They were intent on persuading
people that the settling of the West was a legitimate and
noble effort.
   "The reaction we are getting makes us think the show was
long overdue."
   The paintings, by everyone's calculation, are often
spectacular. There are 164 of them, from Remington through
Albert Bierstadt, George Caleb Bingham, George Catlin,
Emanuel Leutze, Thomas Moran, Charles Russell and N.C. Wyeth.
   It is the museum's interpretation of them that has aroused
controversy. Sen. Alan Simpson (R., Wyo.), something of a
student of Western art, has seen the show twice, and he says
he's "shocked" at what he calls "revisionist" commentary. "To
read all this religious and symbolic nonsense into some of
these paintings is silly."
   Not to Mr. Truettner. He pauses in front of Richard Caton
Woodville's "Old '76 and Young '48." It shows a young Army
officer, back from service in the Mexican War, relating his
experiences to his grandfather, whose portrait as a young
officer in the Continental Army hangs on the wall. Black
servants are gathered in the doorway.
   By 1849, the date of the painting, Americans had
"canonized" the American Revolution, says Mr. Truettner. And
so Woodville's painting shows "this young man seeking his
grandfather's seal of approval that the war with Mexico was
just as heroic as the war for independence."
   As for the black servants in the doorway, "their
positioning suggests the uncertain consequences of the war's
aftermath to the status of black Americans," according to the
catalog published in conjunction with the exhibit.
   An 1850 painting, William Jewett's "The Promised Land --
the Grayson Family," shows Mr. Grayson and his wife and son
dressed in ermine, poised at the top of a hill, ready to
descend as settlers into an unspoiled Sacramento Valley.
"They are portrayed as a holy family," says Mr. Truettner.
   But the painting is not really truthful, he argues. By
1850, the valley was filled with speculators and scoundrels
looking for gold. "The painting is an effort to justify the
westward expansion as a religious mission."
   "A lot of people have seen this show, and they either love
it or hate it," says Madeleine Jacobs, the Smithsonian's
public-affairs director. She says she is preparing a package
of material, including the catalog, for Sen. Stevens. "We're
also inviting him to come see the show. He hasn't seen it
yet, you know."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
