ID: 93	RANK: 43	SCORE: 8.306367
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910620-0135
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910620-0135.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   REVIEW &amp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):
   India's Second Chance
</HL>
<DATE>
06/20/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14
</SO>
<RE>
FAR EAST (FE)
INDIA (II)
</RE>
<LP>
   With most of the votes now tallied, India's election
victors are struggling to splice together the country's
fourth government in 19 months. What kind of government it
will be now becomes the crucial question for India.
   The biggest winner, the traditionally dominant Congress
(I) Party, had only one candidate who seemed to have learned
enough both from past successes and mistakes to offer a
chance of hauling India into the modern world. That was
former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, whose five-year term
ended with the loss of his party's parliamentary majority in
1989. Mr. Gandhi was courting voters this round with promises
to resume his mid-1980s drive for a more open economy when he
was assassinated May 21 at a campaign rally.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Since Mr. Gandhi's murder, his Congress Party has been
trying frantically to scrounge up a viable nominee for prime
minister. Mr. Gandhi's replacement as Congress Party
president, 69-year-old P.V. Narasimha Rao, is in bad health
and seems to be serving mainly as a place holder. The mission
of finding a lasting party leader has become urgent now that
the projected vote totals show Congress short of a majority,
but with enough seats to negotiate the leadership of a new
coalition government.
   To form a government, Congress members face the double
challenge of drumming up a viable prime minister as well as
pasting together a majority coalition over which this mystery
minister could preside. Small wonder that with the top
politicians so befuddled, the June 15 edition of one of the
country's leading magazines, India Today, refers to India as
"one of the most ungovernable countries in the world."
   Fortunately, India still has one ace in the hole -- its
voters. With each creak and heave of the three recent
administrations, voters seem to have been getting a sharper
idea of what they want -- and what they are fed up with. If
the politicians would stop squabbling long enough to heed the
message of the recent polls, they might find that India's 835
million people are trying to steer their country in a more
governable direction.
   What voters clearly don't want is the old-style
poverty-making state planning, which mainly promotes economic
stagnation, corruption, frustration and resulting ethnic
strife.
   The steps needed for economic development are by now no
secret. The world has seen enough socialist experiments fail
-- from India's democratic version to the Soviet Union's and
China's more hideous communist models. We have all marveled
at the rise since World War II of Asia's capitalist tiger
economies. Even India's traditionally statist neighbors in
Pakistan and Bangladesh have been turning recently toward
more free-market ways. When Rajiv Gandhi pointed in that
direction for two years or so in the mid-1980s, Indians were
clearly ready to follow; they responded with a burst of
economic growth. Now they want more.
   Rajiv Gandhi died while seeking what he called a "second
chance" to pursue the reforms that would let India fulfill
its huge potential as the most populous of the world's
democratic, developing nations. The challenge for the
jostling Congress leaders who survive Mr. Gandhi is to redeem
his free-market election pledge that has won them this second
chance.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
