ID: 93	RANK: 52	SCORE: 8.193092

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-66787 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea027___94028" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-027 </AU>
JPRS 
Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     19 April 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> INDIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   U.S. Initiatives Seen Favoring Pakistan </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    U.S. Initiatives Seen Favoring Pakistan </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94AS0281A Jalandhar PUNJAB KESARI in Hindi 19 Apr 94 p 6 </F>
<F P=103> 94AS0281A </F>
<F P=104>  Jalandhar PUNJAB KESARI </F>
<F P=105>  Hindi </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Punam I. Kaushish: "The U.S. Proposal Is Against India's </F>
Interest and in Favor of Pakistan"] 
  [Text] Do you remember an incident related to Kennedy? 
During his talks with President Chiari of Panama, he turned to 
one of his assistants and said, "I am not managing this 
negotiation very well." The assistant asked, "What makes you 
think that?" Kennedy responded, "He says that we had committed 
atrocities on them in the past, and I agree with him." 
  The time has changed from Kennedy to Clinton and the 
situation has changed from Panama Canal to India. The United 
States has traveled far. However, the president's talks are the 
same. Except that Bill Clinton will not admit that the United 
States has been nasty to India. Robin Raphel will never admit 
that the United States favors Pakistan. Strobe Talbott cannot 
deny that the relationship between India and the United States 
has soured. Winter goes and summer comes, however, from the 
deputy state secretary to the President, everyone curses India 
with full ardor be it the issue of human rights violations or 
Sikhs rights or the Kashmir issue. 
  We hope from Talbott's recent visit to India a new chapter 
will be added to India-United States relations. He did try to 
soothe India over Kashmir and human rights. He spent most of his 
time explaining the Clinton government's South Asia policy. It 
emphasizes nuclear non-proliferation and tells how the nuclear 
capability of India and Pakistan can be controlled. He talked 
about making South Asia nuclear free and kept India and Pakistan 
talking about non-proliferation while discussing the interests 
of a platform of nine countries including the United States, 
England, France, Russia, China, Japan, Germany, India, and 
Pakistan. 
  This sends out a clear message. The United States wants to 
remain the only superpower in the world. It wants to pressure 
India to terminate its nuclear and missiles programs. Washington 
understands that India will not bow down under U.S. pressure. 
Thus, it will adopt a policy that serves U.S. interests. 
  There are two aspects of this plan. First, Prime Minister 
Narasimha Rao has received an invitation from President Clinton 
to visit the United States next month. The letter goes like 
this: "I am waiting to meet you. At that time, we will analyze 
world relations as well as our mutual relations. The purpose of 
this is improve U.S.-India relations." One veteran leader 
commented on it in these words, "This letter does not stand 
anywhere when compared to President Reagan's warm letter to 
Rajiv Gandhi." 
  Second, Talbott met with all leaders one by one. Mr. Rao 
expressed India's concern over U.S. plans to supply F-16s to 
Pakistan. However, Talbott's assurance was very restricted. He 
said that he did not want to play the Pakistan card. In 
addition, he criticized Dulles. 
  The hint about Kashmir was also very unclear. Robin Raphel 
declares Kashmir to be a disputed region, but Talbott talks 
about the Shimla agreement. The truth is the Washington is still 
kicking the Kashmir issue around. One Indian observer commented 
that the U.S. proposal is analogous to saying [in wrestling], "I 
have pinned down and I am also pinned down." We should restrict 
our program and Pakistan will get F-16s. This is not 
negotiation; this is a joke. 
  In addition, Talbott expressed confidence about his trip to 
Pakistan. This means that Washington and Islamabad have agreed 
on some confidential pact. The special condition of this could 
be that Pakistan has agreed to restrict its nuclear program. It 
should be remembered here that the commander in chief of 
Pakistani armed forces was purchasing weapons in the United 
States during those days. All Talbott said was, "The United 
States and Pakistan have laid the foundation stone for 
progressing in the right direction." 
  One Pakistani spokesman said that their government will 
consider any proposal that helps balance power between India and 
Pakistan. However, these special issues can be different. This 
way, Talbott has been successful in his lump deal. This means 
that Pakistan will restrict its nuclear program in exchange for 
receiving F-16 fighter planes. This will lead to U.S. pressure 
on India to restrict its high technology, space, and nuclear 
programs. Talbott denies that he is tying Kashmir to nuclear 
non-proliferation. It is incorrect. As for Pakistan, it has 
always viewed this issue within the framework of Kashmir and has 
tied relationship with India to it. The United States knows that 
it cannot change Pakistan's determination. It proposed the idea 
of India and Pakistan forming a regional group to resolve their 
problems. At the same time, they should limit their nuclear 
weapons. 
  Still, it was clear to India. That is why Prime Minister 
Narasimha Rao had told Talbott that India will not sign the NPT 
[Nonproliferation Treaty]. It will not express its reaction to 
U.S. supplying weapons to Pakistan because it is actively 
helping the terrorists. Ambassador Siddartha Shankar Ray 
commented, "How can it be logical for the United States to 
increase India's defense-related worries and then pressure India 
to reduce its defense forces?" 
  If there are so many disagreements between India and the 
United States, why was not the non-proliferation issue given 
much importance during Talbott's visit? If we look at it from 
the U.S. perspective, we will learn that Talbott's goal was to 
first target the nuclear weapons and then end the nuclear 
program. We can say that this task is the most complicated after 
the end of the Cold War. 
  The U.S. foreign policy can be viewed from U.S. economic 
prosperity angle. Asia is the only path to its future 
prosperity. Unfortunately, Clinton strategy is to "gain a lot 
without much work" and all this without facing any danger. The 
Asian leaders are opposing it because they find that bringing 
Washington's trade here means Washington forcing its political 
wishes on them. 
  There are two basic aspects of Clinton's Asia policy. First, 
on 3 June he has to decide whether to keep the most favored 
nation clause for China or not. Second is to implement the U.S. 
law Super-301, which empowers the U.S. President to impose 
restrictions on the nations that close their markets to U.S. 
products. The target this time is Japan. 
  In other words, the U.S. administration has become alert. It 
does not want to see another failure in the Indian 
sub-continent. That is why it wants to impose limited 
restrictions and not fight the whole war at once. It is 
targeting India and Pakistan in this context. 
  It is adamant on the proposal related to nuclear 
non-proliferation and weapons control on multi-national 
agreement. He has recently increased the number of nations from 
five to nine, because the idea of five nations was not 
acceptable and it did not satisfy India. Therefore, it has been 
suggested in the U.S. proposals that initial talks be held once 
of twice a year on one issue and these talks can be started by 
either the United States or Japan. 
  The defense in South Asia should be made the basic issue for 
these talks. Each point should be discussed to attain the goal. 
The U.S. proposal emphasizes raising the defense issues in South 
Asia in these talks and pointing out the points of dissention 
that cause these problems. There are provisions to impose 
restrictions on the production of nuclear weapons. This task 
will be taken care of by other associated nations. 
  It will be a good thing if the two countries agree on an 
issue. This platform will monitor to see the rate of progress. 
The basis for any decision is that all involved nations agree. 
  This agenda shows that the U.S. intentions are not 
honorable. 
India will oppose any step that is against it. Of course, Prime 
Minister Narasimha Rao will discuss all these issues with 
President Bill Clinton in Washington next month. The United 
States definitely is very important for India, however, the fact 
is that the United States is not always correct; other countries 
are always wrong! 
  Therefore, New Delhi must be fully prepared and the Rajiv 
Gandhi formula about NPT must be made clear once again. It said 
that it must be accepted by all the nations and all must agree 
to gradually get rid of their nuclear weapons by 2010. The U.S. 
proposal that is in front of us is according to the U.S. and 
Pakistani wishes; not to India's. The United States should deal 
with India carefully. India can do a lot for the United States, 
but the United States should also bend a little and try to 
understand facts. Let us hope that Narasimha Rao during his trip 
will be able to convince Clinton to follow Kennedy's footsteps 
when dealing with India. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
