ID: 93	RANK: 53	SCORE: 8.164105

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-66535 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea020___94043" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-020 </AU>
JPRS 
Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     14 March 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> INDIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Relations With China Seen Improving </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Relations With China Seen Improving </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94AS0237D Bombay NAVBHARAT TIMES in Hindi 14 Mar 94 p 6 </F>
<F P=103> 94AS0237D </F>
<F P=104>  Bombay NAVBHARAT TIMES </F>
<F P=105>  Hindi </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Radhanath Chaturvedi: "India and China: </F>
Extending the Hand of Friendship to Each other"] 
  [Text] Some recent incidents seem to hint that the chasm 
created between India and China during the 1962 confrontation is 
becoming narrower now. One of the indicators of this change is 
China's reaction to the Pakistani resolution in the UN Human 
Rights Commission [UNHRC] meeting in Geneva. 
  Pakistan is so agitated over the Jammu-Kashmir issue that it 
raises it at every international platform and is always 
defeated. It brought this issue up in the form of a resolution 
in the UNHRC meeting in Geneva. Pakistan first suggested that an 
international task force be sent to Kashmir for investigating 
human rights violations there and that a report be presented in 
the 49th session of the United Nations. Later, it amended this 
resolution and demanded that the situation related to human 
rights violations be investigated and India be asked to protect 
human rights there. It did not mention India in the first draft, 
however, the finger was clearly pointed towards India. India was 
mentioned by name in the amended resolution. 
  There are 53 members on this commission and China is one of 
them. Usually, China supports Pakistan against India, however, 
this time China said when the resolution was introduced that if 
Pakistan insisted on a vote then it would not participate in the 
vote. This is a new development. Also, when Prime Minister 
Benazir Bhutto went to Beijing on official visit, she had asked 
the Chinese leaders to support Pakistan openly over the 
Jammu-Kashmir issue. China had expressed disagreement over the 
proposal which was made public in the communication published 
after the Pakistani prime minister's visit. 
  After the fall of the Soviet Union, no major world power is 
left to support India at the international level over the 
Jammu-Kashmir issue. The U.S. attitude is known to all. Against 
this background, the Chinese attitude from the Indian 
perspective was very welcome, and still is. 
  An even more important fact than these two developments is 
the meeting of military officials and diplomats from India and 
China to discuss the border-related differences between the two 
countries. Although no decisions were made in this meeting held 
in New Delhi, the atmosphere lacked tension and the attitude on 
every issue was cooperative and productive. In this meeting, 
discussion centered around such topics as making some changes in 
the Line of Control in the northeastern region, changing sites 
of some military posts, reducing the number of soldiers, and 
starting and increasing trade across the border. It is clear 
that some of these problems are so old that these cannot be 
resolved in a single meeting. Therefore, one or two more 
meetings will be held. The next meeting following the diplomatic 
protocol should be held in Beijing, and will take place soon. 
  The series of these meeting started after Prime Minister 
Narasimha Rao's visit to China in September 1993. However, the 
efforts to improve relations began in the early 80s. In December 
1988, then Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi visited China. The 
groundwork he created for goodwill was further enhanced by 
Defense Minister Sharad Pawar's visit to China. A deputation 
from the National Defense College visited China in 1990. On 
their invitation, a representative group from the Chinese 
National Defense University came to visit India. At that time, 
military deputations were encouraged to visit each other. The 
vice commander of the Chinese army visited India after about 
three decades. After about 40 years, a Chinese naval ship docked 
at an Indian port in Bombay. 
  All these remind one of the days when India and China had 
come into contact at the Bandug Conference [1954]. Both 
countries had jointly expressed faith in the Panchashila 
principles. This relationship was poisoned with Zhou Enlai's 
demand to have Aksai Chin, forcible occupation of Tibet, India's 
silent acceptance, and finally the war on the northeastern 
border in 1962. The final episode destroyed the late Krishna 
Menon's dream of friendship between the two nations, and killed 
the first Prime Minister Nehru. Mr. Nehru was greatly hurt by 
the Chinese attack and could not bear it. It took 20-25 years to 
dissolve the bitterness that was created in 1962. 
  It is true that India can take a sigh of relief at the 
indications of both countries coming together. However, there is 
no reason to stop worrying and become complacent. 
  The main reason for India's worry is the Chinese progress in 
the area of nuclear technology for weapons. Secondly, China is 
still supplying weapons to Pakistan. China's recent sale of 11 
missiles to Pakistan has shaken us up. Even worse than this is 
China's attitude about trade. The United States used to supply 
weapon to Pakistan in the past. The mention of Star warplanes 
was often made in this context. However, the United States was 
upset at Pakistan's efforts at making nuclear bombs. It began to 
lose interest in Pakistan and restricted supply of weapons to an 
extent. China came forward at such an opportunity and started 
to supply missiles and other weapons. These missiles cannot be 
used against any country except India. China considers the sale 
of these missiles to be purely a business deal. When India 
expressed its concern, a Chinese government spokesman said that 
India can also purchase these missiles and other weapons from 
China if it so desires. It is willing to supply these to India 
also. This situation definitely causes concern. It puts a 
question mark on the efforts China has made to improve relations. 
  As for the border dispute, this is a major issue for India. 
India has seas on three sides. Except for Pakistan and China, 
there are friendly nations on our borders. There is no military 
danger from other countries. However the same cannot be said of 
China. The country, with over one billion in population is 3,000 
miles long and 2,500 miles wide. Its borders meet with 11 other 
countries. These countries are: North Korea, some regions of the 
former Soviet Union, Mongolia, Afghanistan, Nepal, India, 
Bhutan, Burma. Laos, and Vietnam. Pakistan has also joined as a 
neighbor of China now because China has taken over 2,000 square 
miles of Pakistan-occupied Kashmir. 
  There are very few countries with which China does not have 
border-related disputes. It disagrees with North Korea over the 
border in the Chang Chai mountains. Its border problems with the 
former Soviet Union is well known. There is disagreement with 
Myanmar over some areas in Yennan province. China has such 
economic, military and trade relations with Vietnam and Laos, 
and they have so much open travel among the three countries that 
it is not known where one country's border begins or ends. China 
disagrees with Nepal over Mount Everest. China says that Mount 
Everest is in China [Tibet] and Nepal says it is in Nepal. The 
groups that come to climb the Everest get permission from the 
Nepalese government. China has disputes with Mongolia also. 
Thus, involvement in border disputes has become a part of 
China's political life style. 
  If we can leave the border dispute alone and give some time 
for it to be resolved, the efforts that India and China are 
making to normalize their relations should continue. It appears 
very possible that these will continue and both countries will 
continue to have close ties. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
