ID: 93	RANK: 83	SCORE: 7.730834

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-66531 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea020___94039" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-020 </AU>
JPRS 
Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     23 March 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> INDIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Rao Visit to U.S. Questioned </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Rao Visit to U.S. Questioned </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94AS0245A New Delhi JANSATTA in Hindi 23 Mar 94 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 94AS0245A </F>
<F P=104>  New Delhi JANSATTA </F>
<F P=105>  Hindi </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Radhe Shyam Yadav: "Should the Prime Minister Go </F>
to America?"] 
  [Text] We are so accommodating of the United States that 
questions about our lack of pride are raised even in U.S. Senate 
committees. However, our foreign ministry and the Parliamentary 
committees dealing with foreign affairs never pay any heed to 
it. Recently, the Assistant Secretary for South Asian Affairs, 
Robin Raphel, was grilled in a U.S. Senate sub-committee as to 
why the Clinton Administration has not appointed an ambassador 
to India. However, this question was never raised in the Indian 
political and administrative circles. The Clinton Administration 
has not appointed an ambassador to India after more than one 
year in office. Despite this, Our ambassador is also making 
plans for Prime Minister Narasimha Rao's visit to the United 
States. When all this is happening, the question arises as to 
whether India's prime minister should visit that country. 
  Several important persons, including four former foreign 
secretaries, have reacted in support of and in opposition to the 
visit. Two of them support an immediate visit by the prime 
minister (so that misunderstandings and miscommunications are 
removed and an atmosphere of friendship and cooperation is 
created). The other side says that it is the United States that 
has stained the relations (and is not willing to appoint an 
ambassador soon). Why should the Indian prime minister visit the 
U.S. before the Clinton administration makes the first move? 
This is especially true when the Clinton administration does not 
recognize Kashmir's joining India as complete and final and 
calls it disputed territory. In such a political climate, Prime 
Minister Narasimha Rao's visiting the United States would mean 
that India has knelt down to the United States because of its 
kind deeds done through the World Bank and India has no 
alternative but to play the U.S. game of keeping India and 
Pakistan at odds with each other. Is it necessary for India to 
inform the United States, the rest of the world, and, most of 
all, Pakistan about this submission? If it is not necessary, 
then how can the Indian prime minister visit the United States 
before a U.S. ambassador is appointed to India? Such a step is 
taken only by countries that are economically and politically 
slaves. 
  It is true that the United States has invested more money in 
India than any other country and has provided technology to 
India in many areas. At the same time, it is also true that it 
has been regularly encouraging Pakistan to sink its teeth into 
India's heels. The U.S. President's comment on Kashmir in the 
United Nations, reference to human rights violations in Punjab 
and Kashmir, and U.S. officials' declaring Kashmir a disputed 
region are actions which cue the Pakistani government (and its 
intelligence agency--Interservices Intelligence) [ISI] and the 
terrorists and separatists in Kashmir and Punjab to accelerate 
their activities against India. These hints are followed up. The 
groups active in this region and Benazir and her government in 
Pakistan accelerate their activities against India. Therefore, 
the Indian prime minister's visit to the United States in the 
midst of the U.S. government's anti-India activities is nothing 
but an insult to our country and its people. 
  There was a time when governments formed by the opposition 
parties used to be involved in such actions. When the government 
of a coalition of opposition parties was formed, its cabinet 
members began to dash to the United States (and then-U.S. friend 
China's capital, Beijing). No Congress Party government has 
taken a step in the past that embarrassed our nation. We do 
remember Indira Gandhi's visit to the United States when she was 
allowed to meet with Reagan only after she was checked with a 
metal detector for security reasons. (This insult was meted out 
perhaps to avenge her for her actions that broke up Pakistan in 
1971). However, at that time, Indira Gandhi needed the 
President's support because she wanted to borrow money from the 
World Bank. However, at this time when India's foreign exchange 
reserve is satisfactory and India has also agreed to the Dunkel 
proposals, Prime Minister Narasimha Rao has no such exigencies 
that are forcing him to visit the United States. It is not 
appropriate to try to improve relations when the United States 
is involved in damaging Indo-United States relations by putting 
on different kinds of pressures. 
  In addition, this tension in the relationship did not occur 
suddenly. The U.S. government has been creating this tension 
methodically. Its goals are to have India sign the NPT 
[Nonproliferation Treaty] after it has agreed to the Dunkel 
proposals, and to stop it from having better relations with 
China and Iran. The United States does tolerate India's 
relations with Russia to a level where it is in a position to 
help India make progress in science and technology. For example, 
the United States is not only worried but also alarmed by 
India's progress in its space program, energy projects, defense 
implements such as rockets, tanks, radars, fighter planes, and 
naval vessels. Additionally, if India is able to make economic 
progress independently, the United States will not be able to 
control its huge market. Therefore, it is important for the 
United States to control India's scientific progress and 
economic development through the World Bank. When this plan is 
transparent, is it appropriate for the U.S. government to hint 
to India that it show its willingness to make this plan 
successful? 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
