ID: 93	RANK: 87	SCORE: 7.671019
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910621-0027
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910621-0027.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   What's News --
   World-Wide
</HL>
<DATE>
06/21/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<LP>
   GERMAN LAWMAKERS VOTED to move their government back to
Berlin.
   After a debate rich in references to German history from
the Third Reich to the Berlin Wall to reunification,
Germany's parliament voted to shift government operations out
of Bonn and to restore Berlin to its traditional role. The
controversy about changing the seat of government had been
the most emotional issue since unification last October, with
Chancellor Kohl emerging as an impassioned advocate for
Berlin. The move, which transfers Germany's political center
back toward the east, could take more than a decade to
complete and will be extremely costly.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Bonn's economy will be badly hurt, with as many as 100,000
jobs lost, and advocates of keeping the capital there argued
that stripping it of government offices would be a crushing
blow.
   ---
   BUSH OFFERED U.S. help to Russia's Yeltsin during a White
House meeting.
   The newly elected leader of the Russian Republic held a
symbolic official meeting with Bush, who a year ago had
avoided such a full-blown discussion because the Soviet
politician hadn't yet been openly elected and was viewed at
the time as a rival to Gorbachev. Throughout his visit this
week in Washington, Yeltsin stressed that he and Gorbachev
have ended their feud and plan to work together.
   Bush suggested possible American help in training Russia's
workers, developing its transportation system, providing food
storage facilities and converting defense industries to
civilian use.
   ---
   The Supreme Court ruled that public figures who sue for
libel when a writer alters their quotations can't win damages
unless they prove that the meaning of what they said was
changed significantly. But the court said allegations in a
psychoanalyst's suit were substantial enough to require a
trial in that case.
                                                                                                       

   The high court bolstered police powers in the war on drugs
by ruling that officers may board buses and ask any passenger
to consent to a search. Separately, the court said the full
protection of a law aimed at giving minorities equal voting
rights applies to the election of state judges.
   ---
   A House panel voted to bar the Health and Human Services
Department from enforcing rules that prohibit federally
financed health clinics from counseling poor women on
abortion. The 35-20 vote by the House Appropriations
Committee sets the stage for a probable veto confrontation
with Bush.
   ---
   Baker and Bessmertnykh failed to resolve remaining
differences on a treaty slashing strategic nuclear arms.
After conferring in Berlin, the U.S. secretary of state and
Soviet foreign minister said they had made some progress on
outstanding issues and that senior aides would travel to
Geneva next week to intensify work on the pact.
   ---
   The State Department said it regretted the repeal of
Colombia's extradition agreement with Washington and said
U.S. officials would be closely following the trial of
reputed drug trafficker Pablo Escobar, who surrendered
Wednesday to Colombian authorities. Escobar turned himself in
shortly after a panel voted to bar extradition.
   ---
   P.V. Narasimha Rao was asked to form a new government in
India, and the Congress Party leader said that he would be
sworn in as prime minister today. Rao, a former foreign
minister and loyalist of slain party chief Rajiv Gandhi, said
President Venkataraman had given him four weeks to put
together a majority government.
   ---
   Senate Republicans failed to substitute their version of
an omnibus anti-crime bill for a proposed Democratic package.
The GOP's last-minute compromise, cobbled from proposals made
by Bush and Democrat Biden of Delaware, was defeated by a
56-40 vote.
   ---
   Rep. William Gray announced that he would resign from
Congress to become president of the United Negro College
Fund. The Pennsylvania Democrat, who as House majority whip
is the highest-ranking black in Congress, told a news
conference he would begin his new job in September.
   ---
   The U.S. Air Force decided to withdraw most of its troops
from the Philippines because of damage to Clark Air Base
caused by eruptions from Mount Pinatubo, American officials
said in Manila. The volcano yesterday spewed more ash over
Clark during seven explosions, as the death toll from over
two weeks of eruptions rose to 268.
   ---
   Buthelezi met with Bush at the White House and urged that
the U.S. lift sanctions against the Pretoria government. But
the South African Zulu leader said Bush gave no date for
ending the five-year-old economic curbs. The U.S. has said
Pretoria must meet a final condition -- the release of all
political prisoners -- before the sanctions are lifted.
   ---
   Scientists transplanted human cells that make insulin into
laboratory mice without arousing the rodents' immune systems,
suggesting a major advance in organ and tissue
transplantation. The researchers said they developed a
technique that "tricked" the rodents' immune systems into
accepting the human cells.
   ---
   British medical researchers said they found that a
prenatal test that can be performed in the eighth to 10th
week of a pregnancy has a somewhat higher risk to the fetus
than a test performed later. The finding contradicts the
results of a major U.S. test of the two procedures released
two years ago.
   ---
   The AIDS epidemic must be treated as "a world-wide,
lethal, venereal disease," U.S. researcher William Haseltine
told a conference in Florence. While the illness can be
transmitted by infected blood and shared needles, Haseltine
said it is important to recognize that AIDS is mainly a
heterosexual disease.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
