ID: 295	RANK: 45	SCORE: 14.516436
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910220-0065
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910220-0065.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Marketing &amp; Media:
   In Reversal, Turner
   Broadcasting Posts
   Net of $7.3 Million
   ----
   By Michael J. McCarthy
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/20/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B6
</SO>
<CO>
   TBSA
</CO>
<IN>
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
EARNINGS (ERN)
ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)
</IN>
<LP>
   ATLANTA -- Turner Broadcasting System Inc., helped by
results at its two entertainment channels, posted a
turnaround in the fourth quarter, reporting net income of
$7.3 million compared with a $110.9 million year-earlier
loss.
   The latest quarter didn't include any results affected by
coverage of the outbreak of Persian Gulf hostilities. That
coverage has led to skyrocketing ratings for the company's
Cable News Network, although the cost of reporting the
conflict has dug substantially into earnings.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The fourth-quarter results contributed to a full-year
profit of $4.6 million for the cable company, its first since
1985.
   Earnings for Turner Broadcasting's most profitable
division, news, already were hurt in the fourth quarter by
the increased cost of covering events in the Gulf. The
extended coverage in the Middle East between August and the
end of the year put Cable News Network about $12 million to
$15 million over budget, spokeswoman Kitsie Riggall said.
Despite a 14% increase in news revenue to $113.6 million, the
division's earnings slipped 1.8% to $39.1 million.
   Noting that the CNN coverage so far has been a drag on
earnings, Ned Zachar, a vice president of Duff &amp; Phelps-MCM
Research, said: "The trick for CNN will be to translate the
higher ratings into higher revenues."
   Since the Gulf war, CNN's ratings have soared, and the
company has been raising advertising rates to bring them in
line with the larger audiences the 24-hour news network is
commanding. Some advertisers have balked at the increases and
at Turner's attempt to renegotiate ad agreements set up
before ratings rocketed. But over time, some analysts said,
the company should have an easier time charging and getting
the higher rates.
   In the fourth quarter, Turner Broadcasting's profit, which
amounted to a per-share loss of three cents after preferred
dividend payments, included an extraordinary tax credit of
$10 million. The net loss for the year-earlier quarter,
equivalent to 83 cents a share, was after an extraordinary
charge of $15.7 million related to taxes and a $98.3 million
charge for the extinguishment of debt.
   Fourth-quarter revenue rose 22% to $356.5 million from
$292.8 million.
   In the quarter, Turner Broadcasting's big entertainment
division, comprised of Turner Network Television and TBS
Superstation, posted a 32% gain in operating profit to $34.2
million, on a 62% gain in revenue to $178.1 million.
   During 1990, despite a softer advertising environment, ad
revenue increased 20% for Turner Broadcasting's news channels
and 32% for the entertainment channels. Also during 1990, CNN
and Headline News had record viewing levels, with the cable
channels in 61% and 48% of U.S. homes, respectively.
   "While global hostilities and domestic economic problems
cause us to view 1991 cautiously" said Ted Turner, chairman
and president, "we are optimistic that investments we made in
1990 in theatrical film licenses and major league sports and
our front-running position in television news will enable us
to show further improvements in operating performance in the
current year."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
