ID: 295	RANK: 57	SCORE: 14.250537
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920205-0080
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920205-0080.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Politics &amp; Policy -- Campaign '92:
   CNN Is Positioned to Set the Agenda
   For the 1992 Presidential Campaign
   ----
   By Timothy Noah
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/05/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<CO>
   CBS CCB GE TBSA TBSB
</CO>
<MS>
CONGLOMERATES (CGL)
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
BROADCASTING (BRD)
CONGLOMERATES (CGL)
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
</IN>
<NS>
POLITICS (PLT)
</NS>
<RE>
CONNECTICUT (CT)
GEORGIA (GA)
NEW HAMPSHIRE (NH)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   CONCORD, N.H. -- Heavyset and ruddy-faced, state Motor
Vehicle Director Robert Turner is a gregarious Republican
party regular who in bygone days was an irresistible source
to network TV reporters covering the New Hampshire primary.
"I used to know all of these guys," he recalls wistfully.
   But with less than two weeks to go before the New
Hampshire contest, only one TV network has paid Mr. Turner a
call: Cable News Network.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   In modern presidential politics, it's television more than
anything else that establishes the agenda for the campaign --
and in 1992, it's CNN that is positioned to establish the
agenda for television. "There's always somebody that sets the
tone," says Edward Fouhy, who has served as a high-ranking
news executive for ABC, CBS and NBC, and who now produces
public-affairs programming and is a consultant to the
Commission on Presidential Debates. "This year it's going to
be CNN."
   On a program-for-program basis, CNN's ratings are far
behind those of the over-the-air networks. But with its 24
hours of news, it is claiming an increasing share of the
audience for all national news programming. And at a time
when the three traditional networks and local TV stations are
strapped by tight election budgets, CNN is expanding the
amount of staff and money devoted to this year's presidential
campaign. (Executives say they plan to spend $13.5 million on
election coverage this year; other networks haven't publicly
broken out their election budgets.) Alone among the networks,
CNN has had two correspondents trekking constantly through
New Hampshire since the beginning of January.
   It has also scheduled a daily half-hour devoted to the
presidential campaign, airing at 4:30 p.m. -- a time slot
that Mike McCurry, an adviser to candidate Bob Kerrey, says
probably magnifies CNN's influence over the decision makers
at other networks, local stations, newspapers and political
campaigns when they sit down to "figure out what the day's
story was all about."
   It's not yet clear how well CNN will perform the task.
While its cinema-verite approach to news has improved
steadily over the years, many of its reporters, producers and
anchors are politically inexperienced. And while CNN remains
steadfastly committed to covering every major campaign event
that occurs within public view, University of Pennsylvania
media expert Kathleen Hall Jamieson says that, despite some
recent high-profile hires from other networks, it still lacks
what she calls the "analytic bench strength" to put the
welter of the campaign into perspective.
   But CNN also hopes to break some of the molds of political
coverage developed in the years of dominance by the
over-the-air networks. Among other things, it has received an
unusual $3.5 million foundation grant -- brokered by former
President Carter -- to provide experimental coverage ranging
from in-depth interviews with average voters to new graphic
techniques for critiquing misleading political ads.
   Meanwhile, CNN provided the only live national coverage of
last week's Gennifer Flowers press conference, in which the
former cabaret singer repeated the unsubstantiated charges of
marital infidelity by Democratic candidate Bill Clinton for
which a supermarket tabloid reportedly paid her as much as
$175,000. (Unlike the three major networks, however, CNN
declined to air Ms. Flowers's taped phone conversations with
Mr. Clinton on the ground that their authenticity couldn't be
confirmed.)
   The sense of enthusiasm at CNN contrasts starkly with the
situation at its three network competitors. ABC, for example,
has responded to tight budgets by no longer attaching a full
crew to each candidate. Continuing an experiment begun in
1988, the network has instead assigned "off-air reporters" to
the campaign trail, with on-air correspondents hooking up to
do individual stories.
   Hal Bruno, political director at ABC, insists that the
reliance on off-air reporters has "worked beautifully,"
echoing the common sentiment among network news executives
that the old body-watch approach to the news is no longer
necessary. Indeed, even CNN is participating in a new pool
arrangement in which the four networks share expenses for a
news crew in New Hampshire. But CNN also has its two
additional crews in New Hampshire.
   "You can't just sit in Washington and gauge people's
reactions to these candidates," insists CNN national
political correspondent Gene Randall.
   At a time when the older networks are pulling back from
tarmac-to-tarmac coverage, CNN executives say that even
unsubtle photo-ops like candidate George Bush's 1988 visit to
a flag factory merit air time. "It's their right to handle
their campaign however they see fit," says Ed Turner, CNN's
executive vice president for news gathering. "We have a
responsibility to cover it."
   For more imaginative coverage, CNN executives point to
projects funded by the $3.5 million grant from the New
York-based Markle Foundation. But the grant itself has
stirred controversy in other quarters about the propriety of
nonprofit funding for commercial broadcasting. The money was
originally intended for an ambitious series of programs on
the Public Broadcasting Service. But when PBS and the
foundation couldn't agree on plans for the series, former
President Carter alerted CNN President Tom Johnson that the
foundation was looking for another partner.
   "I was astonished at the use of foundation money to cover
a thing that CNN for its own economic well-being would have
had to cover," says Bill Kovach, curator of Harvard's Nieman
Foundation. Mr. Kovach notes that two weeks after CNN
received the grant, its parent company, Turner Broadcasting
System Inc., purchased Hanna-Barbera Productions Inc., a
company best known for producing "The Flintstones." Mr.
Johnson responds that the propriety of the award is the
Markle Foundation's concern and not CNN's, and adds that the
network didn't actively solicit the grant. Markle officials,
for their part, say they're pleased to be working with CNN.
   Network executives say the money will be used for a number
of projects, such as a series aimed at discerning the
"People's Agenda" for the campaign. So far, at least, the
record on such efforts is mixed. For instance, a two-hour
"People's Agenda" program that aired Sunday, while
characteristically serious, wore viewers down by interviewing
seemingly every last citizen in Baltimore -- including prison
inmate, murderer-rapist and 1988 campaign symbol Willie
Horton -- on the pressing issues in their lives. Producers at
CNN also talk vaguely about using Markle money to link voter
groups with candidates by satellite, and putting together a
list of government sources to aid a fledgling reporters'
resource center.
   Mostly, though, what CNN has in its coverage is the luxury
of time -- 24 hours a day that it has to fill with
programming of some kind. The network's wall-to-wall coverage
was a strong selling point to political columnists Jack
Germond and David Broder when they jumped to CNN from NBC's
"Today" program, where they provided periodic political
commentary.
   While their audience will be much smaller than on "Today,"
they will be able to appear with greater frequency, and at
greater length. "I'd rather spend a little more time to talk
sensibly even to a smaller audience," says Mr. Broder.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
