ID: 295	RANK: 64	SCORE: 14.187011
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910201-0043
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910201-0043.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Marketing &amp; Media:
   CNN Is Raising
   Advertising Rates
   As Ratings Soar
   ----
   By Martha Brannigan
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/01/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4
</SO>
<CO>
   TBSA IPG
</CO>
<IN>
ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
</IN>
<LP>
   ATLANTA -- Cable News Network, emboldened by the huge
ratings increases stemming from its Persian Gulf war
coverage, is raising its advertising rates.
   The network, owned by Turner Broadcasting System Inc., is
also trying to renegotiate agreements with advertisers. It
contends it can deliver bigger audiences with fewer spots
than originally anticipated, and should be given some
latitude in reducing or rescheduling future spots.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "The cost per 30-second commercial has gone up, or they're
attempting to raise it, but the cost per 1,000 viewers may
not be higher," since CNN is reaching a much larger audience,
said Michael Stone, vice president and associate director,
national broadcast, at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in New York.
   CNN has raised its prime-time rates from between $4,000
and $5,000 for a 30-second spot to more than $20,000,
according to Joel M. Segal, executive vice president,
national broadcasting for McCann-Erickson Inc., a unit of
Interpublic Group of Cos. But due to the big jump in
viewership, Mr. Segal estimates that the new rates are about
commensurate, based on the cost per-thousand viewers.
"They're trying to keep the same ratio, which is reasonable,"
he said.
   McCann-Erickson, which represents such advertisers as
Taster's Choice and Columbia Pictures, says CNN has taken the
unusual step of asking ad agencies for givebacks of spots,
pointing out that some advertisers had their commercials run
in time slots that had enormous boosts in viewership. Still,
Mr. Segal said, McCann-Erickson wouldn't give up any spots.
   Since the Persian Gulf war began, CNN's ratings have
skyrocketed. Its prime-time ratings have hit 7.9, roughly
seven times its pre-war audience. Now, CNN wants to get paid
accordingly.
   "We're asking advertisers to pay for the audience
delivered," said Joe Uva, executive vice president of CNN
sales, adding that CNN's rates are still lower than the
networks except during early morning and late night hours.
   The network is working under the constraints of having
less advertising air time, because it deliberately reduced ad
time by 25% at the outbreak of the war and because its
uninterrupted coverage of news conferences, briefings and
major developments has pre-empted many ads, Mr. Uva said. As
a result, CNN has an oversupply of ads slated to run during
much of the next two months. It is asking advertisers "to
sacrifice a handful of spots" in light of their scheduling
problems and the large audience CNN has already delivered.
   Are advertisers agreeing to the unusual request? "We're in
discussions now and for the rest of the week, and we expect
to be in discussions through next week," Mr. Uva said.
   At the same time, CNN is trying to cope with concerns
about advertising during the war coverage. On the one hand,
many advertisers are lured by the bigger audiences. But they
may harbor fears that presenting their products in
conjunction with the war may create bad impressions in
viewers minds.
   In addition to boosting rates, CNN is also asking cable
operators to pay a voluntary surcharge to defray the high
costs of its war coverage. CNN said it "has no intention of
increasing or changing" the basic rates charged to cable
operators, but is asking the operators to voluntarily pay
more to help defray the cost of covering the war. CNN has
already held talks with the top 25 multiple system operators
and is making the rounds among the other more than 10,000 who
air CNN.
   CNN said its war coverage has cost an estimated $10
million between August and December, and an additional $4
million in January.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
