ID: 295	RANK: 83	SCORE: 13.811409
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910114-0087
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910114-0087.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Marketing &amp; Media:
   TV Networks Have Hundreds of People
   In Place as Persian Gulf Deadline Nears
   ----
   By Kevin Goldman
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/14/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4
</SO>
<CO>
   GE CCB CBS TBSA MDEST
</CO>
<IN>
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
</IN>
<GV>
DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)
</GV>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- A popular poster during the Vietnam War posed
the question, "What if they gave a war and nobody came?"
   Not this time.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Against tomorrow's deadline for Iraqi forces to withdraw
from Kuwait or face military reprisals, U.S. troops have
continued to build their presence -- and so have members of
the electronic (and print) media. The four major networks
have dispatched a combined force of more than 300 reporters,
producers and technicians to the Persian Gulf region, the
largest deployment ever amassed for a single story, according
to network news executives.
   The possibility of war in the Gulf may mark the first time
the world has known, well ahead of time, that fighting could
break out on a specific date. Never mind secret invasions.
This is a heavily hyped countdown. All the preparations are
giving the multinational forces time to prepare for war. But
they're also giving the networks time to get their
correspondents and crews in place -- and in harm's way.
   Indeed, each night on the "CBS Evening News," a logo
entitled "Countdown to Confrontation" highlights how many
days remain until the Jan. 15 deadline.
   "I've never seen a ready, set, go war before," says Ed
Turner, executive vice president of the all-news cable
network CNN, a unit of Turner Broadcasting System Inc.
   But if the networks were hoping that being so entrenched
weeks before a war began would place them in a competitive
position to report the story, those plans have been jolted by
stiff restrictions imposed the Defense Department.
   On Jan. 9, the Pentagon established rules of reporting
that the networks say will seriously stifle enterprising and
aggressive coverage in the Gulf region, should fighting break
out. A Pentagon spokesman says the rules are aimed at
preventing a media circus, with reporters getting in the way
of military officers trying to coordinate battles.
   "We know the networks aren't happy with these rules. But
we're concerned with stories that could put U.S. lives at
risk and jeopardize U.S. security," says the spokesman,
Robert Hall, deputy assistant secretary of defense. An
appeals procedure is in place if the military challenges
something in a report and the networks disagree.
   Timothy J. Russert, senior vice president and Washington
bureau chief of NBC News, a unit of General Electric Co.,
calls the Pentagon's plans "censorship." David Martin, the
Pentagon correspondent for CBS News, a unit of CBS Inc.,
recently returned from an assignment in the Gulf. He says the
rules will "inhibit" reporting.
   The presidents of the four network news divisions on
Wednesday sent a letter to Defense Secretary Dick Cheney,
saying the rules "go far beyond what is required to protect
troop safety and mission security." But it isn't top Defense
officials that are the worry, says Mr. Russert of NBC News.
"The problem," he says, "is when a second lieutenant on the
scene whose charge in life is to follow orders wants to
follow these guidelines to letter of the law."
   Given the government-imposed limitations, the networks
perhaps could make do with far fewer people in the Gulf and
save some money in the process. But news executives insist
the hefty investment in personnel and money is necessary.
"You need to have people in place to cover briefings and be
part of the pool," says Jeff Gralnick, executive producer of
special programming and events at ABC News, a unit of Capital
Cities/ABC Inc.
   Each network spends in excess of $750,000 a week on the
Gulf crisis, and that could rise to $1 million should
fighting break out.
   If U.S. troops go to war, plans are in place for the three
major broadcast networks and CNN to provide 24-hour coverage
of the fighting. That also would drive up costs.
   Since the Persian Gulf crisis began in early August, it's
dominated the broadcast network newscasts. According to a
study by the Washington-based Center for Media and Public
Affairs, the Gulf story accounted for 873 stories, or 84%, of
the total aired in August. That dropped to 488 stories, or
47%, in September; 229 stories, or 19%, in October; 395
stories, or 43%, in November; and 349 stories, or 35%, in
December.
   The percentage of airtime devoted to Gulf coverage would
likely soar again if tomorrow's deadline leads to bloodshed.
   The networks are also spending big dollars on safeguarding
their on-scene personnel. Outfits to guard against chemical
weapons go for upward of $2,000 each.
   Because of the amount of Persian Gulf coverage, "Other
stories suffer," says CNN's Mr. Turner. "We'd all love to be
in Eastern Europe covering the changes there. But it's hard
when you have 150 of your people in the desert."
   Joe Peyronnin, the No. 2 executive at CBS News, says that
"when one story occupies so much of your time, attention and
resources, naturally you're shifting away from other stories.
Whether {Polish President} Lech Walesa is successful is a
legit story, but all of our people are in the Gulf."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
