ID: 184	RANK: 37	SCORE: 26.584372
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP901002-0174 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NY-10-02-90 2216EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r i AM-Germany 8thLd-Writethru a0764 10-02 1029</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Germany, 8th Ld-Writethru, a0764,1286</SECOND>
<HEAD>Two Germanys Unite After 45 Years of Division</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: LEADS with eight grafs to UPDATE with leaders in attendance,
other violence, minor editing. Picks up 8th graf pvs, `The
ceremony...'</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By LARRY THORSON</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>BERLIN (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The two Germanys ended 45 years of division with a
blaze of fireworks and the pealing of church bells Wednesday,
declaring the creation of a new German nation in the heart of
Europe.
   Near the ruins of Hitler's citadel in the city that symbolized
the Cold War division of Europe, the German flag was hoisted to
crown the dramatic rush to unify a Germany divided by World War II
and the Communist Berlin Wall.
   Rockets burst in the sky over Berlin, illuminating the
war-scarred Reichstag building and the Brandenburg Gate. The shower
of fireworks also lighted the upturned faces of thousands of
Germans, united in peace but troubled by the political and economic
problems facing a united Germany.
   Chancellor Helmut Kohl, President Richard von Weizsaecker and
former leader Willy Brandt stood in the glare of floodlights at the
Reichstag and joined in singing the national anthem as a vast party
occurred across the land of 78 million residents. Millions of
Germans and a watching world joined the ceremony by television.
   Wednesday was declared a national holiday, but late Tuesday
police in Goettingen, 66 miles south of Hanover, reported 1,000
leftist protesters opposed to unification rampaged through the
city. Authorities said the radicals broke store windows and chanted
``Never Again Germany!'' and ``Nazis out!''
   In Berlin, police detained seven people who were caught with
paint and gas pistols. Another man was arrested in the Kreuzberg
district after a policeman was stabbed in the arm during a scuffle
between police and about 500 youthful demonstrators.
   In the northern port of Rostock, authorities evacuated 23 Soviet
Jews from a refugee center because of fears the center could become
a target of rightist radicals. No incidents were reported.
   At least four people were injured and more than 10 arrested in
scuffles between police and demonstrators in Schwerin, where some
celebrated unification with the Nazi ``Sieg-Heil'' salute,
witnesses said. Police also reported clashes with youths in Leipzig
and Hamburg.
   The ceremony marked return of a united Germany built on the
ruins of Adolf Hitler's defeat in World War II and the end of Cold
War antagonism that split Europe into competing blocs led by the
United States and the Soviet Union.
   It came less than 11 months after the Berlin Wall was opened
Nov. 9, 1989, by a tide of democracy that swept away Communist
regimes across Eastern Europe.
   Fourteen schoolchildren from the former East and West Germanys
carried the huge, 72-square-yard German flag and hoisted it up the
132-foot-tall mast in front of the Reichstag.
   Hundreds of thousands of people, waving German flags, crowded
along the Unten den Linden thoroughfare and June 17th Street that
once were cut by the Berlin Wall.
   Fireworks exploded over the Reichstag as a replica of the
Liberty Bell, donated to Berlin by the American people, pealed.
   ``Germany is one again, Germany is sovereign,'' said German
television. ``Forty-five years after the unconditional surrender''
of Nazi Germany ``the two German states are united.''
   Prime Minister Lothar de Maiziere said of unification minutes
before midnight, ``What for most people had been only a dream has
become reality.''
   Then, Kurt Masur directed Beethoven's Ninth Sympony as East
Germany ceased to exist to the deep chords of the ``Ode to Joy.''
   City authorities had banned demonstrations near the Brandenburg
Gate, the 200-year-old monument that was a focus of celebrations.
   The broad thoroughfares around the Brandenburg Gate were
thronged with tens of thousands of people hours before the historic
occasion, and vendors sold food, drinks and souvenirs.
   Dixieland jazz, street musicians and organ-grinders played music
that rang in the chilly fall air.
   Searchlight beams waved in a cloudless sky, and a tall crane
dangled an old East German ``Trabi'' car 50 feet in the air just
south of the massive stone gate.
   About 200 leftist radicals lined a police barrier outside the
Schauspielhaus, blowing whistles and jeering at dignitaries
arriving for a formal state ceremony hosted by the departing East
German government.
   The radicals chanted ``Germany, drop dead!''
   Kohl, 60, said in a statement to the Frankfurter Allgemeine
newspaper that the new Germany will help stabilize Europe, and that
it would not be a ``restless Reich'' like Nazi Germany, which
plunged Europe into its most disastrous war.
   The unification of Germany is a ``European, indeed a world event
of historic rank,'' Kohl said.
   Several German newspapers published the approved verse of the
national anthem to be sung in unified Germany - not the old
``Deutschland Ueber Alles'' verse - but the third verse, which
starts: ``Unity and Justice and Freedom for the German
fatherland.''
   The verse admonishes Germany to ``bloom,'' not to be ``above
all,'' the old mission that frightens some Europeans.
   Only a year ago the rush toward unity was barely starting. East
Germans demonstrated for political freedoms and the right to leave
their country. The Communist government opened the Berlin Wall last
fall but was swept away anyway in a peaceful popular revolution.
   East Germans began to demonstrate for unification, which was
taken up by Kohl and his government, and eventually approved by
Moscow and the Allies.
   The Soviets agreed to let united Germany remain in NATO and to
remove their troops by the end of 1994, although Germany is paying
Moscow $9.5 billion to finance the withdrawal. The Allies will keep
troops in West Berlin until the Soviets leave.
   The last formal steps to clear the way for unity were taken
mostly by the foreign powers who defeated Nazi Germany and retained
legal powers as occupiers in Berlin.
   In New York on Monday, President Bush and Soviet Foreign
Minister Eduard Shevardnadze were present for the signing of a
declaration of a suspension of the Allies' special powers.
   On Tuesday morning, Allied generals from the United States,
Britain and France signed a letter ceding their powers. Buglers
played as the three flags were lowered for the last time at the
Allied headquarters.
   Maj. Gen. Raymond E. Haddock of the United States, Maj. Gen.
Robert J.S. Corbett of Britain and Maj. Gen. Francois Cann of
France then went to West Berlin City Hall to deliver the letter to
Mayor Walter Momper.
   ``We three commandants will shortly leave Berlin and we shall
carry with us a feeling of satisfaction that our collective efforts
have been successful. The Berlin which we leave will be whole and
free,'' their letter said.
   Kohl said in a statement broadcast on television that Germany
thanked the Western allies for their support, and he also praised
Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, saying: ``He recognized the
nations' right to pursue their own path. Without this decision, we
would not have experienced the day of German unity so soon.''
   Much work needs to be done, Kohl said.
   ``Particularly at this moment, we Germans must show solidarity
toward one another,'' the chancellor said. ``A difficult path lies
before us.''
   The mighty West German economy, with a gross national product
last year of $1.4 trillion, has to rebuild East Germany, which had
one-fourth of West German's population but an economy only
one-eighth as big in 1989 and failing fast in its last days.
   East Germany's work force of 9 million had 360,000 out of work
in August, and 1.4 million were on so-called ``short work'' with an
uncertain future.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
