ID: 184	RANK: 46	SCORE: 25.835135
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891111-0016 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-11-11-89 0110EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-EastGermany 5thLd-Writethru a0422 11-11 1151</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-East Germany, 5th Ld-Writethru, a0422,1183</SECOND>
<HEAD>East Germany Makes Open Borders Permanent, Cuts New Passage in Wall</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: Leads with 10 grafs to add details, tighten. Pick up 12th pvs,
`We are...'</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos BER40,54; NY4; XHMS9</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By NESHA STARCEVIC</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>BERLIN (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   East German workers early Saturday punched through
the Berlin Wall, lifting a section of concrete panel to create a
6-foot gap, the first hole in the fortification that has divided
East and West for nearly 30 years.
   On Friday, East Germany ended all border restrictions, and more
than 100,000 jubilant East Germans climbed over and rushed through
borders for the first time since 1961. They chatted amiably with
stony-faced guards who no longer have orders to open fire.
   Thousands crossed back and forth during the day. West German
television showed East German guards helping East Berliners climb
over the wall to avoid congested check points. Some border guards
were handed roses by beaming girls.
   Communist leader Egon Krenz told 150,000 people at a rally in
East Berlin that his new reforms ``will not be turned back.'' The
party's Central Committee approved a document calling for free
elections, more restrictions on its security forces and greater
separation of party and state.
   Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany flew to West Berlin
hoping to speak with Krenz, who has stunned the world with rapid
reforms _ and a pledge of free elections _ intended to appease
pro-democracy protesters and end emigration to the West.
   Work began late Friday at the Bernauer Strasse.
   East Germans used a hydraulic crane to dismantle the round top
of the concrete wall. East German workers could be heard knocking
on the wall.
   Peter Zeisler, a West German police official at the scene, said:
``It will be a pretty hole that will make it possible for people
and cars to come through.''
   When the barrier was finally broken through early Saturday, East
German border guards and West German police shook hands. Then other
East German guards immediately placed a flimsy red-and-white metal
barrier in front of the opening.
   On the Western side of the wall, dozens of firemen dismantled
observation platforms from which West Berliners used to gaze
across. About 400 people watched, occasionally setting off
fireworks.
   ``We are speechless,'' said Helmut Keuchel, 48. ``This is a
fabulous and overwhelming experience.''
   Several thousand people celebrated at the Brandenburg Gate, the
great monument that, like the wall, was a symbol of Berlin's
division. Many danced on the wall, drank champagne, waved
sparklers, set off fireworks and chanted: ``The wall must go! The
wall must go!''
   East German border guards watched impassively as some in the
crowd used picks and hammers to chip away pieces of the hated
barrier for souvenirs.
   Thousands of East Berliners poured across the Glienicker Bridge,
on which some of the most famous spy trades took place, when it was
opened in the early evening.
   In West Berlin, thousands more streamed along the elegant
Kurfuerstendamm shopping boulevard, some carrying candles, others
toasting each other. Crowds of young girls could be seen rushing
down the street toward stores. Bars offered free drinks to East
Berliners.
   Police in West Berlin said they gave up counting Friday when
they reached 50,000 visitors.
   Krenz told those at the rally that ``the best of our people must
be elected to Parliament.'' He said reforms would make ``a new
revolution on German soil'' that would produce a communist system
``economically effective, politically democratic, and morally
pure.''
   ``These are not empty promises,'' he declared, addressing the
skepticism of those who have questioned his sincerity.
   Communist officials said Thursday that, for the first time since
the Berlin Wall was built, citizens could travel freely to the West
until a new travel law was drafted. On Friday, they made the open
border permanent.
   ``It is permanent and will be the foundation of a new travel
law,'' Interior Minister Friedrich Dickel said on state television.
   Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher of West Germany told
20,000 cheering people outside the West Berlin city hall the East
Germans were cutting more holes in the wall and were expanding the
Glienicker Bridge crossing. Bells, some called them freedom bells,
rang in the background.
   Chancellor Kohl said: ``The spirit of freedom now reigns all
over Europe: Poland, Hungary, and now, East Germany. We claim this
right for all people in Europe. ... we claim it for all Germans ''
   President Bush said he would ``seize every chance'' to promote
democracy in Eastern Europe and his meeting next month in Malta
with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union will have
``even more importance.''
   Secretary of State James A. Baker III called the lifting of East
German travel restrictions ``the most dramatic event in East-West
relations'' since World War II, but added: ``There's a long way to
go before there is true freedom and true political pluralism in
East Germany.''
   In Moscow, Foreign Ministry spokesman Gennady I. Gerasimov said
opening East Germany's borders would help stem emigration and end
``stereotypes about the Iron Curtain.''
   East Germans arrived in cars or taxis, on motorcycles, by foot
for their first taste of the West. Most apparently planned to
return home.
   East German roads were clogged with cars heading for the border,
but West German border officials said only about one-tenth of the
visitors planned to stay. So far this year, more than 200,000 East
Germans have gone to West Germany.
   People thronged East German police stations, waiting for the
travel passes officials said nearly everyone would be given.
Thousands went through simply by getting a stamp at a border
control point, and many crossed without special documents.
   ``We've just decided to leave our jobs for a little while, have
a look around and then go back over,'' said a young man who visited
Herleshausen with four compatriots. ``We don't know what our boss
will say about that. Perhaps he's over here too.''
   A young man drove to Herleshausen with his child for 15 minutes
just to buy a West German newspaper.
   ``I'm going over to pick up some brake pads you can only get in
the West,'' said a motorcyclist who crossed crossed at Helmstedt.
   In Berlin, many East Germans just wanted to shop or see the
sights. A group of East German workers took turns.
   ``Everybody wanted to go so we decided to do it in shifts,'' one
said. ``We're still fulfilling our quota of work.''
   Usually dour East German border guards chatted with countrymen
filing through border control points.
   ``You don't have to work today?'' one asked a young man at the
Invalidenstrasse crossing in Berlin.
   ``No, I've got the day off,'' was the reply.
   The ruling Politburo fired four more officials and began an
investigation of ``gross mistakes'' made by the leadership under
Erich Honecker, the 77-year-old party boss dismissed Oct. 18.
Honecker supervised the building of the wall 10 years before
becoming party chief.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
