ID: 184	RANK: 52	SCORE: 25.329700
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891114-0176 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-11-14-89 2012EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-EastGermany 3rdLd-Writethru a0730 11-14 0873</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-East Germany, 3rd Ld-Writethru, a0730,0894</SECOND>
<HEAD>West Germany Offers Marshall Plan-Style Aid to East Germany</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: SUBS 14th graf bgng: `He was ... to ADD dropped word `not,'
as in `will not come down.' Picks up graf 15, `In our ...'</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By NESHA STARCEVIC</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>BERLIN (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   West Germany said Tuesday it was willing to give
East Germany massive financial aid in the style of the postwar U.S.
Marshall Plan, but demanded political and economic reforms the
Communists have so far rejected.
   East Germany's new premier said the Berlin Wall must remain, to
keep AIDS, crime and other Western problems out of his country. He
promised a coalition government but did not say whether the
opposition could join it.
   After a week of dramatic developments in East European
countries, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union said
in Moscow:
   ``They have a common direction, which fosters the building of a
European home, for it makes the countries closer, more open and
creates new opportunities for human contact and an equal exchange.''
   The Liberal Democrats, an East German party that is allied with
the Communists but shows signs of independence, said pro-democracy
groups should be invited in ``round-table'' talks about East
Germany's future.
   Discussions this spring between Polish authorities and
Solidarity, which were given that name, led to a non-Communist
government in Poland.
   Mayor Walter Momper of West Berlin said the sudden opening of
East Germany's borders was creating traffic jams, currency problems
and other economic difficulties the two governments must resolve.
   Economics Minister Helmut Haussmann of West Germany announced a
six-point aid plan including investments, joint ventures and
modernizing East Germany's dilapidated communications and transport
systems.
   Haussmann did not name a figure for the aid and said East
Germany must achieve ``thorough change'' in its centrally directed
economy.
   Reforms promised so far by Communist Party leader Egon Krenz,
who took over last month from hard-liner Erich Honecker, have
resulted in more questions than answers, Haussmann said in Bonn.
   He compared his proposal to the Marshall Plan devised by
Secretary of State George C. Marshall, which provided more than $12
billion in American aid in 1948-51 to help Europe recover from the
war.
   East German authorities have rejected the idea of adopting a
complete free-market system and new Premier Hans Modrow, a leading
reformer, says he wants ``step by step'' economic changes.
   Modrow appears to want a streamlining of the bureaucracy, but
has given no indication he will urge sweeping changes such as those
in Hungary and Poland.
   He was quoted Tuesday in the West Germany newspaper Bild as
saying the Berlin Wall can remain open to travel, but will not come
down.
   ``In our country there is little criminal activity ... cases of
AIDS and drugs are virtually unknown,'' he was quoted as saying.
``Our people are asking themselves why they shouldn't just leave
that as it is.''
   ADN, the official news agency, said the government might open a
part of the wall near the Brandenburg Gate as yet another passage
between East and West Berlin. The high-columned monument is near
the wall in East Berlin and is among the city's best-known symbols.
   Before East Germany opened its borders Thursday, the gate had
been a major rallying point for demonstrators seeking freedom to
travel to the West. Hundreds of West Berliners gathered there
Tuesday in hopes a hole would be opened.
   A leader of New Forum, East Germany's main opposition group,
said it could work with a revamped Communist Party but naming
Modrow premier was not enough.
   ``There are still too many people in top positions with whom
dialogue is not possible,'' Juergen Tallig, spokesman for the group
in Leipzig, said in a West German radio interview.
   More change could occur at a special party congress in East
Berlin on Dec. 15-17. The congress, which can change the entire
leadership, set policy and alter party statutes, was called late
Monday by the party Central Committee.
   Pro-democracy advocates have held huge demonstrations demanding
an end for the 40-year Communist monopoly on power. Although Modrow
did not indicate whether the opposition would be allowed in his
coalition, he pledged to seek more cooperation with the four small
parties allied with the Communists.
   Guenter Schabowski, one of the most prominent Politburo members
and a leading reformer, resigned as party chief for East Berlin,
ADN said, and was replaced by Hans Albrecht.
   Schabowski had indicated earlier he might surrender the post
because of a heavy workload. He still is the party propaganda chief
and political analysts believe he may get an important job in
Modrow's cabinet.
   Guenther Maleuda, the new, non-Communist speaker of Parliament,
said he would seek to alter the first article of the constitution,
which defines the Communist Party's leading role in society. The
party has used the provision to defend its power monopoly.
   The East German Red Cross said its reception centers could
handle up to 10,000 East Germans returning home. The West German
Red Cross said it expected several thousand of the 200,000 who had
settled in the West this year to return to East Germany.
   Mass emigration has cost East Germany vital skilled workers and
has strained the ability of West Germany to provide jobs and
housing.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
