ID: 184	RANK: 54	SCORE: 25.151838
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891109-0211 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-11-09-89 1920EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-EastGermany 5thLd-Writethru a0780 11-09 1191</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-East Germany, 5th Ld-Writethru, a0780,1229</SECOND>
<HEAD>URGENT</HEAD>
<HEAD>East Germany Opens Borders, Revelers Dance Atop Berlin Wall</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: LEADS with eight grafs to UPDATE with Germans dancing aton Berlin
Wall, carnival atmosphere, details, quotes. Picks up graf 3 pvs, `All apparently
...'</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos MAR1,3</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By NESHA STARCEVIC</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>BERLIN (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   East Germany opened the Berlin Wall and its other
borders Thursday, and its cheering citizens crossed freely to the
West for the first time since 1961.
   Late Thursday, exultant East Germans began passing through
Berlin Wall checkpoints and others entered West Germany at other
border crossings. Jubilant people pranced and danced atop the
Berlin Wall, a sight unthinkable only hours earlier.
   Hundreds were seen on the Friedrichstrasse subway to West
Berlin, and East Germans also were allowed for the first time at
Checkpoint Charlie, the famed Friedrichstrasse crossing run by the
Allied military.
   Many hugged and kissed total strangers, while cars packed with
East Germans and others paraded down the streets of West Berlin in
a carnival-like atmosphere.
   ``It's crazy! It's crazy!'' yelled one young man as he sat in
the back seat of a car with his parents after a brief trip through
the once-impenetrable Berlin Wall.
   His parents said they just wanted to see the West _ and then
drive back. They declined to give their names.
   ``We heard it on TV, we just decided to go over and have a
look,'' said the young man's father. ``We want to show our son a
little bit of Kurfuerstendamm.''
   The Kurfuerstendamm is one of Europe's most elegant shopping
strips. For decades, East Germans locked up behind the
now-crumbling Iron Curtain could only dream of seeing it.
   All apparently were arriving without visas, although visas
technically were necessary under regulations announced earlier in
the day. A spokesman for the West German border police in
Braunschweig said the East Germans had been allowed over the border
there without visas.
   About 100 East Berliners gathered at the Brandenburg Gate, just
inside the wall, and chanted: ``Open the gate! Open the gate!''
   With decades of fortified frontiers apparently at an end, the
wall that symbolized East-West division for decades may become a
mere monument to the Cold War.
   Since it appeared during an August night 28 years ago and East
Germany's borders were sealed, 191 people are known to have died
while fleeing to the West.
   Egon Krenz, East Germany's new leader, also advocated a law
Thursday that would ensuring free and democratic elections in his
communist nation, which has been disrupted by pro-reform
demonstrations and weakened by mass flight to the West.
   The Central Committee scheduled a Communist Party conference for
Dec. 15-17. Party conferences are forums for making major changes
in policy and the last one was held in 1956.
   More than 200,000 East Germans, nearly 1{ percent of the
population, have left so far this year _ 50,000 since Saturday
alone. Most are young, skilled workers vital to the economy.
   Hundreds of thousands of people who stayed home have filled the
streets to demand democratic reforms and an end to 40 years of
rigid one-party rule.
   As the news spread the number of East Germans heading for
Bavaria through Czechoslovakia rose dramatically. The official East
German news agency ADN reported up to 4,000 per hour entering
Czechoslovakia at the Schoenberg crossing, 10 times the number of
people entering Bavaria a few hours earlier.
   Guenter Schabowski, a member of the ruling Politburo, said the
borders were being opened until a law was passed to allow East
Germans greater freedom of travel.
   Schabowski did not say when the law would be passed. He also
said East Germany was not yet ready to remove all its barriers.
   The Central Committee decision means all East Germans ``can
travel over all East German border checkpoints,'' including through
the Berlin Wall, Schabowski told reporters.
   He said those seeking to emigrate could go to West Germany
directly without having to pass through a third country. East
Germans have fled through Hungary, Poland and Czechoslovakia.
   Anyone merely wanting to visit the West would need a visa,
Schabowski said, but they should be issued quickly. He did not
mention limits on time that could be spent abroad.
   Offices that issue travel visas had closed for the night by the
time Schabowki made the historic announcement, so no further
information was available.
   East Germans reacted with astonishment and jubilation.
   ``Is it really true?'' asked Mario Schmidt, 18.
   ``Now I no longer feel locked in here,'' said Uwe Landgraf, 28,
who hoped to travel to Paris.
   ``I think that even some of those who left recently will come
back now,'' said a 25-year-old electrician who identified himself
only as Thomas.
   Erich Honecker, the 77-year-old leader Krenz replaced last
month, supervised the building of the wall before he became
Communist Party chief. Every U.S. president since John F. Kennedy
has urged that it be torn down.
   President Bush called Thursday's announcement a ``dynamic
development ... clearly a big development in terms of human
rights.''
   On Capitol Hill, Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell said the
decision amounts to ``the symbolic destruction of the Berlin
Wall,'' and urged East Germany to ``take the final step and tear
that wall down.''
   ``The wall is the most tangible symbol of the failure of
communism,'' he said.
   West German leaders hailed the decision. Chancellor Helmut Kohl,
on an official visit to Poland, said: ``We will be in contact with
the East German leadership shortly after my return and I would like
to meet very soon with Mr. Krenz.''
   Fifteen prominent Communist intellectuals and officials in East
Berlin wrote to the Central Committee suggesting the wall be torn
down.
   ``It is also imaginable, even in the foreseeable future, that
the wall will become a relic of the past'' if an agreement is
signed with West Germany that would prevent ``damage to the East
German economy,'' they said. The letter was published Thursday in
the Berliner Zeitung, a party newspaper.
   As protest and flight gathered momentum this week, the
leadership took increasingly desperate steps in an attempt to turn
the tide.
   On Wednesday, Krenz purged the old guard from the party
Politburo and slimmed it down from 21 members to 11.
   An ADN dispatch said the party conference next month would
consider personnel changes in the 163-member Central Committee.
   Krenz, 52, touched on multiparty elections in a speech to the
Central Committee that official newspapers published Thursday. He
recommended a ``new election law that ensures free, democratic
general elections with a secret ballot'' and proposed ``public
supervision in every stage of the balloting.''
   He did not say whether he wanted a true multiparty system in
East Germany, but has said previously the supremacy of the
Communist Party is not open to debate. Officials define the current
election system, which guarantees the Communists virtually
unanimous approval, as democratic.
   The new leader also promised laws on freedom of assembly,
association and the press. He gave no details, but said independent
groups might have a role in politics.
   East Germany's pro-democracy opposition has made free elections
its main demand. Plans have been reported to legalize New Forum,
the largest group.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
