ID: 184	RANK: 67	SCORE: 23.925406
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891111-0047 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-11-11-89 0909EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i PM-EastGermany 5thLd-Writethru a0472 11-11 1183</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-East Germany, 5th Ld-Writethru, a0472,1213</SECOND>
<HEAD>Workers Smash Hole in Wall; Kohl and Krenz Plan Summit</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: Leads with 12 grafs to UPDATE with more detail on Kohl, Krenz
meeting, details of events in Hof and Hesse state; picks up 8th pvs: In
West ...</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By GEORGE JAHN</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>BERLIN (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Workers punched through the Berlin Wall today and
border guards from two nations reached through a gaping hole and
shook hands in a spine-tingling ceremony marking the opening of the
border between East and West Germany.
   Thousands of exultant East Germans poured across the border for
a second day to revel in their new freedom to travel after three
decades of confinement in their once strictly controlled country.
   East Germany's ADN news agency said West German Chancellor
Helmut Kohl and Communist Party chief Egon Krenz spoke by telephone
today about economic relations between the nations and other
matters related to the historic change percolating in Communist
East Germany.
   Kohl said said the leaders would likely meet either at the end
of the month or the beginning of December.
   Krenz' daring gambit _ that by giving his people the freedom to
travel he will stop an unprecedented exodus of his most talented
young citizens _ appeared to be working.
   Austrian border officials said the steady flow of East Germans
refugees heading to West German through Austria had slowed to a
trickle. Only 150 East German asylum seekers crossed the border
during a 24-hour period ending this morning, a sharp drop the from
1,000-a-day average of recent weeks.
   In Bonn, the Interior Ministry said this morning that 140,000
East Germans had arrived overnight in all of West Germany through
the newly opened borders, but most appeared to be using their
remarkable new travel privileges to visit rather than seek asylum.
   ``I've never been in West Berlin before,'' said a beaming Sabine
Gohlke, 23, who came from East Berlin with her husband and two
toddlers. ``I couldn't come before, they wouldn't let me.''
   Christopher Kennedy, 18, an exchange student from Harrison,
Ark., said he wanted to see an event ``that is going to be in the
history books as long as man is on the face of the earth.''
   West German cities all along the border were packed with East
Germans. Traffic jams were reported at major crossing points.
   In the central state of Hesse, officials lifted traditionally
strict shop-closing hours and let stores stay open as long as they
wanted today to handle the flood. In a near-revolutionary move,
stores were also allowed to stay open on Sunday in Hesse.
   Officials in the north Bavarian city of Hof near the East German
border barred traffic from downtown because of a massive influx of
visitors awed by the relative opulence of the West.
   In West Berlin, many danced, sang and smashed bottles from atop
the wall in a second night of celebration since the Berlin border
was opened for the first time since 1961.
   Two giddy, exuberant days of celebrations by Germans from both
nations turned raucous at times around the wall, surrounded by a
swarming mass of celebrants. There were several minor
confrontations between police and demonstrators overnight and
today, but the crowds were brought quickly under control.
   In one incident near the wall's Brandenburg Gate, about 100
demonstrators tore several holes in the wall, one 2-feet wide, and
then engaged in a shoving match with East German border guards,
witnesses and radio reports said. The encounter ended quickly and
there were no injuries.
   Protesters also hurled bottles, litter and dirt at the East
German guards, the witnesses said.
   Susan Wulka of the West Berlin police said that in several
instances, police had to restrain some in the crowds who were
chipping away at the wall. But she said no violence occurred.
   ``The spirit of freedom now reigns all over Europe _ Poland,
Hungary and now East Germany,'' Kohl declared here Friday night,
before leaving to hold an emergency Cabinet meeting in Bonn today.
   Kohl announced today he would be meeting soon with Krenz to
discuss the historic developments. Kohl also said he is ``constant
contact'' with Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, whose reforms
triggered the firestorm of change sweeping the East bloc.
   In East Berlin, Communist leader Krenz pledged before a rally of
150,000 people Friday that the country's new reform course ``will
not be turned back.''
   The Communist Party Central Committee promised that its dramatic
decision Thursday to allow East Germans to travel freely will be
permanent. It also said it will guarantee ``secret and publicly
monitored elections.''
   However, the government offered no details and made no reference
to constitutional provisions guaranteeing Communist dominance of
the government.
   On Friday, workers opened a bridge spanning the border and broke
through the wall early today to create the first of 18 planned
openings in the monolithic structure, the symbol of Cold War
tensions that divided not only a nation but the world.
   A constant stream of East Germans began crossing through the new
60-foot opening at the Bernauer Strasse section of the wall.
   Early this morning, East German guards and West German police
shook hands through the newly created break in the wall to cheers
from a crowd of about 100, who had waited through the night.
   ``This is a wonderful day,'' said a French policeman who
watched. ``Who here would not be happy to see it?''
   The symbolic event came after another dizzying day of change in
East Germany. On Friday East Germany announced that all border
restrictions were lifted, prompting more than 100,000 jubilant East
Germans to cross into the West.
   Most came for a quick visit, to get a glimpse of a world they
had not been able to see for 28 years.
   Krenz replaced hard-line leader Erich Honecker Oct. 18 amid an
unprecedented wave of public discontent, with tens of thousands
fleeing to the West and hundreds of thousands demonstrating for
reform almost daily.
   East Germany's decision to open its borders brought accolades
from world leaders, although some expressed caution against too
swift a move to reform.
   President Bush said he would ``seize every chance'' to promote
democracy in Eastern Europe. Secretary of State James A. Baker III
called the lifting of East German travel restrictions ``the most
dramatic event in East-West relations'' since World War II.
   In Moscow, Foreign Ministry spokesman Gennady I. Gerasimov said
opening East Germany's borders would help stem emigration and end
``stereotypes about the Iron Curtain.''
   By giving in to one of the key demands of recent weeks _ free
travel _ the East German leadership took a calculated risk, hoping
to calm some of the anger directed at the Communists.
   Authorities appeared relieved that so many citizens were
prepared to go look at the West, but then come back to a country
that this year has lost 200,000 mostly young skilled workers to
West Germany.
   In West Berlin, thousands streamed along the elegant
Kurfuerstendamm shopping boulevard, some carrying candles, others
toasting each other. Crowds of young girls could be seen rushing
down the street toward stores. Bars offered free drinks.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
