ID: 184	RANK: 82	SCORE: 22.573496
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891115-0092 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-11-15-89 1155EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i PM-EastGermany 3rdLd-Writethru a0527 11-15 0937</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-East Germany, 3rd Ld - Writethru, a0527,0960</SECOND>
<HEAD>East German Media Appear to Dismiss West's Aid Offer</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: Inserts 2 grafs after 12th graf, `Even leaders ...' to UPDATE
with warning by West Berlin mayor. Pickup 13th, `West Germany's...'</HEAD>
<HEAD>With LaserPhotos</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By GEORGE JAHN</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>BERLIN (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   East German newspapers today appeared to dismiss
West Germany's offer of massive financial aid, and Mikhail S.
Gorbachev cautioned that ``exporting capitalism'' could hurt the
climate of cooperation in Europe.
   Also today, East Germany's official news agency said nearly half
its 16.5 million people have been issued visas for the West since
travel restrictions were lifted on Thursday.
   ADN quoted an unidentified Interior Ministry official as saying
7,765,881 visas for West Berlin and West Germany had been approved
by this morning.
   Economist Karl-Heinz Arnold told the Communist Party newspaper
Berliner Zeitung that East Germany can manage its own economic
recovery, an indication that Bonn's conditional aid offer may be
rejected.
   ``I don't see any need to dramatize the internal or external
financial situation'' of East Germany, Arnold was quoted as saying.
   The government newspaper Bauern-Echo, aimed at East Germany's
farmers, warned of becoming too greatly influenced by West Germany.
   ``Yes to unrestricted travel. No to an East German sellout,''
the paper declared. ``Yes to meeting again, no to reunification.
The two German states are politically and economically too
diverse.''
   There was no official response from the government to West
Germany's offer, which would require Easter Germany's ruling
Communists to fundamentally reform their centrally planned economy.
Communist officials have made clear they do not favor a full
free-market system.
   In Frankfurt, West Germany's third-largest bank said it would
seek to open an office in East Berlin. The proposal by Commerzbank,
however, requires the approval of authorities in both Germanys and
West Berlin.
   Gorbachev, believed to have encouraged the ouster of hard-line
East German leader Erich Honecker and the dizzying reforms that led
to the Berlin Wall's opening, warned Westerners not to gloat over
the demise of Communism in the East bloc.
   ``When accusations of `exporting revolutions' are replaced with
calls for `exporting capitalism,' we have at hand a dangerous
manifestation of old thinking,'' Tass paraphrased Gorbachev as
saying Tuesday in Moscow.
   Even leaders of New Forum, the East German opposition group
leading massive protest marches for democratic change, have
expressed concern that Western capitalists might exploit an
unstable East Germany without helping its people.
   West Berlin Mayor Walter Momper said outsiders should not
interfere with East Germany's economic reforms.
   ``East Germany needs no patronage. The society of East Germany
is strong enough to improve its economic performance,'' he said.
``The citizens want self-determination and do not want to exchange
the decades of Communist Party tutelage for the patronage of the
West German state or society.''
   West Germany's economics minister, Helmut Haussmann, offered
Tuesday to rebuild East Germany's economy through broad-based
investments and joint ventures and to overhaul it moribund
communications and transport systems.
   While not offering details, Haussmann likened his plan to the
brainchild of U.S. Secretary of State George C. Marshall that
revitalized postwar Western Europe with an infusion of $12 billion.
   But he said such aid would be made available only if East
Germany carried out a ``thorough change'' of its centrally planned
economy.
   East Germany's new premier, Hans Modrow, is known to favor
gradual economic change and oppose a swift transition to full
democracy.
   Modrow, a 61-year-old Communist reformer confirmed by Parliament
as premier on Monday, has resisted recognition of unofficial groups
as viable opposition forces or negotiating partners.
   Modrow has said the government has no intention of tearing down
the Berlin Wall, which it opened to free travel in an effort to
halt an exodus of refugees and appease a public that has taken to
the streets en masse since early October to demand free elections
and other reforms.
   In the newest challenge to the Communists' supremacy, Parliament
Speaker Guenther Maleuda said Tuesday he would seek to amend the
constitution so the Communist Party is no longer deemed the leading
force in society.
   Maleuda, elected by Parliament Monday in the chamber's
first-ever secret ballot, made the remark at a meeting of his
Democratic Peasants Party _ one of the four formal opposition
parties that have recently begun to assert independence.
   The Liberal Democratic Party also called for increased
power-sharing. It urged convening talks, to include the unofficial
opposition, patterned after negotiations held in Poland that helped
usher in the Solidarity-led government.
   In a development heralding the possible inclusion of another
prominent reformer in the government, Politburo member Guenther
Schabowski resigned as Berlin's Communist boss.
   Schabowski, the party's propaganda chief, had announced
Thursday's opening of East Germany's borders. His resignation was
considered a possible prelude to his appointment to an influential
post in the government.
   A celebration began at the Brandenburg Gate on Tuesday after ADN
said the East Germany leadership was contemplating a new hole in
the Berlin Wall that would reconnect the central monument with the
West.
   In West Berlin, revelers who waited in excited anticipation of
reopening of the famed thoroughfare dwindled to a few hundred after
dawn when rumors spread that the new East-West crossing would open
only on Thursday.
   East Germany's Red Cross said, meanwhile, that it is setting up
reception centers for any East Germans who fled to the West and now
want to return.
   It said the centers can handle up to 10,000 people. The West
German Red Cross said it did not expect many of the 200,000 who
have fled to the West this year to return.
   The emigration has seriously depleted East Germany's labor force.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
