ID: 184	RANK: 89	SCORE: 21.524351
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900217-0091 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-02-17-90 1805EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-Germany 2ndLd-Writethru   02-17 0891</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Germany, 2nd Ld-Writethru,a0544,0917</SECOND>
<HEAD>Kremlin Opposes NATO Link For Reunified Germany</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: To CORRECT that Genscher is foreign minister sted defense
minister, SUB 2nd graf pvs; pickup 3rd graf pvs, `The Bonn...</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By KEVIN COSTELLOE</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>WEST BERLIN (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The Soviet Union will block the reunification
of Germany if the West insists on NATO membership for the combined
states, a top adviser to Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev said
Saturday.
   Also Saturday, two West German publications said Chancellor
Helmut Kohl and Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher made
concessions to Moscow to win Kremlin support for reunification last
week.
   The Bonn government denied the reports, which said the West
German leaders agreed to seek immediate legal recognition of
Poland's Western border by a united Germany; and promised that East
Germany would continue to supply the Soviets with much-needed food
and farm equipment.
   In an attempt to calm Soviet fears about security, Genscher
Saturday ruled out basing NATO troops on what is now East German
soil.
   ``The West is agreed that with a unification of Germany, there
will not be any eastward extension of NATO,'' Genscher told the
Westdeutsche Rundfunk radio station.
   His comments conflicted to some extent with those of West German
Defense Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg, who said Friday that NATO's
military protections should extend ``without weakening'' to all of
Germany in the event of unification. West German officials have
said they have no intention of turning their backs on the Western
alliance.
   The Kremlin made its stance clear Saturday.
   ``If the Western alliance sticks with its demand for a NATO
membership of all of Germany, then there won't be any German
unification,'' Valentin Falin said in an interview with Saarland
state radio.
   Falin, in addition to serving as a Gorbachev adviser, is the
head of the international section of the Soviet Communist Party's
Central Committee. He also is a former Soviet ambassador to West
Germany.
   The Soviet Union has been hardening its stance against NATO
membership for a united Germany, creating an impasse that could
slow the breakneck pace toward reuniting the states split after
World War II.
   Poland's insistence on a role in guiding the process has created
another potential stumbling block. It is concerned about
conservative West German politicans' claims to pre-war German
territories that were awarded to Poland by the Allies after World
War II.
   The Welt am Sonntag newspaper reported that Kohl and Genscher,
when they met with Gorbachev last week, promised to seek full and
immediate legal recognition of Poland's Western border by a unified
Germany.
   A Bonn government spokeswoman denied Saturday that such a
promise was made but added that ``it is possible this issue was
discussed.''
   Welt am Sonntag and the influential Der Spiegel magazine of
Hamburg said Kohl and Genscher also guaranteed to the Moscow
leadership that East Germany's contractual obligations to deliver
various products to the Soviet Union would be upheld after
reunification.
   Welt am Sonntag said the products were mainly food and farm
equipment. The Soviet Union is heavily dependent on East Germany
for such agricultural products.
   The spokeswoman denied that such an agreement was reached in
Moscow but added: ``These issues can only be settled after the
joining of the two German states.''
   Der Spiegel appears on the newsstands on Monday and Welt am
Sonntag is a Sunday newspaper. Both provided their reports to other
news media in advance of publication.
   West Germany has sought to quicken the pace of unification,
prompting East German protests that Bonn has been heavy-handed in
its dealings with its troubled neighbor.
   For weeks, there have been assertions that the troubled East
German economy could soon collapse.
   East Germany has been hurt by the exodus of about 2,000
emigrants a day this year, joining the more than 340,000 who left
last year. Many of them are young, skilled workers.
   In the financial capital of Frankfurt, West German Economics
Minister Helmut Haussmann criticized East German Premier Hans
Modrow's rejection of quick introduction of the West German mark in
East Germany.
   ``Heading back home with the West German mark in your luggage is
one of the greatest gifts there is,'' Haussmann said, referring to
Modrow's trip to Bonn earlier in the week.
   ``A free market-oriented country like Hungary would know how to
appreciate such an offer,'' Haussmann added.
   East Germans have said they realize that unification is
inevitable, and they have been making plans to join the two
countries and the city of Berlin.
   That includes East German plans to tear down a 1.2-mile stretch
of the Berlin Wall between the Reichstag, the former Parliament
building, and the famous Checkpoint Charlie crossing.
   The West Berlin city government said the East Germans will put
up a 5-foot fence along most of the stretch, but leave open a
200-yard section near the Brandenburg Gate. The work is to start on
Monday.
   East Germany's Communist leaders began opening the wall last
Nov. 9 in response to the exodus of East Germans and the growing
street rallies demanding democratic reforms.
   A group of about 1,000 West Germans held their own street rally
in Frankfurt Saturday and clashed with police in a demonstation
against an extreme rightist party.
   Several police officers and 27 demonstrators were injured in the
clashes. Police said the demonstrators threw rocks, bottles and
fireworks. The protesters demanded that the ultra-rightist National
Democratic Party be outlawed.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
