ID: 117	RANK: 17	SCORE: 10.449955
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910516-0164
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910516-0164.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
   The Grand Vizier of Poetry
   ----
   By Donald Lyons
</HL>
<DATE>
05/16/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14
</SO>
<LP>
   Poor Goethe, a marble statue in German town squares
forever bestowing smiling wisdom, brings to Anglophone minds
the inexhaustible author of "Faust," endless and incoherent,
the creator of the first teenage-suicide fad thanks to "The
Sorrows of Young Werther," and a polymath dubiously
pontificating on rocks and optics and chromaticism and love
and nature. It is off-putting. And it is unfair.
   Rescue of a sort is at hand in a huge new
life-and-time-and-works biography by Nicholas Boyle, whose
first installment, which has just appeared, gets us through
half the life: "Goethe, the Poet and the Age: Volume 1, the
Poetry of Desire, 1749-1790" (Oxford University Press, 807
pages, $30). Mr. Boyle, a fellow and tutor at Magdalen
College, Cambridge, spreads before us the fragmented but
awakening Germany where Johann Wolfgang von Goethe was born
in 1749 to a rich but professionally disappointed bureaucrat
and a lively, loving mother in Frankfurt. A pampered, happy
eldest child, little Goethe was tutored at home until he went
off to college in "Parisian" Leipzig. College brought on, as
college will, acute attacks of yearning, eroticism,
religiosity and verse (mostly later burnt). Then came law
school in Strasbourg, where he discovered nature (long walks
in the Vosges), German philosophy (he found Herder the most
congenial), atheism (he was to stay a lifelong anti-Christian
"pagan") and sex (he guiltily jilted a local girl).
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Back home in the early 1770s, equipped with a law degree,
he found his voice, or rather his voices -- his extraordinary
and, until Rilke, unchallenged inner oneness with the German
language. He began writing remarkable poetry: dithyrambs such
as "Prometheus" that anticipate both the excited, sweeping
energy of Shelley and the ecstatic precision of Hopkins; and
alongside them simple, stark ballads that remind us of
Wordsworth or Coleridge. He started "Faust" around then and,
although he was to go on reworking and expanding it until his
death in 1832, this "Urfaust" involving the original story of
the forsaken love, infanticide and execution of poor Gretchen
turned out to be the best part of the whole gigantic edifice,
bringing Goethe's cheery pantheistic optimism face to face
with evil and tragedy. But it was rather the hysterical cult
that developed around the maudlin novella "Werther" that made
Goethe the first true literary celebrity. He spent the rest
of his life pestered by "Werther" fans.
   In 1775 Goethe made his career move; he accepted the
invitation of Duke Carl August, ruler of tiny Weimar, to come
be councilor/minister/poet laureate/tutor/grand vizier. Here
he stayed essentially the rest of his life, a cherished and
petted courtier. He had a long, tormentedly platonic affair
with a married court lady, Charlotte von Stein. He enjoyed
court life, planned some plays, but also squirmed restlessly.
   The solution was one of history's most famous vacations:
Goethe's two-year trip to Italy in 1786-88, "the land where
the lemon trees bloom." Italy was revelation and catharsis:
Palladio, Raphael and Michelangelo (though Goethe loathed
their Christian subjects), Vesuvius, swarming Naples, and,
above all, Rome, where for two years he watched papal
ceremonies, studied art and had lots of undemanding sex. His
writing block dissolved: He tackled "Faust" again, this time
tacking on the odd concept of Faust as a kind of summa of the
human race.
   Back in Weimar in 1788, Goethe, now 39, met the woman of
his life: Christiane Vulpius, 23, from a marginal, literate
-- but -- scrimping Micawberesque family. Goethe installed
the spunky, no-nonsense woman in his home (no actual wedding;
mild local buzz) and soon had a son. His work thrived: He
finished his best play, "Tasso," all about the stresses of
being a great, mad poet in a backbiting, uncomprehending
court. Above all, he wrote "Roman Elegies," 20 poems loosely
modeled on Latin erotic poets like Propertius and Ovid but
wholly original in essence, fusing Goethe's new marital
happiness with his memories of Rome.
   They tell, in 20 vignettes, the short history of an
intense affair between a traveling German poet and a buoyant
Roman lass who likes to flirt in public by drawing the poet's
initials in wine on the table; he enjoys tapping out the
meters of the poems he's writing on her naked back in bed.
These amazing, humorous, ironic poems are full of the sounds
and smells of Rome, and the quality of light at different
times of day. Along with Byron's "Don Juan" and Pushkin's
"Eugene Onegin," both considerably later, the "Roman Elegies"
comprise a trilogy of brilliantly erotic Romantic narrative
verse -- a genre that might itself seem a paradox to those
who think of Romanticism as involving merely windy rhapsodies
and self-absorbed verbosities. In 1789 Goethe returned to
Italy, found he hated it, could think only of Christiane and
little August, and wrote the nasty, often funny "Venetian
Epigrams" mocking the tackiness of it all.
   Mr. Boyle leaves Goethe back home, a purring paterfamilias
of 41. Mr. Boyle's labors are never less than intelligent and
eloquent; he discriminates and points to the living and
enjoyable Goethe. For those embarking on a long sea voyage
and wanting to know all about Goethe, he is a reliable
companion. But the less-leisured may wish to turn to the
Penguin "Goethe: Selected Verse." A variegated selection from
plays, epics and lyrics, big and small, light and heavy, and
preceded by David Luke's ample introduction, it offers the
remedy for Goethe the bore -- not Goethe the man, however
richly presented, but Goethe the thrilling, witty and sexy
poet.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
