ID: 117	RANK: 80	SCORE: 5.714541
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-4982</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CK2AVAE0FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921128
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 NOV 92 / Books: My Book of The Year - Our reviewers choose the books
they have enjoyed most, published this year
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By FT Reviewers
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
I CHOOSE Robert Skidelsky's John Maynard Keynes, The Economist as Saviour
1920 -1937 (Macmillan, Pounds 20.00). It is the second volume of the life of
one of the most influential economists and civilised figures of the 20th
century. Like its predecessor, it is admirably written and based on massive,
though unobtrusive scholarship. The 'official' biography by Roy Harrod came
out in 1951 five years after Keynes's death. It was a splendid book. But the
lives of great men need to be reassessed at intervals. Fifty years is not
too long. Much can be said today, especially about Keynes's sexual life
which Harrod felt he could not reveal then. 'Keynsianism' has latterly been
under a Thatcherite cloud but there are signs that it may be lifting. This
is not only a wonderful portrait of a man often described as 'the last great
liberal'. It is also remarkably topical.
ROBERT BLAKE
TO ALL those baffled by the mindless savagery of the present civil war in
what was Yugoslavia, I warmly commend The Making of Eastern Europe by Philip
Longworth (Macmillan, Pounds 40.00). He is of course not solely concerned
with Yugoslavia. His aim is to trace the pattern in a complex ethnic carpet
spreading from the Baltic to the Black Sea; and to this end, he has adopted
the unusual method of working back from the present to the past, to those
early Christian centuries in which unfortunately, the seeds of so many later
conflicts (eg between Orthodox Serbs and Catholic Croats) were sewn. This
may seem a cumbersome procedure, but it has resulted in a first-rate piece
of historical analysis; and I find Professor Longworth's comments constantly
illuminating, on a region of Europe which I had up to now thought I knew
reasonably well.
ERIK DE MAUNY
I CHOOSE Humphrey Carpenter's Benjamin Britten (Faber, Pounds 20.00). The
author trains his well-focused biographer's beam upon areas of the life
previously preserved largely in shadow. In doing so he manages to raise many
thorny questions (almost all of them incapable of clear answer, he readily
admits); in particular, it is the speculation about whether the composer was
sexually abused at school, and to what degree his fondness in adult years
for young boys amounted to paedophilia, that has already caused the book to
be so widely publicised. But this is not the reason why Carpenter's Britten
is so completely engrossing. Lucidly laid out, judiciously balanced, it
never allows the reader to forget that Britten is one of the geniuses of
music - which is why all the questions arise, and are worth grappling with,
in the first place.
MAX LOPPERT
MY CHOICE is The Granta Book of the American Short Story edited by Richard
Ford (Granta Books Pounds 16.99) because it is at once so idiosyncratic and
so pleasing - idiosyncratic because it ignores the whole history of the
American short story up to the Second World War and pleasing because it
keeps its eye on the object. Ford starts with most of the well known names
from Paul Bowles through Flannery O'Connor to Donald Barthelme, but the real
hero is Raymond Carver, whose contribution, embedded in the middle of the
collection, is a sombre masterpiece.
GEOFFREY MOORE
HOW CAN an author control his reputation after he is dead? Should papers be
kept or destroyed? Should the will bind the executors or give them
discretion? Ought the widow to have a veto? I much enjoyed Michael
Millgate's Testamentary Acts (Oxford, Pounds 27.50), a wry but understanding
account of how four famous writers prepared for the immortality of
biography. Browning left too many decisions to his son. Tennyson foolishly
believed that a pious commissioned memoir would pre-empt the public's
curiosity. Henry James spent years carefully reinterpreting his early life
with the benefit of hindsight. Hardy's friends preferred the nation's wishes
to his own. From these and more modern examples (including Auden, Eliot,
Maugham and Larkin) Millgate explains the techniques of literary myth-making
and how they can be rumbled.
WILLIAM ST CLAIR
BRONCHIAL asthma is beastly - volcanic sneezes, hacking coughs bouncing back
from rock-hard lungs, even newspapers are almost impossible to read. A
book-loving friend always bombards me with the latest paperbacks in the hope
 -usually forlorn - that one might hook me. This year he succeeded with the
paperback of Julian Critchley's Hung Parliament (Headline, Pounds 4.50). The
first paragraph, often the furthest frontier I reached when asthmatic,
pushed me on. I was gripped. I read it through non-stop.
J. H. PLUMB
IT HAS NOT been a year for reading new books, other than those connected
with my own subject, let alone buying them as a means of outfacing the
recession. I did, though, enjoy Miranda Seymour's study of Ottoline Morrell:
Life on the Grand Scale (Hodder &amp; Stoughton Pounds 25.00). But nothing could
rival returning (for the umpteenth time) to Randall Jarrell's Pictures from
an Institution, which really is the Great American Novel, and makes life
better.
CLEMENT CRISP
NOBODY ELSE even reviewed it, that I ever saw, but the book I most enjoyed
this year was Pettibone's Law (Bloomsbury original paperback, Pounds 8.99)
by John Keene. It is a first novel by a former US fighter pilot, set in
Vietnam and written very much in the spirit of Catch 22. Better books may
have been written about the absurdities of Vietnam, but if anybody has ever
written a funnier one, I have yet to come across it.
NICHOLAS BEST
IN THESE days of dismal European news, I found Emilie Carles' A Wild Herb
Soup: The Life of a French Countrywoman translated by AH Goldberger
(Gollancz Pounds 6.99) a rich and life-restoring brew. A peasant-teacher who
lived most of her life in the mountains around Briancon, in south-eastern
France, Mme Carles chronicles through her own life story, (1900-1979) the
impact of two world wars on a peasant community. Her autobiography reveals
more about the complex politics of inter-war France than most historical
accounts. The translation almost catches the full flavour of the French
original.
ZARA STEINER
IT IS sometimes too tempting to nominate an obscure volume which no one else
has spotted. This year - in utter contrast - I am happy to admit that for me
from the first pages the great book of 1992 had to be Michael Ondaatje's
novel The English Patient (Bloomsbury, Pounds 14.99) which as I said at the
time on this page, is a masterpiece and had to be the Booker prize-winner.
The judges half-agreed with me. I stand by what I said and urge sceptics of
the Booker brouhaha to give this one the attention it deserves.
JDF JONES
I ENORMOUSLY enjoyed the account of one of this century's most famous
literary love affairs, that of W B Yeats and the Irish revolutionary Maud
Gonne, as told through their own correspondence in W B Yeats &amp; Maud Gonne:
The Gonne-Yeats Letters 1893-1938 (Hutchinson, Pounds 25.00). This
50-year-long romance and friendship had everything: longing, rejection,
passion, renunciation, rancour, envy, idealism, all set against a backcloth
of extraordinary literary energy and political engagement.
JACKIE WULLSCHLAGER
MY CHOICE is The Medieval Cookbook by Maggie Black (British Museum Press,
Pounds 14. This is much more than a collection of recipes, 80 of them that
range from the Saxons' basic fare, frumenty to such delights as rose pudding
made with rose petals. But the volume's real point and joy lie in the social
history it contains; its setting of the medieval scene, its literary asides,
its magnificent illustrations, and its views on such topics as deportment,
medicines, dress, pilgrimages, bee-keeping, life in general.
ISABEL QUIGLY
FOR SHEER volume of fine writing enclosed within a single cover, you cannot
beat The Granta Book of the American Short Story (Granta, Pounds 16.99),
edited by Richard Ford. Forty-four of them, most good, more than a few
great, all of them demonstrating that the short story is alive and well in
the US. And do not let Ford's modesty in not including one of his own
stories fool you - they rate with anything on offer here.
STEPHEN AMIDON
FITTINGLY in this Year of the Danes, far and away the best book I have read
celebrates a great Danish artist, Poul Vad's Vilhelm Hammershoi and Danish
Art at the Turn of the Century (Yale University Press, Pounds 45). Vad is a
scholar who writes about paintings with a brilliance and delicacy foreign to
most art-historical monographs. From the first page, we are swept along by
Vad's intense commitment to fathoming the mind of a creative artist. And
what an artist] Hammershoi, who died in 1916 at the age of 53, is often
called 'the Danish Vermeer' - although there is more to his genius even than
that. For the pictures alone, then, this is a covetable art-book. But read
it, too, for Vad's portrayal of a melancholy Danish genius who, his face
always turned against the prevailing wind, must now be seen as an artist of
truly European stature.
PATRICIA MORISON
THE 1992 book which I expect to be still taking down from the shelf 10 years
from now is Sex (Secker &amp; Warburg Pounds 25.00) by Madonna. Like The Sgt
Pepper LP it is a striking departure in concept: 14 inches by 11 with a
spiral back and brushed metal covers, it depicts a sexual odyssey - well,
all right, a sexual eclecticism - in photographs, accompanied by personal
jottings. Some parts are mannered, naive or embarrassing, but others are
funny, honest and arousing. Some of the photographs are superb (the
'Boticelli Venus') some hilarious (the straddled fish fountain) and some
erotic (the full page kiss with a long haired youth). None of it is great
art and some of it is confused. But it is utterly unlike any other book
appearing this year, or any other year.
CHRISTOPHER DUNKLEY.
I ESPECIALLY enjoyed Kwame Anthony Appiah's In My Father's House: Africa in
the Philosphy of Culture (Methuen, Pounds 20.00), which provides an elegant
and lucid analysis of some of the problems of African cultural politics.
Discussions of African culture, he suggests, should focus less on identity
than on diversity. Engagingly, he emphasises, the value of such diversity by
affectionate reference to his own childhood: he grew up in Ghana, as the son
of an English mother and a father who was a close relation of the Asante
king.
CHLOE CHARD
MICHAEL Ondaatje's The English Patient (Bloomsbury, Pounds 14.99) is a
masterpiece. In an Italian villa ruined from the German retreat, a complex
story unravels of exploring the Libyan Desert before the War. The story is
rich in coincidence and disaster, sparsely told.  But is not cruel, just
unsentimental. Endless moments of truth make it a must for all who have
travelled in hard places and wondered why they are there.
GERALD CADOGAN
THE BEST novel to come my way this year was Death and Nightingales by Eugene
McCabe (Secker &amp; Warburg, Pounds 13.99), a dramatic masterpiece and a lesson
in verbal economy. It transports you bodily to Fermanagh 1883, and kindles a
curiosity that will keep you up all night. The religious divides of Ulster
are brought vividly to life, giving the reader a fresh understanding of the
continuing conflict. I expected it to be an obvious front-runner for all the
major prizes but as far as I know it has consistently escaped notice.
ALANNAH HOPKIN
I AM addicted to books on the visual arts and architecture. And some
subjects seem inexhaustible: so it is with Monet, about whom so much has
been said, written and shown; how can we bear any more? But there is more,
and I cannot imagine how we have done without it: Virginia Spate's The
Colour of Time Claude Monet (Thames and Hudson, Pounds 38.00) a decade in
the making, and dazzling in the result. Spate has produced an enormous
synthesis of political and cultural history focused on the immense oeuvre of
one seminal artist in his time.
MARINA VAIZEY
I BECAME addicted to David Lodge's The Art Of Fiction (Penguin, Pounds 5.99)
when it was newspaper-serialised; now here is the book. Lodge tells us
everything we ever wanted to know, but were afraid to ask structuralist
friends, about the tics and tropes of the novelist's art. Deftly and
readably, the book roams from allegory to stream-of-consciousness via
aporia, metafiction, time-shift, suspense, magic realism and 40-odd other
headings. Here is scholarship made human, and illustrated with chunks of
great writing from Fielding to Fitzgerald. There has been no better populist
study of fiction since Forster's Aspects Of The Novel.
NIGEL ANDREWS
THE DIFFICULT, painful, tedious enterprise of observing friends dying from
AIDS has hurt the poet Thom Gunn into writing some of the most vital poems
of his life in The Man with Night Sweats (Faber &amp; Faber Pounds 11.99 or
Pounds 5.99 paperback). It is the most powerful collection of new verse to
have been published this year. Gunn has not been a poet who has ever worn
his heart on his sleeve; for many years he seemed all too content to
describe emotions in the abstract. The 1960s ambience and San Francisco,
where he has lived for the past quarter of a century, loosened his tongue
and his feelings. The sequence of elegies to dead friends, all named, with
which the book concludes, not only stares death in the face unflinchingly,
but also reminds us that for Gunn, an out-and-out hedonist, there is no
alternative to the lures and the delights of the flesh. Dead or alive, its a
hard road - but there is no other.
MICHAEL GLOVER
NOT ONE of the political memoirs or biographies, although there have been
several good examples this year, but a book by a politician turned
reflective: Denis Healey's My Secret Planet (Michael Joseph, Pounds 16.99).
Healey describes it as an attempt to explore his inner life. It consists of
extracts from writing that influenced and moved him, plus commentary. The
writings are diverse. Healey says that among his favourites are Wordsworth,
Heine, Yeats, Auden, Virginia Woolf, Traherne and Emily Dickinson. Yet you
will also find extracts from the memoirs of Ellen Terry. There was always a
reflective side to Healey: his reading and his memory are prolific, not only
in English. It is good to find him enjoying himself and finally shedding the
reputation of the old bruiser. He ends with lines from Traherne: 'This busy,
vast enquiring Soul/Brooks no Control:/'Tis hugely curious too.'
MALCOLM RUTHERFORD
MY BOOK of the year is a provocative piece of political incorrectness
entitled The Seven Fat Years and How to Do It Again (The Free Press, Pounds
15.99), a brilliant defence of President Reagan's 1980s supply-side economic
reforms by Bob Bartley. He points out that in the seven fat years in which
American real GNP grew 31 per cent, 18 million new jobs were created,
charitable giving increased, and the tax burden on lower income groups fell
and their real incomes rose compared with the previous half-decade. At a
time when the best lessons of the 1980s threaten to become unlearned,
Bartley's book provides a seasonal pick-me-up for supply-side fogies
everywhere.
MARK ARCHER
AMONG the books that most significantly alert and instruct us this year are
Edward de Grazia's Girls Lean Back Everywhere (Constable Pounds 19.95) about
censorship and the arts, and Helena Kennedy's Eve Was Framed (Chatto and
Windus, Pounds 16.99) about the difficulties experienced by women in
conflict with the British criminal justice system. But for my prime
selection I nominate PN Furbank's Diderot (Secker and Warburg, Pounds
25.00), an insightful study, by an exemplary biographer, of an outstanding
man in an outstanding age. Wide learning is gracefully purveyed in this
account of admirable endeavours and ideals - a discerning reader's delight.
AC GRAYLING
I HAVE a soft spot for novels like E M Forster's The Longest Journey that
re-create the period when an individual takes his first heady sips of adult
freedom at some college or university. It is a time of life when the
ultimate questions that have perplexed thinkers throughout the centuries
coincide with a continual pondering of more immediate amorous prospects; the
two trains of thought merge together intoxicatingly in a painful wonderland.
Donna Tartt has, in her first novel, The Secret History (Viking Pounds
15.99) made a glowing addition to this genre. I am happy to give it my
accolade in return for the happiness it gave me. Her Vermont collegers and
their classics tutor-guru are uncompromisingly elitist cultural snobs, some
of whom have far too much money for their own good. They are utterly
ruthless beneath the surface charm. They represent everything we are taught
nowadays not to admire. Was it because of that I adored it so much?
ANTHONY CURTIS
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XVIII
</PAGE>
</DOC>
