ID: 117	RANK: 94	SCORE: 5.498175
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920306-0131
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920306-0131.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   On Sports: River Rivalry
   ----
   By Frederick C. Klein
</HL>
<DATE>
03/06/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A7
</SO>
<LP>
   Any sporting event with the word "The," capital T, in its
title has gotta be important, and The Boat Race surely
measures up. What boat race? you ask. Why, the one between
eight-man crews representing the U's of Oxford and Cambridge,
in England, of course. Now aren't you sorry you asked?
   Weather permitting, and it almost always does because the
British are stout about such things, the date of the next one
is April 4. The place is the River Thames in London between
Putney Bridge and just past the Mortlake Brewery in Mortlake,
a distance of 4 1/4 miles.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   There's a big-time sponsor in Beefeater gin, which gives
the two schools about $225,000 a year each for the privilege
of putting its name on the winner's trophy; Ladbrokes, the
betting-parlor chain, previously sponsored the race. Remember
that the next time you want to complain about Virginia Slims
and women's professional tennis.
   Are the Brits excited? You bet] Some 50,000 actual humans
are expected to line the river's shores for the event, and 10
million or so more will be watching at home, on the telly.
I'm informed that The Boat Race is the third most popular
annual live televised sporting event in the United Kingdom,
behind only the FA Cup final (that's football; soccer,
really) and the Grand National (that's a steeplechase).
   But The Boat Race holds a special place in the hearts of
the people whose sporting heirs we are, like it or not.
That's because it bests those other two goes in a category
the British truly hold dear, which is history. Whereas the FA
Cup was inaugurated in 1872, and horses first jumped the
hedges in the Grand National in 1847, The Boat Race dates
from (gasp]) 1829. With interruptions for wars (WWs I &amp; II,
Crimean, Boer, Roses) and other cataclysms, next month's
edition will be the 138th.
   That first race, you'll be interested to know, was
organized by Oxonian Charles Wordsworth, a nephew of the
poet. He was a kind of Don King of his day, having promoted
the first intra-U cricket match two years earlier.
   The two crews met on the Thames at Henley on June 10,
1829, and an estimated 20,000 people came to watch.
Historians say the crowd gathered at least in part because an
article in the Sporting Magazine -- hotly denied by the
amateur contestants -- had reported that a side bet of 500
pounds was at stake. Whatever, Oxford won. So, too, in a way,
did the Church of England, because the crews would produce
two bishops, three deans and a chancellor of the Diocese of
Manchester.
   The race also is interesting nowadays, I think, because of
the ways in which British intercollegiate sports differ from
our own. There is no equivalent of the NCAA in Great Britain,
which makes everything a lot easier. Any student-graduate or
undergrad -- can compete on any of his school's teams for as
long as he is enrolled.
   Moreover, team members -- the "kids," as it were -- call
the shots Over There in a way that would amaze but not amuse
the likes of Bobby Knight. The coaches of both of the crews
are hired not by the universities but by the elected
presidents (i.e., captains) of their respective student boat
clubs, and those young men also have a strong say in team
selection. Sounds to me like an educative experience.
   There's some disagreement over whether British U's -- and
Cambridge and Oxford in particular -- recruit jocks. Oxford
has won the race the past five years, and Max Justicz, the
Cambridge Boat Club president, claims that's partly because
Oxford's admission practices are "receptive to athletes."
   Not so, replies the Oxford Boat Club prez, Joe Michels.
"If anything, it's just the opposite," he asserts. "Some of
our deans dislike the fuss that goes with the race, and give
us rowers a tough time."
   If you discern an, uh, edge to the Justicz-Michels
relationship, it's no accident. Michels is a 27-year-old
doctoral candidate in physics from around Washington, D.C.,
who did his undergraduate work, and rowing, at La Salle in
Philadelphia. Law student Justicz, 24, is a British citizen
who nonetheless grew up around Atlanta and holds a degree
from Boston U. They're acquainted, and near the end of last
year's event, when it was clear Oxford would win, Michels
leaned from his craft and hollered, "Bye, bye, Max."
   We Yanks might consider that to be mild woofing, but the
British press -- those scandalmongers] -- turned it into the
"Bye, bye, Max" affair, and has quizzed the principals about
it endlessly since. Says Michels: "Not to justify what I did,
but I thought they {the Cambridge crew members} were pretty
arrogant before the race. There's no great friendliness
between us. "Says Justicz: "I thought his remark was a good
indicator of how they {the Oxford crew members} approach
things. To win, we'll have to match that."
   Cambridge already has done a few things to get back into
the "W" column in a contest in which Oxford holds an overall
69-67 victory margin, with one tie (in 1877). It has hired as
coaches John Wilson, who coached Oxford the previous few
years, and, for a few weeks, Harry Parker, the noted Harvard
U. crew mentor. Its coxswain (he's the guy who steers) will
be Andy Probert, a 37-year-old doctoral student who has coxed
British crews in international competition. Coxing is
especially important in The Boat Race because of its long,
bell-shaped course and variable tidal currents.
   Oxford's coaches include Jurgen Grobler, a former East
German guru, and Mike Spracklen, of the Canadian national
team. Its boat includes a couple of British Olympic hopefuls.
   The Boat Race is, indeed, serious business, with both
crews putting in six-hour training sessions daily for the
previous five months. It's said that Cantabrigians exercise
vigorously to keep warm, while Oxonians do it to stay awake,
but the grind is no joke to President Justicz. "On April 5, I
can resume having a social life. I hope," says he.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
