ID: 315	RANK: 11	SCORE: 44.183346
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900323-0177 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-03-23-90 1040EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>a a PM-AnotherLook:MountSt.Helens Adv26   03-23 1255</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Another Look: Mount St. Helens, Adv 26,1282</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv26</NOTE>
<NOTE>For Release Mon PMs, March 26, and Thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>Quake 10 Years Ago Was First Sign Mount St. Helens' Fuse Was Lit</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Donal is cq in 25th graf, ``For Crandell...'</NOTE>
<NOTE>With LaserPhoto</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By JIM KLAHN</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>SEATTLE (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   At 4.1 on the Richter scale, the earthquake on
the afternoon of March 20, 1980, was no great shakes. It knocked
snow off the north face of Mount St. Helens but went virtually
unnoticed in the surrounding counties of southwestern Washington.
   Nearly 130 miles to the north, the line traced by a wandering
pencil on a seismograph at the University of Washington was first
interpreted as evidence of a tremor 75 miles southeast of the
dormant volcano.
   But on closer inspection, seismologists determined the quake had
occurred under the mountain, and relatively close to the surface.
   It was the first recorded sign that Mount St. Helens' volcanic
fuse was lit. One week later, on March 27, the volcano belched
steam and ash in its first eruption in 123 years. The accompanying
4.7-magnitude quake sent seismic needles skittering.
   Fifty-two days after that, on May 18, 1980, the mountain
exploded spectacularly. The eruption killed 57 people and sent ash
around the world. In an instant, 1,300 feet of the mountain
disappeared, fully a fifth of its towering majesty simply blown
away.
   The smoking, raw-edged crater left behind stunned residents of
Washington and Oregon used to gazing out at a symmetrical,
snowcapped peak.
   ``It woke people up to the fact that having a volcano in your
back yard can be dangerous,'' said Dwight Crandell, retired from
the U.S. Geological Survey. In 1978, Crandell helped write a report
that predicted an eruption at Mount St. Helens this century.
   The blast was also a wake-up call for volcanologists around the
world. In the 1970s, only two countries with volcanic mountains
were examining the dangers of nearby human settlements. Today 16
countries have active studies under way, Crandell said by telephone
from his home in Denver.
   ``It's clear that the 1980 eruption was a sensation for the
science of volcanology,'' said geologist Steve Brantley, stationed
at the USGS Cascade Volcano Observatory in Vancouver, Wash., about
45 miles southwest of Mount St. Helens. About 80 scientists work at
the observatory, built after the eruption.
   UW seismologist Steve Malone said the March 20 earthquake was
strong enough to draw attention to the area but not so unusual as
to make scientists suspicious that molten rock was squeezing into
crevices deep under the earth.
   ``Earthquakes at the volcano are not unheard of,'' Malone said.
``They generate a bit of interest but not immediate alarm.''
   But quakes kept coming, increasing in number and strength. Three
days after the initial quake, UW seismologists warned the USGS
about a ``potentially serious situation.''
   ``This was when we first suspected we might be on to something
other than just a small earthquake swarm,'' Malone said.
   Teams of geologists arrived to set up equipment to monitor
ground movement and the gases emitted each time the volcano burped.
Seismologists stayed close to their machines. The Forest Service
began warning people to stay clear of the mountain because of
avalanches.
   But the scientists were not working in isolation. Scores of
eager newspaper and broadcast reporters joined the crush.
Researchers accustomed to working in geologic time, in a science
where more is unknown than known, were being asked to provide
instant answers for that evening's news and the next morning's
newspapers.
   ``I remember ... being a bit overwhelmed by the media interest
this was already generating,'' Malone said. ``All we had was data
and some possibilities and a lot of questions.''
   Meantime, the ground was moving at postcard-perfect Spirit Lake,
at the mountain's foot. Chuck Tonn, who ran the Forest Service desk
at the lake, hung a pencil from a string to show the faint shaking.
The lake was evacuated Tuesday morning, March 25.
   ``I was glad to leave that morning,'' Tonn said. ``That last
night, I don't think any of us slept. ... It seemed like there was
always some movement going on.''
   Not everyone left. Harry Truman, the 83-year-old owner and
keeper of rustic Spirit Lake Lodge, dug in his heels. Truman said
he would stay on the mountain that had been his home for 50 years,
the mountain that eight weeks later would kill him. In the media
catering to the nation's rising anticipation, Truman became a
cantankerous folk hero.
   Another local, Stan Lee, 67, owner of the Kid Valley Store about
20 miles from the peak, snorted at talk of a possible eruption and
accused the Forest Service of plotting to squelch development. Two
days later, the mountain blew.
   That first eruption shot a black plume almost a mile and a half
high. By mid-April, the stark gray and brown hollow of a crater had
replaced the mountain's snowy point, once 9,677 feet above sea
level. Ashfalls in the region were commonplace, with fickle winds
determining who got dusted next.
   May 18, 1980, the day the mountain finally blew its top, is now
designated Eruption Day in Geological Survey books. On those who
were there and experienced the power and awe and terror, Mount St.
Helens has left its mark as clearly as the eruption scarred the
landscape.
   ``I feel fortunate to have been at Mount St. Helens from the
beginning all these 10 years,'' said Tonn, who now manages the
Forest Service's visitors' center west of the 110,000-acre National
Volcanic Monument.
   ``It (eruption) kind of puts me in my place. It puts me in awe
of what can happen.''
   For Crandell and fellow USGS geologist Donal Mullineaux, the
eruption was right on time. After studying dormant Cascade Range
volcanoes in the 1960s and 1970s, they predicted in 1978 that Mount
St. Helens would likely erupt relatively soon.
   ``Everything we found indicated it was a very young volcano, and
a very explosive volcano, and a frequently active volcano,'' which
last erupted in 1857, Crandell said. ``We felt almost sure the
volcano would erupt, and sooner rather than later. That is what the
history told us.''
   While some public officials greeted their hazard report
seriously, there were also snickers, the two scientists said. ``A
lot of people made fun of it, of course,'' Mullineaux said.
   Crandell said he was gratified that many countries with
volcanoes have since made use of their work in hazard assessment,
including New Zealand, Japan, Italy, Mexico, Equador and Colombia.
   The eruption of Colombia's Nevado del Ruiz in November 1985
provides an example of how hazard assessment could have helped,
Crandell said. An assessment had been completed, and hazard zones
had been laid out, including likely flood and mudflow zones at the
town of Armero. But word never reached local officials. There were
no evacuations and 25,000 people perished.
   Mount St. Helens prompted gains in both volcanology and
seismology. Since 1980, scientists have learned to better predict
volcanic eruptions by studying earthquake activity, including the
``harmonic tremors'' that indicate movement of molten earth.
   Other volcanic mysteries are also better understood, Crandell
said. These include the devastating sideways force of the May 1980
eruption, the fast-moving and deadly mixtures of matter and gas
known as pyroclastic flows and surges, and the mudflows that let
loose in minutes after vibrations turn snowfields into walls of
water.
   Mullineaux and Crandell retired in the mid-1980s, but both
remain active in research on Mount St. Helens.
   ``I can't leave it alone,'' Crandell said.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Mon PMs, March 26</NOTE>
</DOC>
