ID: 232	RANK: 2	SCORE: 21.446541
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP881128-0027 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-11-28-88 0146EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a PM-Sununu-Tufts     11-28 0960</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Sununu-Tufts,950</SECOND>
<HEAD>Sununu Receives School Benefits Six Years After Leaving</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By JOHN KING</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>MEDFORD, Mass. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Six years after he last taught at Tufts
University, John Sununu remains on the school faculty in what one
official calls an ``extremely rare'' arrangement that allows his
children to receive tuition waivers and other aid.
   Sununu, the New Hampshire governor chosen to serve as White House
chief of staff in the Bush administration, last week declined to be
discuss the arrangement but said last summer, ``I never asked for
any different treatment. This was all done by the board of
trustees.''
   Sununu has had two children enrolled in Tufts since he left the
university and also has children attending the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology in Cambridge, Mass., and Stanford University
in Palo Alto, Calif.
   The children attending Tufts are granted full tuition waivers and
those at other colleges receive tuition subsidies from Tufts as part
of faculty benefits Sununu has received during his six years on
leave from the school, according to Tufts officials. Tuition at
Tufts in the 1987-88 school year was $11,750.
   An official who oversees faculty benefits at Tufts said general
school policy is to grant leaves for up to two years.
   But policies governing such extended leaves by faculty at private
colleges and universities vary greatly, with the longest leaves
generally granted to professors who quit their academic posts for
high-profile government assignments.
   Sununu announced in May that he would not seek a fourth term as
governor and has spent much of his time since then working for Bush.
During the presidential campaign he served as a chief Bush surrogate
attacking the record of Massachusetts Gov. Michael Dukakis, the
Democrats' nominee.
   In announcing that he would not seek another term, Sununu cited
his $68,000 a year gubernatorial salary as too small. His wife
specifically said college tuition bills were a factor in her
husband's decision to leave his post.
   As White House chief of staff, Sununu can earn up to $89,500,
according to government pay scales.
   Tufts officials confirmed Sununu remains on leave from his
tenured teaching post in the mechanical engineering department but
referred most questions about the circumstances of his leave to
President Jean Mayer, who did not return repeated messages from The
Associated Press.
   Mayer's secretary said the school president told her he would
have no comment on Sununu's status.
   Sununu said last summer he intended to eventually return to
teaching at Tufts but had not discussed a date with school
officials. In the school's latest catalog, published in Aug. 15,
1988, Sununu remains listed as an associate professor of mechanical
engineering.
   ``Why not?'' he answered when asked if he believed it was
appropriate for his children to continue to receive tuition waivers
and assistance from Tufts.
   Attempts to reach Sununu this week to discuss his status at Tufts
were unsuccessful. Jerry Little, the governor's spokesman, said
Wednesday that Sununu did not have time to conduct an interview.
   Children of Tufts faculty members, and most other colleges and
universities, are allowed to attend that school free of charge.
Tufts policy also allows children of Tufts faculty to receive $1,250
a semester for a maximum of $2,500 a year to help pay their bills at
any other accredited college, according to Bernice Segal, academic
affairs officer at Tufts.
   Whether those benefits are extended to faculty members on leaves
varies from school to school, according to an informal survey of a
dozen private colleges and universities.
   Sununu said he believed his children at Stanford and MIT received
$1,250 a year from Tufts. He said he did not believe, as Ms. Segal
said, that they were eligible for $2,500.
   The school, citing confidentiality guidelines, refused to say how
much assistance was given to Sununu children attending schools other
than Tufts. But it released the amount which they are eligible to
receive.
   Ms. Segal, to whom all questions about faculty benefits were
referred, said all benefits are available to faculty on full leaves,
including health and disability insurance. Sununu does not receive a
salary from the school.
   She termed it ``rare'' for a faculty member to be granted a leave
of more than two years and ``extremely rare'' for a leave to be
approved for five years or more.
   A department chairman must recommend a faculty member for a leave
and the recommendation must be approved by the school's dean, she
said. Leaves are reviewed annually, she said.
   Tufts spokeswoman Rosemarie Van Camp disputed parts of Ms.
Segal's account and said extended leaves are ``routinely'' given to
faculty members who enter the Foreign Service, an apparent reference
to those who leave Tufts' Fletcher School of Law &amp; Diplomacy for
diplomatic jobs.
   Ms. Van Camp said she could not recall any current or former
faculty member except Sununu who had been granted an extended leave
while holding elective office.
   Frederick C. Nelson, dean of Tufts School of Engineering, said
Sununu's leave ``was not an action of my office. I suppose he asked
for it to be continued but that was handled by the president's
office.'' He referred all other questions to Mayer.
   Sununu joined the Mechanical Engineering faculty at Tufts in 1967
and remained in the post until he was first elected New Hampshire
governor in November 1982.
   His daughter Cathy graduated from Tufts in 1982, while Sununu
still was teaching there.
   Another daughter, Elizabeth, graduated in 1983, the first year of
her father's leave of absence and first year as governor.
   A third daughter, Christina, a graduate of the University of
Vermont, is currently enrolled in a graduate program at Tufts,
according to school officials who refused to discuss her specific
course of study.
   Sununu's son, John, attends MIT and another son, James, attends
Stanford.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
