ID: 232	RANK: 67	SCORE: 9.173546
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910312-0100
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910312-0100.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Education:
   Colleges Cancel
   Aid Meetings
   Under Scrutiny
   ----
   By Gary Putka
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
03/12/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<GV>
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)
</GV>
<LP>
   A group of 21 elite private colleges canceled meetings
that have been under federal antitrust investigation, opening
their financial-aid awards to competitive forces for the
first time in about 35 years.
   The schools, including Harvard University, Princeton
University and 19 other Ivy League, liberal arts and
historically women's colleges in the Northeast, formed the
main body of a formal "overlap group" that has traditionally
met to share financial information on common applicants. Two
other members of the process, Yale University and Barnard
College, dropped out of the 23-member group last year.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The move could save the colleges from further legal
liability in a U.S. Justice Department inquiry into their
tuition, aid and salary setting practices, but might also
hamper their attempts to defend against private lawsuits
brought by students. In overlap, the colleges met and shared
information on financial-aid applicants. The information was
often used to set aid awards so that net tuition prices to
students would be about the same at different schools where
the student was admitted. The effect often was to keep
students from getting better financial aid packages than they
otherwise might have received.
   The colleges acknowledged no wrongdoing, and said they
were abandoning overlap "as a sign of good faith," according
to a statement from Princeton. The Justice Department is
investigating the 23 overlap schools and about 40 other
private colleges and universities to determine whether they
illegally collude in setting tuitions, aid awards and faculty
salaries.
   Gina Talamona, a spokeswoman for the Justice Department,
declined to comment.
   The cancellation of the overlap meetings, which in recent
years have begun in mid-March at Wellesley College outside
Boston, was the first change in practice by a broad group of
schools in response to the Justice Department inquiry. It
followed a development last year at Wellesley that shook up
the overlap members.
   Before last year's meeting, many of the schools had sent a
letter to the Justice Department, seeking some sign that
attending the gathering would not complicate their legal
situation. The U.S. didn't respond in advance of the meeting,
leading some members to think attendance was safe. But after
arriving at Wellesley, the schools received a hand-delivered
letter from Justice Department investigators warning that no
legal clearance had been given.
   "There has been considerably more opportunity to exchange
views with Justice this year than there had been when the
schools proceeded with last year's meeting," Princeton said
yesterday. The school has been acting as an information
outlet for the group.
   Steven Kramer, a New York attorney representing Roger
Kingsepp, a Wesleyan University student who has sued 12 of
the schools, also alleging price-fixing, said the move will
hurt the case for the defense. Mr. Kingsepp is seeking
class-action status for his suit on behalf of about 100,000
other students.
   "It's a recognition, no matter what type of flowery
language they put on it, that they are competitors, they are
meeting, and they are discussing things that they are not
permitted to discuss," said Mr. Kramer. "Otherwise they would
have said there's nothing wrong, and we're meeting."
   The effect of overlap cancellation will be to subject aid
awards and students' choice of colleges to a level of
potentially heated competition. The schools have long
maintained that overlap served a useful purpose of avoiding a
"bidding war" for the best students entitled to financial
aid. The schools have estimated that each year during overlap
they compared notes on more than 10,000 students admitted to
more than one of the schools.
   This year, with a declining pool of high school graduates,
many of the schools may be facing declining numbers of
applications, particularly among the best-qualified students.
In the absence of a check on their aid awards, and with
college tuitions again moving higher this year, the amounts
of aid granted could rise. Financial-aid competition has
chiefly been limited in the past to athletes, which has also
led to criticism of the schools. Now, such competition would
extend to the most academically talented students as well.
   William Cotter, the president of overlap member Colby
College, of Waterville, Maine, said the schools haven't
decided whether to conduct discussions next year and beyond,
although he said he hopes some information-sharing could
resume in the future. Often, he said, the talks led to
Colby's aid awards being raised for some students, when
another school has produced information on a special need
such as a sudden family medical crisis, to which Colby wasn't
privy.
   Mr. Cotter said he hoped the cancellation could be a
prelude to "some agreed-upon resolution with the {Justice}
Department where they would be comfortable" with the schools'
financial aid practices. He added that "suggestions" for a
settlement of the case have been exchanged between the
schools and the Justice investigators, "but they haven't come
to full agreement." He said the Ivy League has led the
discussions for a number of schools.
   After the departure last year of Yale in Connecticut and
Barnard, of New York, the overlap membership included Trinity
College and Wesleyan, also in Connecticut; Bowdoin and Colby
colleges in Maine; Harvard, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Tufts University, and Amherst, Mount Holyoke,
Smith, Wellesley and Williams colleges, all in Massachusetts.
   Also included were Columbia and Cornell universities and
Vassar College in New York; Princeton, in New Jersey; Bryn
Mawr College in Pennsylvania and University of Pennsylvania;
Brown University in Rhode Island; Dartmouth College in New
Hampshire; and Middlebury College in Vermont.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
