ID: 232	RANK: 78	SCORE: 8.958138
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910722-0079
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910722-0079.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Dingell's Witness for the Persecution
   ----
   By Bernard D. Davis
</HL>
<DATE>
07/22/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
</MS>
<IN>
MEDICAL SUPPLIES, EYEGLASS MANUFACTURERS (MDS)
</IN>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES (HHS)
</GV>
<RE>
MASSACHUSETTS (MA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Three years ago congressional committees headed by John
Dingell and Ted Weiss reviewed several cases of fraud in
biomedical research in which administrators had brushed
aside, or even punished, the whistle-blowers. The legislators
were justified in pressing for better responses. However,
they also fostered the unwarranted impression that there is a
crisis of integrity in scientific research, and that the
traditional system of peer review is inadequate. In pursuing
the goal of closer government oversight of scientific
research, Rep. Dingell's main weapon has been the Baltimore
case, a problematic case that has created intense and often
acrimonious debate in the scientific community.
   Nobelist David Baltimore, then at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, collaborating with Thereza
Imanishi-Kari, published a paper in the journal Cell in 1986
on the behavior of the immune system in a mouse in which the
gene for a particular antibody had been inserted. Building on
this paper, Margot O'Toole, a post-doctoral fellow with Ms.
Imanishi-Kari, was unable to obtain some expected results.
She believed the paper contained serious errors, but when she
failed to convince the authors, and also several senior
immunologists at MIT and Tufts, she agreed to drop the
matter.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Nevertheless, through the intercession of some scientific
vigilantes, the case reached Rep. Dingell's Subcommittee on
Oversight and Investigations. Though there was no charge of
fraud, the case was taken up in a hearing on fraud, and Ms.
O'Toole achieved fame as a courageous whistle-blower who has
suffered enormous injustice. Rep. Weiss recently wrote in the
Chronicle of Higher Education that "she lost her job and was
unable to find another position as a scientist for several
years; she even lost her house."
   This picture of outrageous injustice has colored the
controversies over the science, dominated the public
response, and helped to justify the government's
extraordinarily intense pursuit. But it is time to look at
the facts.
   1. The terms "firing" and "dismissal" have created the
impression that an otherwise continuing job was terminated.
But Ms. O'Toole had a nonrenewable one-year appointment,
ending May 31, 1986. Two weeks before that date her employer,
Ms. Imanishi-Kari, asked her not to return to the laboratory;
her stipend continued for the remaining two weeks.
(Incidentally, Mr. Baltimore had nothing to do with her
"dismissal"; she was not even in his institute.)
   2. According to congressional testimony by Ms.
Imanishi-Kari, she had reminded Ms. O'Toole earlier in the
year, before relations had deteriorated, that it was time to
seek a fellowship elsewhere, but Ms. O'Toole replied that she
was not sure of her plans, or even whether she wished to
continue in science.
   3. Ms. O'Toole herself testified that "I had a non-tenure
track appointment at Tufts. I had an opportunity to apply for
grants as a Tufts researcher and I intended to do this." But
she dropped this plan because "If I pursued the matter
further, I felt certain Dr. {Henry} Wortis, who was very
influential at Tufts, would seek to prevent my return." (In
fact, Mr. Wortis, her former Ph.D. preceptor, gave her a
favorable reference for her current job, even after his
efforts to help her in the dispute had resulted in unpleasant
publicity for him.)
   4. Ostracism is the generally accepted explanation for why
Ms. O'Toole did not find a job elsewhere in science, until
her recent employment at Genetics Institute Inc. in
Cambridge. However, it is not clear that Ms. O'Toole ever
looked for a job. Mr. Wortis says he was asked for a
reference only by the Genetics Institute. One of her
postdoctoral mentors had the same request. Another received
none.
   In her congressional testimony, Ms. O'Toole did not state
that she had been rejected for any job; instead, she said her
conflict with faculty members had made her reluctant to apply
for a job. But other factors could have contributed to that
reluctance. Of her four relationships with postdoctoral
mentors, three, including that with Ms. Imanishi-Kari, were
terminated prematurely.
   5. Finally, as Rep. Weiss noted, it has been widely
reported that Ms. O'Toole and her husband lost their house
and had to live with her mother. But according to local
Registry records, they sold a house about a year after her
departure from MIT, and 10 weeks later they bought another,
costing $66,000 more. To be sure, it also has been reported
that they initially rented out that house. Ms. O'Toole's lack
of employment obviously decreased her family's income, but
"lost their house" conjures up a much more tragic picture.
   All this adds up to less than a picture of a martyr. It
reinforces a recent exchange, in the British journal Nature,
in raising questions about the reliability of Ms. O'Toole's
testimony.
   That exchange started with a broadside in Nature in which
Ms. O'Toole claimed that Mr. Baltimore lied and covered up a
fraud, and that every involved person who did not completely
agree with her (eight in all) was guilty of either deceit or
incompetence. It hardly seems possible that all the accused
scientists were as deficient as she claims. Moreover, most of
them have now published restrained rebuttals to a large
number of her damning assertions. One must wonder what Ms.
O'Toole wants in continuing to pursue the case. She seems to
have come a long way from her initially stated aim of simply
saving other scientists from building on error.
   While virtually any error could be serious in
straightforward fields of science, such as organic chemical
structure, in others -- such as the cellular immunology of
the present case -- researchers flounder in studying complex
interactions. Here the truth gradually emerges by a process
of trial and error; a large fraction of the reported findings
prove incorrect or irrelevant and are allowed to die, without
formal correction. These two areas of science tend to select
for different temperaments, and Ms. O'Toole seems to have
landed in the wrong field, for her testimony stated, without
qualification, that "it is extremely counterproductive to
current scientific investigation that known errors remain
published as truths."
   Ms. O'Toole's demanding perspective on science and her
confident testimony have become particularly important
because they played a large role in the charges of fraud
found in a recent draft report of the National Institutes of
Health's Office of Scientific Integrity. This confidential
draft, leaked to the press, has convicted Ms. Imanishi-Kari
of fraud in the public eye. Yet five of the report's seven
charges against Ms. Imanishi-Kari have been rejected by two
immunologists on a panel appointed to review the report. The
other two charges involve forensic evidence from the Secret
Service, of a kind unfamiliar to these scientists.
   A group of 143 scientists (including myself) has written
to the OSI complaining that Ms. Imanishi-Kari was not given
the opportunity to defend herself under conditions providing
due process. It is hard to avoid the suspicion that the OSI
-- recently created in response to congressional criticisms
-- has been excessively eager to establish fraud in this
case.
   The scientific community has been split into passionate
defenders and equally passionate critics of Margot O'Toole.
But all would agree that Rep. Dingell's choice of this case
was tragic and the costs have been excessive. These include a
great deal of time and money, serious damage to reputations
and to the public image of science, and the possible
impairment of the future contributions of David Baltimore as
an exceptional scientist and administrator. Even more
serious, however, is the danger that we may end up imposing
on science the kind of bureaucratic system of policing
familiar to legislators. After all, it is asked, are
scientists entitled to any more autonomy than bankers?
   But this is the wrong question. The issue is not
entitlement; it is the value of autonomy in promoting
creative research. And while the autonomous peer review
system, for formally evaluating manuscripts and informally
evaluating subsequent publications, is imperfect, science has
evolved it as a workable mechanism for balancing quality
control with effectiveness. If scientists have been too
trusting, perhaps they -- and concerned lay people -- should
begin a reform by bringing a healthy dose of skepticism to
what was once the "Baltimore case" and has now become the
"O'Toole case."
   The growing menace is suggested in a statement by an aide
to Rep. Dingell, quoted in this month's Boston Magazine:
"Will you tell her {Imanishi-Kari's} lawyer that if she wants
to cooperate with us we'll do great things for her? She's the
poor pathetic soul who bears the brunt." Is plea bargaining
going to become a standard part of the politicization of
science? If so, society, and not only scientists, will be the
losers.
   ---
   Dr. Davis is an emeritus professor of bacterial physiology
at Harvard Medical School.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
