ID: 89	RANK: 70	SCORE: 10.955940
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900127-0124 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-01-27-90 1849EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-QuayleTrip 3rdLd-Writethru a0588 01-27 1254</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Quayle Trip, 3rd Ld-Writethru, a0588,990</SECOND>
<NOTE>EDS: Inserts grafs 13-17, ``A senior official to update with
comments after Perez meeting and include Arias comments</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By RITA BEAMISH</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>TEGUCIGALPA, Honduras (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Vice President Dan Quayle said
Saturday after meeting with Latin heads of state that the U.S.
invasion of Panama has created no ``sour note'' in U.S.-Latin
relations despite their earlier comments deploring the military
action.
   Quayle said, however, that the heads of state with whom he met
did voice concerns and made it clear they want to see U.S. invasion
troops withdrawn from Panama.
   ``Yes, it will help when we're able to reduce our troops,''
Quayle told reporters after a lunch with the presidents of Costa
Rica, Venezuela, Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador and the prime
minister of Belize. ``That will be a positive contribution toward
the building of democracy in Panama.''
   ``Did they express concern? Certainly concern was expressed,''
Quayle acknowledged. But he and his aides reported an upbeat
atmosphere nonetheless.
   Quayle had said earlier in the day that the additional troops
would be withdrawn in ``a matter of weeks, not months.''
   A senior administration official traveling with Quayle said that
the sense was many Latin countries would not recognize the
U.S.-installed government of President Guillermo Endara in Panama
until the troop levels are down from the current 17,000 to the
pre-invasion force of some 13,000. At the invasion, there were a
total of 27,000 U.S. troops.
   However, the official insisted, there was ``no resentment''
expressed at the luncheon at the home of newly inaugurated Honduran
President Rafael Callejas.
   ``Panama was the dog that didn't bark,'' the official claimed,
speaking on condition of anonymity.
   Quayle was sent by President Bush to explain the invasion
rationale to the regional leaders, most of whom expressed dismay at
the invasion of Panama's sovereignty in the Dec. 20 military action.
   ``I am convinced that this decision by the president ... will
not be any type of sour note and we will be able to continue with
the good relations we have had,'' Quayle told reporters. ``There is
no strain in the relationship.''
   Quayle talked at some length privately with Callejas about
economic issues, aides said, and also for about 25 minutes with
Costa Rican President Oscar Arias about the upcoming presidential
election in neighboring Nicaragua.
   He later held a lengthy session with Venezuelan President Carlos
Andres Perez, whose government was among the most offended by the
invasion of Panama.
   A senior official traveling with Quayle subsequently
characterized Perez' position as: ``He regretted the U.S. had to
take this action, however it was done.''
   Venezuela was among the countries that signaled to Quayle that
resentment against the invasion was so intense that it would not be
opportune for him to visit there now.
   The official in the Quayle party said Perez explained that a
Quayle visit ``would be an excuse for the left to stage
anti-American demonstrations.''
   However, the official said Perez said he would welcome a visit
by Quayle soon and that ``it would be a very positive situation''
when the additional U.S. troops are out of Panama.
   ``It is necessary for the United States to withdraw its troops
from Panama as soon as possible,'' Arias said at a news conference.
``It is also necessary for the U.S. and Latin America to undertake
a joint effort as soon as possible to help in the total
reconstruction of Panama.''
   The leaders were in Honduras for the inauguration of Callejas.
   Quayle, speaking briefly to reporters after the breakfast at the
home of Ambassador Chris Arcos, acknowledged the Panama invasion
was ``not without controversy.
   ``We have certainly read the public pronouncements. Today and
tomorrow and Monday my mission will be private consultations, not
in the nature of apologizing, but in the nature of where do we go
from here. How can we work together to build democracy.''
   As to the 17,000 troops remaining in Panama, down from about
27,000 at the height of the invasion, Quayle said he would tell the
Latin leaders Bush is committed to reducing the level to the 13,000
pre-invasion strength.
   He would not give a timetable but said it was ``a time period of
weeks rather than months. We are moving in a downward direction.''
   Before the inauguration, Quayle met with El Salvador's President
Alfredo Cristiani in a session that focused mostly on human rights
and the need to move expeditiously to prosecute military officers
charged in the Nov. 16 slaying of six Salvadoran Jesuit priests.
   Quayle was applauded and cheered where he entered the outdoor
stadium where the inaugural ceremony was held. He later commented
``I was impressed by the enthusiastic response President Callejas
got'' during his lengthy inaugural speech.
   Following the ceremony, Quayle met with the presidents of
Venezuela, Costa Rica, Guatemala and Belize, in addition to
Callejas.
   They attended a luncheon hosted by Callejas that included a
minister of Nicaragua, Miguel d'Escoto. Nicaragua's president,
Daniel Ortega, did not attend the inauguration of his neighbor.
   As Quayle arrived at Callejas' home he told a handful of
onlookers that it was ``a great day for democracy.''
   At lunch Quayle planned to discuss Bush's rationale for the
Panama invasion, his aides said.
   Quayle and his party, which included Sen. Richard Lugar, R-Ind.,
and Rep. G.V. ``Sonny'' Montgomery, D-Miss., strongly urged
Cristiani to keep pressing on that case, said one official in the
Quayle party.
   They impressed on him the high level of interest in Congress,
where the Jesuits case revived rumblings about cutting the $1.5
million-per-day U.S. aid to El Salvador.
   Talking briefly with reporters, Quayle said Cristiani had
assured him of his ``steadfast conviction'' to seeing justice in
the case. He praised Cristiani for ``doing the right thing'' in
arresting four officers and four soldiers in the killings.
   Cristiani assured Quayle and his party ``that he will pursue
this investigation to its conclusion,'' the vice president said.
   Cristiani said ``we are very well on our way'' in the
investigation.
   Testimony by the soldiers has pointed to Col. Guillermo Alfredo
Benavides, who is charged in killings, as the one who gave the
orders.
   If they come to trial it will be the first trial of officers in
connection with a human rights case in El Salvador.
   Quayle aides said the vice president also was prepared to
discuss concerns by the small countries of the region who stand to
see their U.S. aid packages cut, even as Bush puts forward a $1
billion plan to help Panama recover from the invasion.
   In Honduras, the United States withheld some $70 million in 1989
aid because outgoing President Jose Azcona did not implement
promised economic reforms.
   Callejas, leader of the National Party, succeeds Azcona after
winning the election last November. It was the second time Callejas
was the top vote getter in a presidential contest. The other was in
1985 when he was prevented from victory by election rules that
allowed Azcona to take office.
   Callejas has promised to implement economic reforms that the
United States has been pushing.
   Also of concern to the Bush administration is how the new
government will deal with the Nicaraguan Contra rebels encamped
along the Honduran border. Azcona periodically has demanded the
U.S.-backed rebels be removed from Honduran territory. But U.S.
officials have urged Honduras not to boot them out.
   Traveling with Quayle for all or part of his three-day trip to
Panama Saturday night and Jamaica on Monday are Lugar, Montgomery,
Republican political consultant Mitch Daniels, Assistant Secretary
of State Bernard Aronson, as well as Quayle's staff.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
