ID: 89	RANK: 88	SCORE: 10.047903

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-9839 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drlat064_g_94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-LAT-94-064 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Guatemala </F>
<H3> <TI>   President Considers Declaring State of Emergency </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    President Considers Declaring State of Emergency </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   PA0404020594 Mexico City NOTIMEX in Spanish 1701 GMT 3 Apr 94 </F>
<F P=103> PA0404020594 </F>
<F P=104>  Mexico City NOTIMEX </F>
<F P=105>  Spanish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

  [Text] Guatemala City, 3 Apr (NOTIMEX) -- Today, Guatemalan 
President Ramiro De Leon Carpio announced he might declare a 
state of emergency as result of the murder of Constitutionality 
Court President Epaminondas Gonzalez in the next few days. De 
Leon made the announcement during the funeral services of one of 
the country's most distinguished legal experts. The murder, 
which was carried out early yesterday by unknown gunmen, has 
been condemned by all sectors of the country. The president 
acknowledged that he has considered the possibility of declaring 
a state of emergency but that the measure will have to be 
approved this week by the State Council of Ministers. 
  On Friday, Government Minister Danilo Parinello announced 
that a possible state of emergency declaration is being reviewed 
as result of numerous crimes, attacks, and disturbances taking 
place throughout the country and threatening to become a 
national catastrophe. Last week, journalist Marco Tulio de la 
Roca was shot and, as result, lost his left eye. In addition, 
Francisco Elias, the cousin of former President Jorge Elias 
Serrano, was also shot and remains in serious conditions at a 
private hospital. There was also the recent murder of a 
so-called "street child" and a mob attacked an American citizen 
in the northern community of San Cristobal Verapaz, after being 
accused of attempting to abduct a small boy. Another American 
tourist was fired on for no apparent reason by a group of 
unknown individuals on a Guatemala City street. 
  Gonzalez's murder has disturbed the country's judicial, 
union, government, church, and diplomatic communities, which 
believe the murder will become just another of the countless 
crimes that go unpunished in this Central American nation. 
  Yesterday, De Leon announced he had ordered an in-depth 
investigation to locate the murderers of the Constitutionality 
Court magistrate, whom he described as an "outstanding citizen, 
prestigious jurist, and an authentic advocate of democracy and 
peace in Guatemala." This past July, however, when the 
president's cousin Jorge Carpio Nicolle, editor of EL GRAFICO 
newspaper and secretary general of the Union of the National 
Center party [UCN], was murdered, De Leon appointed a special 
commission to investigate the crime, which to date has failed to 
accomplish anything. The Catholic Church and Carpio Nicolle's 
relatives, who were present when the journalist was murdered 
along with three other people, insist that the murder was 
carried out by the paramilitary Civilian Sel-Defense Patrols 
(PAC), but the authorities have dismissed these claims. 
  The archbishop of Guatemala and the human rights ombudsman 
have said it is De Leon's moral duty to solve the Gonzalez 
murder, which occurred just 10 days before Gonzalez was to 
conclude his term as Constitutional Court president. He was 
killed four days after the court had ruled that 
Congress-approved reforms to the Electoral and Political Parties 
Law were unconstitutional. Gonzalez had argued that the deputies 
not only modified the law but, in fact, created a new law. He 
ruled that this was illegal because the Electoral and Political 
Parties Law can only be repealed by a national constituent 
assembly. 
  The reforms are aimed at increasing the number of 
congressional deputies as well as establishing that any party 
that does not field candidates in an election for deputies 
should be taken off the official political parties list. 
Moreover, the congressional deputies affected by the new law 
rejected the independence of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal and 
opened the way for civic committees to participate in the 
election process. 
  The new election law also required the resignation of all 
political party members holding government positions and whose 
leader occupied the Presidency [alta magistratura], and also 
changed name of the new law to the "Election and People's 
Organization Law [Ley Electoral y de Organizationces Populares]." 
  Gonzalez presided over the Constitutionality Court when it 
ruled against the 25 May 1993 "self-inflicted coup" carried out 
by then-President Jorge Serrano. The court's decision proved 
decisive in reestablishing constitutional order in Guatemala. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
