ID: 91	RANK: 100	SCORE: 4.996277
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT922-3521</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CFKBHABAFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920611
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  11 JUN 92 / Arts: School of American Ballet - Dance in New York
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By DAVID VAUGHAN
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
The annual School of American Ballet Workshop (so-called) performances are
an event of more than parochial interest. They are, to begin with, fully
staged productions of ballets, usually from the repertory of New York City
Ballet, with orchestra, the excellent Juilliard School Philharmonia. (During
his tenure as musical director of the company, the late and much lamented
Robert Irving used to conduct.) The audience includes not only doting
parents and siblings, but also balletomanes, critics, and directors of other
companies from around the country, all on the lookout for new talent. Some
of these audience categories overlap.
Former members of NYCB now direct companies or teach outside the city. This
year's award-winning students, Emily Coates and Anna Liceica, are former
pupils of Patricia Wilde, director of Pittsburgh Ballet Theatre, and Yvonne
Mounsey, who teaches in Santa Monica, California, respectively. Another very
gifted young dancer, Rachel Rutherford, is the daughter of the former
ballerina Gage Bush and the late Richard Englund, an associate director of
the Joffrey Ballet. Coates and Liceica have already been taken into NYCB as
apprentices.
Although the School is the official school of City Ballet, not all its
graduates can find a place there, so it also feeds into American Ballet
Theatre and companies outside New York and even abroad. (Paloma Herrera, a
16-year old in last year's performances, has been attracting notice in small
roles at ABT this summer.)
The performances this year afforded a pleasure over and above that of
watching fresh young talent. After the dismal week of 'original' ballets
presented in the NYCB's 'Diamond Project' (which really was a glorified
workshop), it was a relief to see an evening of mostly great choreography:
two Balanchine ballets that were not in the company repertory this season,
Allegro brillante and Who Cares?, and a Bournonville divertissement, the pas
de trois from La Ventana. The only clinker was Martins's achingly tedious
Mozart Serenade.
The general level of the dancing would have done any professional company
proud. Once on stage, these teenagers seem to lose all trace of adolescent
insecurity and become assured, elegant, sophisticated young women and men.
If I had to pick out one outstanding dancer, it would be the Romanian-born
Anna Liceica, who danced the first variation in La Ventana with sweet
delicacy and lyricism, then gave a knockout performance of the 'My One and
Only' solo in Who Cares?, with its dazzling succession of multiple
pirouettes.
But the whole cast in this ballet was sensational, from corps de ballet
through to soloists: Liceica, Rutherford, bewitching in the 'Fascinatin'
Rhythm' solo, and Gavin Larsen, spirited in 'Stairway to Paradise', all
three women strongly partnered in their duets by John Winfield. As so often
before, this was the perfect ballet for a June evening in New York City.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 19
</PAGE>
</DOC>
