ID: 91	RANK: 17	SCORE: 11.542609
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910529-0134
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910529-0134.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Dance: ABT Plays It Safe
   ----
   By Dale Harris
</HL>
<DATE>
05/29/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8
</SO>
<LP>
   New York -- Lucia Chase and Oliver Smith ran American
Ballet Theatre from 1945 until 1980, in which year the board
summarily replaced them with Mikhail Baryshnikov. After the
latter in turn fell from power in 1989, Mr. Smith was
reinstated. His co-director this time was Jane Hermann, an
efficient manager with no evident artistic qualifications.
Had Ms. Chase not died three years earlier, it's possible
that the company would today be ruled by a triumvirate, so
eager was the board to restore ABT's pre-Baryshnikov
identity. Still, Ms. Chase, looking down on Lincoln Center
from her present abode, must feel vindicated. Except for a
detail here and there, the ABT season currently in progress
at the Metropolitan Opera House is one that she herself might
have devised.
   Certainly, the Met engagement makes no pretensions to
seriousness. Under Ms. Hermann and Mr. Smith, ABT has once
again become a company with a single agenda: survival. Forget
art. Forget innovation and daring. Forget the fact that
classical ballet is a discipline whose unbreakable connection
to a long and fruitful tradition implies the need for
constant selfrenewal. Concentrate instead on what is
over-familiar, unchallenging, even retrogressive. At the Met,
the only conviction in evidence is that safety might just
save the day.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   All but one of this season's premieres -- most, at the
time of writing, still to come -- have been taken down from
the company's attic. For example, though it has been
publicized as a novelty, the production of "Coppelia" that
opened the New York season is nothing but a refurbished
version of ABT's witless old "Coppelia" tricked out in new
costumes by Patricia Zipprodt and new sets by Tony Straiges,
a protege and former pupil of Mr. Smith. The re-stagings of
both "Raymonda, Act 3" by Fernando Bujones and of "Don
Quixote" by Vladimir Vasiliev are being presented in their
original, unsatisfactory sets and costumes. On its way is a
revival of Sir Kenneth Macmillan's anodyne "Concerto." The
only work originating from outside the company, Jiri Kylian's
"Sinfonietta," was created 13 years ago for Netherlands Dance
Theatre and is an example of Euroschlock at its most
wearisomely familiar.
   Missing entirely is new choreography. In place of
creativity, however, there are guest artists. These, banished
under Mr. Baryshnikov, who wanted to strengthen ABT from the
inside, have now become what they were in the Chase-Smith
era: a desperate expedient on the part of a company convinced
it has little of its own to offer the public. Like this
season's novelties, most of the visiting celebrities come
from ABT's attic: Mr. Bujones, Cynthia Gregory and Carla
Fracci, the last in her mid-50s and increasingly
circumscribed by enervation and understandable reticence. Her
performance in Antony Tudor's now inert "Lilac Garden" was
unobtrusive to the point of mousiness.
   There is, however, one youthful guest performer, Sylvie
Guillem. Though she lacks the ability to connect individual
steps into a continuum, Ms. Guillem possesses a gymnastic
suppleness that to undiscriminating eyes can pass for
virtuosity. With the right kind of hype, she may prove as
much an audience draw in New York as she has already in
London, where she is a permanent guest artist with the Royal
Ballet. Certainly, ABT needs something to engender
excitement, a quality the season has so far lacked. Sad to
say, none of the company's regulars has the kind of glamour
that creates lines at the box office.
   All the same, there are some fine dancers on the roster.
One of these is Julio Bocca, a performer whose ebullience and
technical proficiency carry him with success through a number
of extrovert roles. Despite being somewhat short in stature
and top-heavy in physique, he makes a winning impression,
though, as the opening-night "Coppelia" revealed, it isn't
that of a major performer. Badly in need of artistic
direction -- as hard to find at ABT these days as it used to
be in the days before Mr. Baryshnikov took over -- he mugged
incessantly and tried to dazzle the audience with a show of
virtuosity just beyond his reach.
   Possibly, he was attempting to compensate for the disaster
taking place around him, the elements of which included
Cheryl Yaeger's charmless, determinedly roguish Swanilda and
Terry Orr's Dr. Coppelius, a portrayal in which tired old
sight gags took the place of characterization. There was,
however, some relief in the engaging performances by Julie
Kent as Prayer and by Kathleen Moore and Roger Van Fleteren,
who led the corps de ballet in the act-one mazurka with
admirable zest.
   Bright spots notwithstanding, the overall effect of this
"Coppelia" was disheartening. By hiring Enrique Martinez to
resuscitate his 1968 staging, the directorate ensured that
the company got a "Coppelia" without either sweetness or
effervescence. Bad as the old version was, though, the new
one is worse, if only because it is bigger and cruder.
Remnants of the original 1870 version by Arthur Saint-Leon,
as well as that mounted in St. Petersburg 14 years later by
Marius Petipa, are now embedded in a production that aspires
to the condition of knockabout farce. The scene in act three
featuring a money-hungry Catholic priest has been amplified
and further coarsened to a point of acute embarrassment.
Where Mr. Martinez has created his own choreography, as in
the last-act solos and ensembles, the result is oppressive.
   Oppressive, too, is the scenery. Mr. Straiges's folksy and
ill-drawn set for the first and third acts is banal to a
point of invisibility. In what looks like an attempt to give
it some substance, the designer has surrounded it with a
wide, dark-green border, a heavy-handed device at odds with
the buoyant music of Delibes. The set for act two, similarly
bordered, looks like an hommage to New York City Ballet's
production of the same work. Ms. Zipprodt's costumes are as
ungainly and miscellaneous in approach as those she supplied
for NYCB's recent "Sleeping Beauty." The trouser-suits she
has given to the peasants in act one are unfortunately
memorable. So are her tutus, the proper cut of which she
doesn't seem to have grasped. What has befallen American
stage design? The same disaster, apparently, that has
befallen ABT.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
