ID: 91	RANK: 38	SCORE: 6.676647
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900402-0221 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-04-02-90 0550EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>a a BC-SPE--Travel:Festivals     04-02 0963</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-SPE--Travel: Festivals,0963</SECOND>
<HEAD>SPECIAL EDITION</HEAD>
<HEAD>Travel: Festivals</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto NY703</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Festivals and fairs might well be the original mini-vacations,
packing entertainment, travel and adventure into a day or two. A
sampling of what's in store in the United States this season:
   The Italian Street Festival, West Palm Beach, Fla. April 5-8.
Italian crafts, food and entertainment -- including fireworks,
bocce exhibitions, Epcot's Italian Street Players, Italian flag
throwers and local tarantella dancers -- will be part of the l990
``celebrazione'' staged at the 200-plus acres of Moroso Park. More
than 100 craftspeople will set up shop under colorful tents for a
South Florida interpretation of an Italian street plaza. For more
information, call (407) 844-8070. _
   Cherry Blossom Festival, San Francisco, April 20-22 and April
27-29. The bay city shows off its Japanese influence at the 23rd
annual Cherry Blossom Festival. Kimono-clad performers, taiko drums
and chicken teriyaki highlight the festival, which is known as
sakura matsuri in Japan. _
   The New Orleans Spring Fiesta, New Orleans, La., April 20-24.
The l990 event will spotlight the city's Spanish cultural heritage,
with horse-drawn carriage rides, plantation home visits, historical
reenactments, historic home tours and the Spring Fiesta Parade.
Contact Jerri Cullinan at (504) 831-2862. _
   New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival, New Orleans, April
27-May 6. Recognized by many as the home of jazz, New Orleans will
host an expected crowd of 300,000 to hear and see 4,000 musicians,
cooks and crafts artists at venues throughout the city. Jazz,
blues, Cajun, zydeco, gospel, country, folk, rock, and
Afro-Caribbean are some of the sounds; headliners include Linda
Ronstadt, B.B. King, Etta James, Pat Metheny, The Chick Corea
Elektric Band, Ashford Simpson, The O'Jays, and New Orleans
favorites such as Neville Brothers and Dr. John and Harry Connick
Jr. Call (504) 888-8181 for ticket information. _
   Sunfest, West Palm Beach, Fla., May 3-6. This is Florida's
largest jazz festival, featuring blues, jazz, fine arts,
traditional crafts, water races, and children's activities, staged
along the city's waterfront. There are the Juried Art Show, in
which painters, sculptors, photographers and jewelry makers compete
for prizes, and the Marketplace, where homespun crafts from the
U.S. and abroad are available. For more information call (407)
659-5992. _
   The California Strawberry Festival, Oxnard, Calif., May 19-20.
The Channel Islands Harbor is the seaside setting for this jamboree
celebrating the strawberry, produced by this area in abundance (22
percent of the state's crop). Visitors can taste all kinds of
strawberry delicacies, including untraditional versions of tamales
and pizza. Other features include an arts and crafts show, family
fun runs, a strawberry shortcake eating contest, a strawberry
blonde competition and Strawberryland for children. You can commute
60 miles from Los Angeles or take advantage of local hotel
specials. Contact the City Convention and Visitor's Bureau at (805)
485-8833. _
   Frankenmuth Bavarian Festival, Frankenmuth, Mich, June 9-16. The
German heritage of this city at the base of Michigan's ``thumb'' is
celebrated with a an eight-day festival featuring parades, beer
gardens, entertainment, crafts, children's activities and dancing.
Called ``Michigan's Little Bavaria,'' the city has many examples of
Bavarian-style architecture, huge family restaurants and the
world's largest Christmas store. Contact the Frankenmuth Convention
and Visitors Bureau at (517) 652-6106. And for information about
any of the other Great Lakes Festivals, contact the Michigan Travel
Bureau at (1-800) 543-2937. _
   Welcome Back to Brooklyn Celebration, Brooklyn, N.Y., June
through August. Often overshadowed by its Manhattan neighbor,
Brooklyn by itself still ranks as the nation's fourth largest city.
But the Borough of Brooklyn stands alone with a 250,000-person
block party on June 10 and follows up with Celebrate Brooklyn, a
free summertime arts and entertainment series held in the Prospect
Park Bandshell weekend evenings during July and August. Guided bus
tours of Brooklyn, starting from Manhattan, also are planned.
Contact the Fund for the Borough of Brooklyn, (718) 855-7882. _
   Independence Day Weekend, South Street Seaport, New York City,
July 3-4. This year's holiday festival salutes the legendary jazz
trumpeter Louis Armstrong with live concerts on the Seaport piers.
Visitors can tour the historic district and top off the
entertainment with a musically-choreographed fireworks show over
the East River at 9 p.m. on July 3. _
   Soulard Bastille Day, St. Louis, July 3-15. A savoring of French
culture and food shapes the holiday observance in the city's
Soulard neighborhood, including a ball, jazz music, an arts
festival and a bicycle race. Local restaurants are offering a
bargain ticket for samples of French cuisine. For more information
call Carol Norton at (314) 436-0828. _
   Wyoming Centennial Celebration, Cheyenne, July 10-13. July 10 is
Wyoming's big day, and about 30,000 people are expected to show up
for the 100th birthday bash, according to the Wyoming Centennial
Commission. Centennial events, most with a western or country
flavor, are ongoing through the year. The commission, at (307)
777-5844, can supply detailed information. _
   Stratton Mountain International Jazz Festival, Stratton,
Vermont, July 14-15. On the other side of snow season, Stratton is
staging its first jazz festival in this ski resort community.
Headliners include Rosemary Clooney, Tony Bennett, Doc Severinsen
and ``Facet,'' Al Hirt and his New Orleans Jazz Band, and the Chick
Corea Elektric Band. The Festival number is (802) 297-2200. _
   The Mountain Dance and Folk Festival, Asheville, N.C., August.
This country celebration in the Blue Ridge Mountains continues for
its 63rd year. _
   Japanese Festival, Missouri Botanical Garden, St. Louis, Aug.
25-Sept. 3. The oriental garden is celebrated with exhibits on
Japanese flower arranging by the Bonzai Society and Ikebana, music
by taiko (drummer) groups and Suzuki violinists, Kabuki dancing,
and martial arts demonstrations. Candlelight walks in the garden
are scheduled from dusk to 10 p.m. For more information, call the
garden at (314) 577-5125. _
</TEXT>
</DOC>
