ID: 91	RANK: 7	SCORE: 16.757341
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910702-0149
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910702-0149.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   All the World's on Stage in New York
   ----
   By Dale Harris
</HL>
<DATE>
07/02/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A11
</SO>
<LP>
   American Ballet Theatre's recent stopover at the
Metropolitan Opera House lasted only nine weeks, but seemed
to go on for years. During one of the season's particularly
arid periods -- when "Coppelia," say, or "Don Quixote" was
the sole work in the repertoire -- one could have sworn that
the company had been running longer than "Cats." "Coppelia,"
which received 11 performances, has already been reviewed in
these pages, "Don Quixote," which received 10, has not.
Originally staged for ABT by Mikhail Baryshnikov, the old
warhorse has now been revised by the Bolshoi's Vladimir
Vasiliev, who has managed the feat of transforming an
unsatisfactory production into a wretched one, by adding
coarse new choreography and even coarser sight gags.
   Most of ABT's ballerinas appeared in the role of the
heroine, Kitri, though only Sylvie Guillem, the company's
newest guest star, drew big houses. Ms. Guillem, who began
her career as a gymnast, still looks like one: Dancing for
her is clearly less important than the demonstration of
physical prowess. In the third act pas de deux of "Don
Quixote," her protracted balances brought down the house --
not because, like the late Margot Fonteyn's, they looked
effortless, but because they looked powerful, a series of
strenuous attempts to overcome the limitations of gravity.
The fact that Ms. Guillem failed to maintain her poses with
perfect steadiness did nothing to spoil her success. Every
falter was taken as further testimony to the ballerina's
indomitable sense of purpose, and incited the crowd to
further acclaim.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Except in her exquisite, if expressionless, face, the
Amazonian Ms. Guillem shows none of the feminine grace
usually associated with classical ballet. Broad-shouldered,
hyper-extended and commandingly tall, she nonetheless adopts
a shy and modest demeanor that contrasts disconcertingly with
the force of her dancing and the implicit willpower it
expresses. In tackling parts like the mischievous innkeeper's
daughter in "Don Quixote" and the remote but passionate
temple dancer in "La Bayadere," she offers less a portrayal
than an impersonation.
   Nowhere was the discrepancy between physical identity and
characterization more glaring than in Agnes de Mille's "Fall
River Legend." As the inhibited New England spinster Lizzie
Borden, who chops up her parents, Ms. Guillem was an
unconvincing wolf in sheep's clothing. "Fall River Legend" is
not merely a poor choice for her particular gifts, it is a
poor ballet. A pop version of one of Martha Graham's cloudy
psychodramas, "Fall River Legend" is psychologically
imperceptive and choreographically vacant. It is also
ludicrously overwrought, though not enough to be genuinely
funny. Along with the now lifeless works of Antony Tudor, it
is part of the barren heritage that ABT needs to junk if it
is ever to get anywhere.
   Ms. Guillem is by no means the only talented dancer at ABT
who doesn't know what roles she looks good in. Julio Bocca
cut a better figure in "Giselle" midway in the season than he
had done in "Coppelia" on opening night, but nowhere as good
a one as he did last year in Mark Morris's "Drink to Me Only
With Thine Eyes" and Twyla Tharp's "Brief Fling." In neither
of these ballets, however, did he appear this time around.
Apparently, he finds both assignments unrewarding. What he
obviously doesn't understand is that in Mr. Morris's richly
inventive work, he has a role that, though made for Mikhail
Baryshnikov, suits him to perfection, and that in "Brief
Fling," especially created for him by Ms. Tharp, his gifts of
energy, speed, virtuosity and charm were used so brilliantly
that for the first time he looked like a star.
   Lacking in self-knowledge though he is, Mr. Bocca at least
has had the chance to work with a genuine choreographer at a
crucial stage in his development. Most of the other talented
young dancers in the company have been less lucky. Amanda
McKerrow, Alessandra Ferri, Gabrielle Brown, Amy Rose,
Christina Fagundes, Julie Kent, Kathleen Moore, Cynthia
Anderson, Christine Dunham, Isabella Padovani -- all have
notable qualities that a first-rate choreographer could no
doubt bring properly into focus. To judge from the fate of
Cynthia Gregory, the chances that this will happen are
slight. During her 26 years with the company, Ms. Gregory has
given many fine performances. Somewhere along the way,
though, the poetical beauty that marked her dancing in the
early 1960s with the San Francisco Ballet was replaced by an
all-purpose competence, and a great ballerina got lost.
   The gifts of the young Fernando Bujones, though not as
remarkable as Ms. Gregory's, were nevertheless conspicuous,
too. Unfortunately, during his two decades with ABT, he
failed to realize them just as surely as she failed to
realize hers. This season, Mr. Bujones, who now dances less
frequently than in the past, was invited to re-stage the
company's "Raymonda, Act III," originally adapted by Mikhail
Baryshnikov from the 1898 choreography of Marius Petipa.
Again, ABT has exchanged a weak production for a dismal one.
Mr. Bujones's "Raymonda" revealed so fundamentally incoherent
a concept of classicism that his cast looked hobbled by
stylistic indeterminacy. Moreover, the character dances,
designed to provide a contrast with the classical passages,
were depressingly limp.
   Nevertheless, at ABT these days some of the best
performing is to be found in character roles, especially
those that call for mime. In Kathleen Moore and Victor
Barbee, especially, the company has two of the most
persuasive dancer-actors of today. Perhaps ABT could lend
them to New York City Ballet when the latter revives "The
Sleeping Beauty" next spring.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
