ID: 274	RANK: 11	SCORE: 15.470988
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920320-0008
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920320-0008.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Chicago Star to Shine in East
   ----
   By Joel Henning
</HL>
<DATE>
03/20/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10
</SO>
<LP>
   Chicago -- Within the next month, Denis O'Hare, a slightly
built, well-spoken young man of 30 years, should know whether
he has a future as a word processing temp.
   Word processing is Mr. O'Hare's day job at KPMG Peat
Marwick &amp; Associates here. Until recently, his night job was
playing the title role in the Victory Gardens Theater
production of "Hauptmann" by John Logan. The show played to
rapt audiences and was held over for several months. Mr.
O'Hare's uncertain employment future stems from the transfer
of that production to the Cherry Lane Theatre in New York,
where it is scheduled to begin previews on April 9 prior to
an April 16 opening. Mr. O'Hare, who will go into rehearsals
for the show before the end of the month, is hoping to do
well enough in the Big Apple to give up his days at the
computer keyboard forever.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   I have not seen Mr. O'Hare process words, but his
portrayal of Hauptmann in Chicago was electrifying. Nor was I
the only critic to gush. Mr. O'Hare's Hauptmann provoked
singular praise among local critics. His work was described
as "the performance of the year" by the Chicago Tribune. The
Sun-Times wrote that Mr. O'Hare had accomplished "A tour de
force that could hold its own on any stage in the world."
   "Hauptmann" recounts the sensational prosecution of the
German immigrant Bruno Richard Hauptmann for the kidnapping
of the legendary Lindbergh baby, infant son of the aviation
pioneer Charles ("Lucky Lindy") Lindbergh and the writer Anne
Morrow Lindbergh. Mr. O'Hare portrays the unsavory but not
necessarily guilty Hauptmann with sardonic petulance. As the
play opens, we hear the judge pronounce his guilt and
sentence him to death. What follows is a two-hour impression
of the events surrounding his capture, incarceration and
trial from Hauptmann's point of view, a view profoundly
affected by his imminent execution.
   Mr. O'Hare's Hauptmann is no innocent martyred on the
altar of American hero worship. He lies to his captors about
circumstantial evidence linking him to the Lindbergh ransom,
he lies to his wife, and we are never sure when he is lying
to us, the audience. In a transcendent scene, Hauptmann
chillingly recounts a version of the baby's kidnapping and
death. The story he tells recapitulates how the kidnapper may
have gained entry to the second-story Lindbergh nursery in
Hopewell, N.J., snatched the infant, and then accidentally
killed him during the getaway down the ladder.
   Mr. O'Hare's subtly etched portrayal serves as the frame
within which we view the Lindbergh kidnapping, a classic
American carnival of media excess and unfair, overwrought
legal process. Everybody from President Hoover to Al Capone
pledged to help bring the baby's kidnapper to hard justice.
Everybody was outraged when Hauptmann was apprehended but
failed to confess. We leave the theater without answers
concerning Hauptmann's guilt or innocence but moved by an
affecting portrayal of a man caught in the vortex of inflamed
national passions.
   Hauptmann is not Mr. O'Hare's first major role or villain.
He portrayed Nathan Leopold Jr., an admitted child kidnapper
and killer, in another play by Mr. Logan, "Never the Sinner."
He won an Emmy for his performance as a character based on
Richard Speck, the mass murderer of eight nurses, in the TV
special "Moment of Rage."
   Mr. O'Hare studied acting at Northwestern University's
School of Speech. "My acting classes taught me to wear black
turtlenecks and smoke," he recalls. "Acting classes can only
teach you how to perform. Don't get me wrong. I love
performers. Victor Borge does the same thing every time he
performs, and it's terrific. . . . I learned how to be an
actor in my non-acting classes studying literature, music,
poetry and architecture."
   Local success in his craft hasn't spoiled Mr. O'Hare.
O'Hare is a household word, but only as the name of the
city's main airport, and O'Hare the actor still has to round
out his income at the computer keyboard. When "Hauptmann"
opened, Mr. O'Hare, as the lead performer, received the
Actors Equity minimum rate of $335 a week, or an annualized
salary of less than $17,500. When the play was held over, his
weekly wage rose to $550. And that's about the limit he can
hope to earn if his portrayal of Hauptmann at the Cherry Lane
doesn't command the respect of the New York critics.
   All he really wants from the New York stint is the ability
to make it big in Chicago. Recognition in New York, even
short of rave notices, might make it possible for him to
become a full-time actor based here. "You can't be big in
Chicago until you leave and succeed in New York or
Hollywood," he says. "The big Chicago shows cast their leads
on either coast."
   At the moment Mr. O'Hare can compete for a title role at
Victory Gardens, but Chicago's major theater companies,
including the Goodman Theater and Steppenwolf, look for lead
actors with national reputations. So last year, Mr. O'Hare
took the bit part of Willie Oban in Eugene O'Neill's "The
Iceman Cometh," while the title role went to the movie actor
Brian Dennehy.
   Even some of Chicago's smaller companies attempt to ensure
strong box office by booking big names. Recently, the Body
Politic Theatre booked Hope Lange for its production of
"Homeward Bound." (She backed out just before rehearsals
began.) The Organic Theatre brought George ("Cheers") Wendt
back here for a revival of "Bleacher Bums."
   In the end it may not matter if Mr. O'Hare comes home from
New York wrapped in glory. He invested the raise he got for
"Hauptmann" in bulbs for the garden behind his house in the
modest Logan Square neighborhood. "If I can't support myself
as an actor," he says, "I'm going to give up word processing
and become a gardener."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
