ID: 274	RANK: 74	SCORE: 9.445840
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910528-0098
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910528-0098.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
   Lucky Lindy to Odd Michael
   ----
   By Joe Queenan
</HL>
<DATE>
05/28/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A20
</SO>
<LP>
   In 1927, during his history-making flight across the
Atlantic, Charles Lindbergh was unexpectedly joined by a
group of spectral figures who suddenly popped out from behind
the fuselage. Lindbergh, who decided not to mention the
appearance of these vaguely defined, transparent humanoids
until he wrote "The Spirit of St. Louis" 26 years later,
found the creatures to be outgoing and chatty, providing him
with "messages of importance unattainable in ordinary life."
Travelers who have long entertained misgivings about those
sounds emanating from the captain's cabin on trans-Atlantic
flights will greet his anecdote with dismay.
   The saga of Lucky Lindy and his flyboy chums can be found
in a new compendium of esoterica, "Harper's Encyclopedia of
Mystical and Paranormal Experience" (HarperCollins, 666
pages, $19.95), an indispensable Baedeker of bizarreness for
space cadets and lay folks alike. According to an
unimpeachable source (the publisher), "67% of Americans
believe that they've had an extrasensory experience, such as
contact with the dead and deja vu." And that's not counting
all those people who worked for Michael Dukakis.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Of special interest is the entry "Drop-in Communicators,"
which describes roving spirits who gate-crash seances to
which they have not been invited. The example cited is
Runolfur Runolfsson, "who dropped in on medium Hafstein
Bjornsson in 1937 and identified himself as a rough,
hard-drinking Icelander who had died in 1879. Over the course
of several sittings, Runolfsson said he wanted to find his
missing leg bone. Well, he certainly picked the right seance
to drop in on] Bjornsson, whose neighborliness extended not
only beyond the call of duty but beyond the grave, promptly
went out and found the missing bone hidden between the walls
of a house. Writes author Rosemary Ellen Guiley: "The bone
was buried and Runolfsson expressed his thanks."
   The encyclopedia is brimming with handy tips for all your
extrasensory household needs. Ms. Guiley suggests, for
instance, that "the dead do place the calls by supernatural
manipulation of the telephone mechanisms and circuitry." This
entry could come in handy for men whose wives scan the
monthly phone bill and notice an unusually large number of
calls to 900-LUV-SEXY. "Must have been your creepy dead Uncle
Leo making dirty phone calls again, Honey."
   Many other curiosities are covered in this dictionary of
ditziness: the Bermuda Triangle, the False Face Society, the
Serpent Kiss of Alistair Crowley, Shirley MacLaine. One entry
treats the art of walking on hot coals; another the art of
self-levitation. The section entitled "Telepathic Hypnosis"
discusses a 1978 chess match between Soviet defector Victor
Korchnoi and reigning champion Anatoly Karpov. After getting
drubbed, Korchnoi claimed to have been the victim of
telepathic hypnosis inflicted by a Russian parapsychologist
sitting in the fourth row. This is an ingenious excuse the
New York Rangers could readily use to explain having gone 51
years without winning the Stanley Cup.
   Speaking of spectral figures, paranormal phenomena and
extraterrestrial visitations, how about Michael Jackson? In
his new book, "Michael Jackson: The Magic and the Madness"
(Birch Lane Press, 626 pages, $21.95), J. Randy Taraborrelli
seeks to explain the eccentric behavior of the most
successful recording artist in history. In vintage Freudian
style, Mr. Taraborrelli blames it all on Dad, who used to
wallop Jackson when he was a kid, and who has proven less
than adept as a business manager for his talented brood.
Joining a long list of "dysfunctional" families -- the
Borgias, the de Medicis, the (King) Lears, the Reagans --
Michael's clan, argues Mr. Taraborrelli, is far from being
one big happy family, as it is sometimes depicted in the
press. Instead, Chez Jackson is a hotbed of psychosexual
upheaval. This explains Michael's odd fascination with
mannequins, rats, the bones of the Elephant Man, rhinoplastic
surgery and Diana Ross. Seeing Carol Channing stark naked
when he was only 13 may also have had a lot to do with the
singer's arrested personal development.
   "Michael Jackson" is partially based on three interviews
with Jackson himself, but two of these interviews took place
back in the late 1970s, before Jackson had seceded from his
original ethnic group and become the racially and sexually
indeterminate superstar he is today. The other was a useless
phone chat in 1982, also before Michael Jackson became
Michael Jackson. So the book is hardly brimming with hot
news.
   Still, it has its moments. Although the author is a bit of
a clichemeister, interspersing the "iron fists" with the
"mean streets" and the "reality checks," "Michael Jackson" is
must reading for hard-core fans who are dying to know the
secret behind Jermaine Jackson's marriage, Marlon Jackson's
divorce, LaToya Jackson's posing for Playboy with a boa
constrictor slithering between her legs, or Janet Jackson's
dieting techniques.
   The inside stuff about Jackson's troubling relationship
with Motown Records is quite interesting, as is the chapter
that deals with the singer's acquisition of the rights to the
Beatles' song catalog. But though he's good on skin
lighteners, Mr. Taraborrelli never really explains how
Michael Jackson went from being a cuddly has-been in 1979 to
the center of the universe in 1983. For all of his weirdness,
Mr. Jackson is still the most electrifying pop performer
since James Brown, embodying everything that confections like
Madonna would like to be, and would be, if she could sing,
and dance, and if there were 15 more of her on stage at one
time.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
