ID: 183	RANK: 27	SCORE: 7.960499
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920115-0002
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920115-0002.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   These Men Dance
   In the Mine Fields,
   Cleaning Up Kuwait
   ---
   They Blow Up Live Bombs
   For Kicks and the Money;
   A Mortician's Mr. Right
   ----
   By Tony Horwitz
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/15/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<NS>
UNITED NATIONS (UNN)
</NS>
<RE>
AFRICA (AF)
AFGHANISTAN (AFG)
ARABIAN PENINSULA (ARA)
BANGLADESH (BG)
EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)
EGYPT (EG)
EUROPE (EU)
FAR EAST (FE)
FRANCE (FR)
KUWAIT (KU)
MIDDLE EAST (ML)
PAKISTAN (PK)
SOMALIA (SOM)
GREAT BRITAIN (UK)
WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)
YUGOSLAVIA (YO)
</RE>
<LP>
   MINA SAUD, Kuwait -- When Charles Hall approached a woman
at a Louisiana bar last year, he reckoned he had an original
opening line.
   "I told her, `I blow up bombs for a living,'" he recalls.
"She smiled and said, `Well I'm a mortician, so I'll probably
be seeing you again.'"
</LP>
<TEXT>
   A few months later, they married in the chapel at the
funeral parlor where she works. Soon afterward, Mr. Hall
headed to Kuwait to blow up Iraqi mines and allied munitions
littering the desert sand.
   "You've got to have a bit of a death wish to do this job,"
he says, molding a lump of plastic explosive and laying it
beside a live cluster bomb. A co-worker sets a charge, then
uncoils fuze line as the two men backpedal 200 yards. Soon
the desert shudders as the bomb explodes in a plume of black
smoke and white sand.
   Mr. Hall smiles contentedly. "I was into fireworks as a
kid," he says.
   Now that firefighters have quenched Kuwait's burning oil
wells, there is no debate about who has the riskiest job in
this emirate. Six men died putting out fires. Bomb demolition
-- known also as explosive ordnance demolition, or EOD -- has
killed 50 so far, and wounded dozens of the hundreds still
working here.
   Even the firefighters, flamboyant cowboys not famed for
their modesty, regard EOD workers with awe. Butch Feaster, an
Oklahoman with scarred arms the size of tree trunks, saw
several men killed while clearing mines for his firefighting
team. "These guys dance through those mine fields in shorts
and thongs as if they're out picking daisies," Mr. Feaster
says.
   If peril comes with the turf, so too does a sick sense of
humor. At a barbecue, EOD workers joke about a novice who
stepped on a mine and was thrown into the air and killed. "He
followed a steep learning curve," quips one man. Another
reports a fatal accident involving a faulty grenade, and
says, "You only need one of those to spoil your day."
   World-wide, the bomb-disposal business is booming for the
dozen or so private EOD companies. The United Nations is
hiring teams to clear war-torn nations, such as Afghanistan,
which lack funds to do it themselves. The Cold War's thaw
means that many weapons stockpiles may be slated for
demolition. And fresh conflicts in Yugoslavia, Somalia and
parts of the former Soviet Union promise to bolster EOD
demand for years.
   "Every time I pick up the paper and read about a new civil
war, I think `Great, as soon as it's over, I'll be there,'"
says Richard Lowther, a marine EOD expert who has spent lean
years blowing up some of the thousands of sea mines left over
from World Wars I and II.
   Kuwait alone may be a three-year, $1 billion bonanza. The
Iraqis laid more than 500,000 mines, and abandoned tons of
explosives. But allied munitions pose the greatest threat.
Fully a third of the 100,000 or so tons dropped by the allies
never exploded, in part owing to soggy sand, but also because
the arsenal included stockpiled or experimental weapons with
a high dud ratio.
   "Some of this new stuff looks as if it landed from another
planet," says Brian Ashwell, operations manager for Passive
Barriers, a British EOD company. His office in Kuwait
resembles the workshop where the weapons whiz "Q" equips 007
in James Bond films. Shelves and floors are stuffed with the
latest in the killing science, most of it made in the U.S.A.:
"rockeye" anti-armor bomblets (finned explosives which
scatter, 400 at a time, from bursting bombs), BLU 63
submunitions (olive drab balls that split open, spewing
shrapnel), and V69 anti-personnel mines (spiked cones that
shoot out trip wires and jump to waist height before
exploding).
   Polaroid snapshots of newfangled weapons, such as a
parachute-delivered mine that doubles as a listening device,
line the walls. The firm photographs weapons it doesn't
recognize and asks the U.S. military to provide it with a
"footprint," or signature, so EOD workers can safely dispose
of them. Standing in one corner of the office is a medical
dummy clad in chain mail. Passive Barriers also designs
protective gear, and it has found Kuwait a good place to test
its products.
   "That dummy took a grenade at five yards," Mr. Ashwell
says proudly. "Barely a scratch."
   British EOD workers are prospering here, trading on their
recent field experience in the Falklands and Northern Ireland
(some U.S. companies offer a different sort of expertise:
They help manufacture the high-tech weaponry they are now
being hired to pick up). There also are EOD workers from
France, Egypt, Pakistan and Bangladesh. Passive Barriers'
employees typify this tight-knit, secretive industry: Most
are former military divers or commandos with tattoos on their
biceps and combat missions they can't discuss.
   "People who do this are thrill seekers," says Mr. Hall,
the lone American among Passive Barriers' 20-man crew. "They
drive fast, work hard, play hard."
   Mr. Hall fits the profile. As a child in Fredericksburg,
Va., he combed Civil War battlefields with metal detectors,
searching for miniballs. He rode motorcycles. In the Army he
signed up for atomic weapons demolition, and served on the
White House bomb squad.
   Now, at 30, Mr. Hall is earning $1,500 a week -- about
half the wage of oil firefighters -- risking his life in the
desert. "Just in case," he says, leading the way through a
dangerous patch, "put your feet exactly where I have." The
mine fields, which Iraqis originally planted on the surface
and bordered with wooden or wire markers, now have been
partly obscured by windblown sand.
   In essence EOD workers act as detectives, reconstructing
the scene of battle. Approaching a bombed-out Iraqi radar
station, Mr. Hall and his colleagues case the site, studying
craters and shrapnel to determine the path and dispersal of
incoming fire. Then they methodically locate each unexploded
piece, and "send it to the moon" -- EOD lingo for blowing it
up.
   "Your biggest enemy is your own ego," Mr. Hall says,
sweeping a beach with a high-powered metal detector. "You
have to resist getting complacent and saying, `There's
nothing out there I can't handle.'" To avoid losing
concentration, EOD workers trade off the metal detector about
every 20 minutes.
   EOD workers also stumble on grisly reminders of war:
decomposing limbs, charred bones and the mass graves of Iraqi
soldiers, usually marked with a single truck tire.
   "We're the shock troops," Mr. Hall says, eyes peeled to an
unswept stretch of Kuwait's desert, still rife with
explosives. Last spring, working for another firm, he saw a
co-worker lose a hand. Passive Barriers has had one casualty:
a man "fragged" while taking the detonator out of a mine. He
is now back on the job, with shrapnel still in his back.
   Other teams haven't been so lucky. Kuwait's entire
five-man crew was killed or maimed in two accidents. An
additional 1,250 civilians have been killed or wounded, as
have hundreds of camels and sheep.
   But EOD workers deflect the dangers of their trade with
armor-plated machismo. Few wear protective gear, which
restricts movement and also isn't likely to guard against
potent explosives. "I'd rather die than have my arms and legs
blown off," Mr. Hall explains.
   In one respect, though, the American differs from his
middle-aged, British colleagues. He plans to work in Kuwait
just long enough "to make a nest egg and go live a normal
life" with his mortician wife in Louisiana. He isn't sure yet
what his next career will be, but he suspects it won't be
bomb disposal.
   "I like it for the kicks and the money," he says, kneading
a ball of plastic explosives as if it were Silly Putty. "But
I don't want to walk on the wild side forever."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
