ID: 244	RANK: 18	SCORE: 11.728320
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890923-0050 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-23-89 0844EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a PM-Obit-Berlin 2ndLd-Writethru a0483 09-23 1368</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Obit-Berlin, 2nd Ld-Writethru, a0483,1404</SECOND>
<HEAD>Russian Cantor's Son Who Became Essence of America Music Dead at
101</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: SUBS 20th graf, `Composer Burt...', to CORRECT name of song
to `Raindrops Keep Fallin' sted Are Falling...'.</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos NY5, NY6</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By VERENA DOBNIK</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>NEW YORK (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Irving Berlin, the Russian cantor's son whose
songs such as ``Cheek to Cheek,'' ``Easter Parade,'' ``White
Christmas'' and ``God Bless America'' became the essence of American
music, has died at age 101.
   ``He's been so much a part of all of us, of all ages, over all
the many years,'' said composer-conductor Morton Gould, president of
the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers.
   Of Berlin's music, Gould said: ``It's become part of our
language, part of our heartbeat, part of our soul.
   ``It's the kind of finish of an era.''
   Berlin died in his sleep at his Manhattan town house Friday
afternoon, said his son-in-law, Alton E. Peters. Asked if Berlin had
been ill, Peters said, ``No, he was 101 years old. ... He just fell
asleep.''
   An actor, singer, and songwriter, Berlin began his career in the
early days of vaudeville and his songs for a time so dominated the
stage and screen that the late composer, Jerome Kern, said: ``Berlin
has no place in American music. He is American music.''
   In a musical career that began with a job as a singing waiter,
Berlin wrote nearly 1,000 songs, from his first big hit,
``Alexander's Ragtime Band'' in 1911, to ``Puttin' on the Ritz,''
which was revived in 1983 by the Dutch singer Taco and was a hit on
the rock charts.
   Berlin was an immigrant Russian whose ``God Bless America''
became the nation's unofficial second national anthem. A Jew, his
``White Christmas'' and ``Easter Parade'' became Christian holiday
traditions.
   ``American music was born at his piano,'' violinist Isaac Stern
said on Berlin's 100th birthday.
   So timeless was his appeal that his songs have become hits over
and over, performed by such artists as Frank Sinatra, Barbra
Streisand and Diana Ross. ASCAP records show 25 of his songs have
topped the popular music charts.
   ``Blue Skies,'' a top hit when he penned it in 1926, reached the
charts again 51 years later on an album by country singer Willie
Nelson.
   Berlin played the piano by ear and never stopped making what he
described as ``songs with heart.'' Even in his 90s, he talked of
adding yet another musical to his credits, which included 19 stage
musicals and 15 movie scores.
   At his peak, one smash followed another so readily that Cole
Porter once said Berlin ``can't help but write hits.''
   Berlin, along with 11 other American immigrants, received a medal
from President Reagan during the Statue of Liberty centennial
celebrations in July 1986.
   Reagan the actor was featured in the mammoth, flag-waving 1943
movie musical ``This is the Army,'' with songs from Berlin.
   ``Nancy and I are deeply saddened by the death of a wonderfully
talented man whose musical genius delighted and stirred millions,
and will live on forever,'' Reagan said.
   Always a private man, Berlin declined to attend a Carnegie Hall
gala, led by Sinatra and Leonard Bernstein, to mark his 100th
birthday on May 11, 1988.
   He was mourned by artists from across the spectrum of American
music.
   ``Irving Berlin was the greatest Tin Pan Alley songwriter,'' said
opera singer Robert Merrill, who also sings Berlin's songs. ``He was
not a great musician but he had a great ear and he had a feeling for
melody and words that was precious.''
   Composer Burt Bacharach, who wrote the 1969 Academy Award-winning
song ``Raindrops Keep Fallin' on My Head'' said, ``This is a great
loss. But Irving Berlin has left us with the greatest legacy through
his music.''
   ``One could hear the dancing by just singing the lyrics,''
cabaret singer Bobby Short said. ``He is perhaps the last of the
giants _ and I think that's not a bad way to go.''
   Actress and dancer Ginger Rogers remembered Berlin with a bit of
song from his ``Cheek to Cheek,'' from the movie ``Top Hat.''
   ``I'm in heaven,'' she sang, then broke off. ``It was like
heaven,'' she said, describing the thrill of working with the likes
of Berlin and Fred Astaire.
   The biggest names on Broadway played in his musical successes,
which began in the World War I era with ``Watch Your Step,''
starring Irene and Vernon Castle, and ran through such post-World
War II hits as ``Annie Get Your Gun'' and ``Call Me Madam,'' both
with Ethel Merman.
   ``A Pretty Girl Is Like A Melody,'' one of many Berlin wrote for
the Ziegfeld Follies, became the unofficial theme song for every
Ziegfeld extravaganza.
   In Hollywood, Berlin did the scores of ``Top Hat,'' starring
Astaire and Miss Rogers; ``Holiday Inn'' with Astaire and Bing
Crosby; ``Blue Skies''; ``Easter Parade''; ``White Christmas''; and
``There's No Business Like Show Business.''
   His last Broadway show was ``Mr. President'' in 1962. His last
song, ``An Old Fashioned Wedding,'' was published in 1966.
   His music-publishing empire earned him a fortune, which he
readily shared with his country in wartime or with favorite causes.
Since 1939 the Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts of America have been
getting the royalties from ``God Bless America.''
   Berlin was awarded three medals for his works and a special Tony
award for his contribution to the musical theater. He won a
congressional medal for the acclaimed World War II musical, ``This
is the Army,'' and the Academy Award for best song of 1942 for
``White Christmas.''
   Explaining the seemingly endless gusher of successful songs,
Berlin said his tunes were merely rewrites of a handful of his best
numbers. ``All good songwriters have no more than half a dozen good
tunes in their systems, and if they have that many they're liberally
blessed,'' he once said.
   Berlin never learned to read or write music and his piano playing
was confined to the key of F sharp. He called songwriting hard work,
but director Josh Logan once recalled that Berlin dashed off the
first verse of ``Anything You Can Do I Can Do Better'' during a
six-minute cab ride.
   Celebrity and wealth didn't seem to touch the shy personality of
the intense, short man with wavy, slicked-down hair and dark
glasses. He lived a simple life, centered on his songwriting and his
family _ his late wife, Ellin, and their three daughters.
   Berlin was brought up in poverty amid the immigrant swarm on
Manhattan's Lower East Side. Born Israel Baline on May 11, 1888, he
was 5 when his family emigrated from Temun in eastern Russia. He was
one of eight children and acquired his earliest musical education
from his father, a cantor. But his father's death put an end to
Berlin's formal education and, at age 8, he went from the second
grade to the streets to earn a living.
   Known as Izzy, Berlin sold newspapers, guided a blind, singing
beggar and worked in vaudeville. In 1907, he wrote the words to his
first song, ``Marie of Sunny Italy'' in collaboration with the piano
player at the Chinatown bar where he worked as a singing waiter.
   The song earned him 37 cents in royalties and a new name _ the
sheet music cover erroneously credited the words to ``I. Berlin.''
   In 1911, at the age of 23, he was contributing songs to the
Ziegfeld Follies. His ``Alexander's Ragtime Band'' with its ``ragged
meter'' ushered jazz onto the popular scene and established Berlin
as a master of Tin Pan Alley.
   Berlin's marriage to Dorothy Goetz the following year ended after
six months when his bride died of typhoid contracted during their
honeymoon in Havana. In his grief, Berlin composed ``When I Lost
You.''
   His marriage in 1926 to Ellin Mackay followed one of the most
widely reported courtships of the decade. His wife's father, a
prominent Roman Catholic layman and head of Postal Telegraph Co.,
had opposed the union.
   Berlin's wife died of a stroke at age 85 in July 1988. Berlin is
survived by his three daughters, Mary Ellin, Linda and Elizabeth.
   Services will be private, said Bill Hartgrove, evening manager at
the Frank Campbell funeral home in Manhattan.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
