ID: 244	RANK: 20	SCORE: 11.646203
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890925-0077 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-25-89 1104EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a PM-IrvingBerlin 1stLd-Writethru a0417 09-25 0786</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Irving Berlin, 1st Ld - Writethru, a0417,0802</SECOND>
<HEAD>`White Christmas' Composer Mourned as Soul of American Music</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: Inserts 2 grafs after the 9th, `Broadway theaters...', to add
candlelight serenade by fans. Picks up 10th graf pvs, `Born Israel...'.</HEAD>
<DATELINE>NEW YORK (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Admirers remembered Irving Berlin upon his death
as the heart and soul of American pop music, and said his songs
such as ``White Christmas,'' ``Blue Skies,'' and ``God Bless
America'' will never die.
   The Russian cantor's son who wrote nearly 1,000 songs died
Friday night in his Manhattan townhouse at age 101.
   Much of his music was written for stage and movie musicals, but
dozens of his songs have been performed over and over from Las
Vegas cabarets to country-western bars.
   Among his songs are ``Alexander's Ragtime Band,'' ``Always,''
``Mandy,'' ``Anything You Can Do I Can Do Better,'' ``There's No
Business Like Show Business,'' ``Cheek to Cheek,'' ``I've Got My
Love to Keep Me Warm,'' ``Heat Wave'' and ``A Pretty Girl is Like a
Melody.''
   ``It's become part of our language, part of our heartbeat, part
of our soul,'' said composer-conductor Morton Gould, president of
the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers, which
Berlin helped found.
   ``Your songs will be with us always,'' the organization said in
a full-page advertisement in The New York Times today.
   ``Very few people have come to touch and move the soul of a
nation,'' said President Bush, who joined a crowd of thousands in
Boston singing ``God Bless America'' in honor of the songwriter
Saturday. ``Mr. Berlin ranks among such people, a composer, a
legendary man whose words and music will help define the history of
our nation.''
   ``This is a great loss,'' said composer Burt Bacharach. ``But
Irving Berlin has left us with the greatest legacy through his
music.''
   Broadway theaters dimmed their lights Saturday night in tribute.
   On Sunday, more than 100 people held a candlelight serenade
outside Berlin's Manhattan townhouse. There was no indication if
anyone was home.
   ``There was sobbing. You can't avoid it,'' said John Wallowitch,
a composer and cabaret singer who led the group. He also has
organized serenades outside Berlin's home at Christmas and on his
birthday for about 20 years, ``but I never wanted to do it for this
reason.''
   Born Israel Baline on May 11, 1888, he was 5 when his family
emigrated from Temun in eastern Russia to New York. The death of
his father forced Berlin him to start working at age 8. He worked
in vaudeville, and as a singing waiter.
   In 1907, he published his first song, ``Marie of Sunny Italy,''
and he had his first hit in 1911 with ``Alexander's Ragtime Band.''
   Some of his songs have become pop hits across the generations.
His ``Puttin' on the Ritz,'' made the charts when it was revived in
1983 by the Dutch singer Taco, and his 1926 composition ``Blue
Skies'' helped get an album by country singer Willie Nelson on the
charts in 1978.
   Berlin was an immigrant Russian whose ``God Bless America''
became the nation's unofficial second national anthem. He was a Jew
whose ``White Christmas'' and ``Easter Parade'' became Christian
holiday traditions.
   Though he never learned to read music, he wrote 19 stage
musicals and 15 movie scores. Twenty-five of his songs have topped
the popular music charts, according to ASCAP.
   Berlin got a medal during the Statue of Liberty centennial in
July 1986 from then-President Reagan, who appeared in the
Berlin-scored 1943 movie musical ``This is the Army.''
   The biggest names on Broadway played in his musical successes,
which began in the World War I era with ``Watch Your Step,''
starring Irene and Vernon Castle, and ran through such post-World
War II hits as ``Annie Get Your Gun'' and ``Call Me Madam,'' both
with Ethel Merman.
   ``A Pretty Girl Is Like A Melody,'' one of many Berlin wrote for
the Ziegfeld Follies, became the unofficial theme song for every
Ziegfeld extravaganza.
   In Hollywood, Berlin did the scores of ``Top Hat,'' starring
Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers; ``Holiday Inn'' with Astaire and
Bing Crosby; ``Blue Skies''; ``Easter Parade''; ``White
Christmas''; and ``There's No Business Like Show Business.''
   His last Broadway show was ``Mr. President'' in 1962. His last
song, ``An Old Fashioned Wedding,'' was published in 1966.
   Berlin was awarded three medals for his music and a special Tony
award for his contribution to the musical theater. His won a
congressional medal for the World War II musical ``This is the
Army,'' and the Academy Award for best song of 1942 for ``White
Christmas.''
   His second wife, the former Ellin Mackay, died in 1988 after 62
years of marriage. Berlin is survived by his three daughters, Mary
Ellin, Linda and Elizabeth.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
