ID: 244	RANK: 75	SCORE: 8.779637
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910909-0139
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910909-0139.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Music:
   Making Music for Silent Films
   ----
   By Paul Duke
</HL>
<DATE>
09/09/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A9
</SO>
<LP>
   "As you can see, it makes quite a bit of noise," said Lee
Erwin, an 82-year-old silent-film organist, as he thumped out
two grand chords on the 81-year-old organ at the Cathedral of
St. John the Divine in New York. The sound hovered for
several seconds in the vast dark hollows of the church, at
112th Street and Amsterdam Avenue, billed as "the world's
largest Gothic cathedral." It produced in Mr. Erwin an
impishly mischievous grin, like a kid overwhelmed with joy at
discovering the power of pushing a doorbell and hearing the
sound ring out.
   On the bill that evening as part of the cathedral's summer
silent-film festival was "Metropolis," Fritz Lang's 1926
science-fiction dystopia. Mr. Erwin warmed up while the
cathedral filled with a crowd of 600. A few score arrived a
full hour early to secure uncomfortable folding seats near
the screen, rather than uncomfortable pew spots further back.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Enthusiastic audiences like this one are keeping Mr. Erwin
a busy man these days. They are doing the same for
86-year-old Gaylord Carter, Mr. Erwin's West Coast
counterpart in vintage and vocation, though not musical
outlook. The two are the grand old men of silent-film organ
accompaniment, the only two who played in the silent-film
heyday of the 1920s and still maintain a full schedule of
live shows and work for video soundtracks.
   Messrs. Carter and Erwin compose their own scores and
belie the quaint image of the harried pianist engaged in a
kind of musical onomatopoeia -- trying to mimic doorbells or
a Buster Keaton pratfall. Says Mr. Erwin, "People seem to
associate silent-film music with an out-of-tune rinky-tink
piano, but even in my hometown of Huntsville, Alabama, the
movie houses had good organs."
   Both add quite a bit to the films they accompany. Mr.
Erwin's atmospheric modern score for "Metropolis" makes this
visually stunning but dramatically maudlin film better than
it actually is by undercutting the treacly elements. On
video, Mr. Carter's moody but delicate music for Erich von
Stroheim's "The Last Command" draws on Russian melodies to
add pathos to this story of the encounter between a deposed
czarist general and a man he once arrested.
   The ebullient Mr. Carter, who lives outside Los Angeles,
recalls that as a teenager his family "was living in Wichita
and my father was a church organist. Things got dull and we
drove to California in 1922. I didn't have a dime to get into
the movies so I played the piano for $2 a night at the
Seville Theater in Englewood." One evening the great comic
actor Harold Lloyd dropped by, liked Mr. Carter's playing,
and recommended him to the swank Million Dollar Theater. Mr.
Carter signed on to play with the theater's 35-piece
orchestra. Music was chosen from the theater's own library of
scores.
   "You knew if it was a drama, a comedy, a World War I film,
an Indian film or a frozen-North picture," he says, but the
rest was up to the theater's own "music synchronizers."
   Sound hit and Mr. Carter took refuge in radio, playing the
Amos and Andy show, among other gigs. Interest in the silents
revived with the burgeoning interest in the history of film
in the 1960s, and Mr. Carter was able to return to his first
love.
   Mr. Erwin has more formal training, having played the
organ in Cincinnati movie houses in the late 1920s while at
conservatory. Returning from a year and a half in France
studying organ and composition with Nadia Boulanger, famed
teacher of Aaron Copland and many other American composers
and musicians, he found the silent era had vanished. That was
followed by 22 years with the CBS orchestra, including 20
years as on-camera organist for Arthur Godfrey's variety
show. He, too, was able to return to silent film work in the
late '60s, when New York's Beacon Theater was restored and he
wrote his first score, for the von Stroheim-Gloria Swanson
film "Queen Kelly."
   Like New York and Los Angeles, the two have their
differences. Mr. Erwin, despite his conservatory background,
is set against borrowing recognizable melodies from the
classics, as was customary in the silent era. "Audiences back
in the '20s weren't very sophisticated musically," he says.
"They didn't hear symphonies and recognize Beethoven and
Brahms. If you play those now, the music draws attention to
itself and distracts from the film."
   Mr. Carter, by contrast, happily borrows away. In the
score for "The Last Command," for instance, he returns
repeatedly to a nugget from Tchaikovsky's "Little Russian"
symphony. And what about the famous scene in the 1925
"Phantom of the Opera" in which Lon Chaney plays the organ
(making the scene a favorite of both Mr. Erwin and Mr.
Carter) in his subterranean hideout? By tradition, organists
have played a pounding melody borrowed from Bach (and now a
staple of haunted-house video games). Mr. Carter, on the
video score, steals a melody symbolic of death from the
Berlioz warhorse "Symphonie Fantastique."
   "That's one of the few actual organ cues in motion-picture
history," Mr. Carter notes. "It's very rare you have the star
playing the organ. I think Kevin Costner would think it's bad
for his image."
   Still, Mr. Carter admits not all his borrowings are from
the classics, and his penchant for musical puns can border on
the corny. He recalls putting together new scores with Harold
Lloyd in the late '40s, when Mr. Lloyd was trying to revive
interest in his silents. In the famous scene in "Safety Last"
in which Mr. Lloyd dangles precariously from the hands of a
giant clock, Mr. Carter segued into the popular song "Time on
My Hands."
   "Lloyd stopped me," Mr. Carter says, "and said, `Gaylord,
I'll do the jokes."
   ---
   Mr. Duke is a former Journal reporter.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
