ID: 218	RANK: 14	SCORE: 14.705435
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890303-0009 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-03-03-89 0021EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-SundayPost 1stLd-Writethru a0632 03-03 0810</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Sunday Post, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0632,0829</SECOND>
<HEAD>New York City Tabloid War Gets New Sunday Competitor</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: INSERTS 3 grafs after 5th graf, ``The sections ..., to UPDATE
with Post ad in NYTimes; picks up 6th graf: `Industry analysts ...</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By LARRY McSHANE</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>NEW YORK (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   NEW SUNDAY TABLOID IN NAKED CITY!
   This weekend, the New York Post joins the crowd at the city's
Sunday newsstands, its Fleet Street tilt a fading memory as it
challenges the Daily News and New York Newsday for tabloid supremacy
on the week's highest-stakes advertising day.
   The Post is confident about its debut Sunday; its competitors are
ready and waiting.
   ``When you see this paper on Saturday night, it's going to look
like a Sunday paper that's been around for 30, 40 years,'' promised
Peter Kalikow, the real estate magnate who saved the Post from
extinction one year ago with a $37 million takeover.
   ``The sections are right, the comics are right, the magazine is
right. It's really there.''
   To let the public know its plans, the Post put commercials on
television and a clever full-page advertisement Friday in one of its
competitors, The New York Times.
   The Times ad, in the form of two tabloid-size pages on the back
of Times' front section, could be folded to simulate the Post's
front and back pages.
   A banner news headline in the ad said it was ``Announcing A Cure
For The Common Sunday.'' Another headline over what would be the
sports page reads, ``Post Goes To Game 7!''
   Industry analysts question if the financing and the market are
right. They predict the Post's move to Sunday _ where a successful
newspaper makes 40 percent to 50 percent of its advertising money _
could mean the demise of at least one of the tabloids.
   ``The question is whether this market is capable of supporting
three daily tabloids. Ask God and the readers,'' said Daily News
Editor F. Gilman Spencer. ``This one is in stable shape, without any
question. ... We're in good shape to take on all comers.''
   Kalikow, on the eve of running out 575,000 copies of the Sunday
Post, believes three tabloids can live happily ever after in New
York. Ad space for the first three weeks in the 128-page paper is
sold out, including space in the pull-out book and travel sections,
Kalikow said.
   He also cites changes recently made in the competition's Sunday
editions as evidence his paper is already a factor: the News'
expanded sports page, Newsday's additional color pages. Spencer and
Newsday Associate Publisher Steven Isenberg said those moves were in
works before the Post went weekend.
   None of this is expected to affect The New York Times or its
massive Sunday edition. The Times can ``stand back and wait, and
then see who's left,'' said industry analyst John Morton.
   But while Kalikow is confident, others in the industry remain
skeptical. The last time the Post had a Sunday edition was during a
newspaper strike in 1978. It was scrapped when the strike ended.
   ``So far, there does not appear to be room for three profitable
daily tabloids; that's certainly the same for Sunday,'' said
newspaper analyst Bruce Thorp of the Provident National Bank. ``I'm
not convinced there's room for two profitable daily tabloids.''
   Agreed Morton, ``The problem is you've got a town that probably
can't support that many newspapers. New York is probably the last
remaining city with the market segmentation to support two
newspapers.
   ``But three or four, in the long run, is probably not do-able.''
   The Post runs third in the city circulation race, trailing the
Daily News (1,281,706) and The New York Times (1,038,829) and
leading New York Newsday (176,043), according to the Audit Bureau of
Circulations figures from Sept 30, 1988. Kalikow anticipates a
similar Sunday showing.
   Morton and Thorp cited other problems the Post faces: lack of
home delivery (Kalikow says a major push to change that is under
way.); overcoming Sunday readership loyalty (Kalikow believes the
paper's 550,473 weekday readers will buy the Post.); tremendous
start-up costs (Kalikow, without mentioning figures, says the Sunday
paper is here to stay.).
   Here for the paper's first 12 weeks is a reader inducement _ a $1
million stock market game which also will run in weekdays.
   More likely to draw readers are the changes wrought at the Post
under editor Jane Amsterdam in the year since Kalikow's purchase of
the paper, which was founded in 1801 by Alexander Hamilton.
   Gone are many of the Rupert Murdoch flourishes which marked his
reign at the Post: no more ``HEADLESS BODY IN TOPLESS BAR''
headlines, no unchallenged liberal-bashing, no jam-packed pages
desperate for space.
   ``Things have improved on a financial basis, the morale has
improved, the quality of the paper has improved,'' Kalikow said.
``Things have really improved far beyond what we had ever expected.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
