ID: 218	RANK: 35	SCORE: 10.931412
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910128-0017
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910128-0017.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Daily News Strike Helps Other Tabloids
   ---
   Circulation, Ad Rates Jump
   For New York Post, Newsday
   ----
   By Patrick M. Reilly
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/28/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A5A
</SO>
<CO>
   TMC NYTA TRB LABOR
</CO>
<IN>
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
</IN>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- The life-threatening strike at the Daily News
is boosting the prospects of tabloid rivals New York Post and
New York Newsday, but the nation's largest newspaper market
appears to be facing permanent shrinkage.
   Both unprofitable and stagnant a few months ago, the Post
and Newsday are now swiftly heading toward profitability as
their circulation and advertising climb. At the same time,
some 200,000 former readers of the Daily News aren't picking
up another newspaper, presumably getting their news from
television.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "Newspaper strikes break people's reading habits, and they
find it easy to go without a paper," said John Polich, a
media consultant and Fordham University professor who has
studied the strike. "Even if the News settles the strike, it
can never recover those lost readers."
   Until the start of the strike Oct. 25, the Daily News was
the country's second-largest metropolitan newspaper with 1.1
million readers. Publisher James Hoge said circulation has
dropped to 600,000, though union leaders and publishing
executives say the Daily News is lucky if it sells more than
400,000 copies daily.
   The New York Times, published by New York Times Co., isn't
considered a direct competitor in the tabloid market. It says
it has seen little change in its circulation attributable to
the strike. But Post circulation has jumped to 750,000 from a
stagnant 510,000. And circulation at Times Mirror Co.'s New
York Newsday, which had been sluggish since its 1985 launch,
jumped to 345,000 from 225,000.
   Mr. Hoge said two weeks ago that parent Tribune Co. would
close the 71-year-old Daily News unless a buyer is found or
settlements reached with nine striking unions. The paper is
estimated to be losing nearly $1 million a day, has already
closed its 64-year-old Daily News Sunday Magazine, and has
considered layoffs even among the ranks of replacement
workers. Media bankers and analysts say any new owner would
have to be willing to absorb continuing losses while taking
on the union problem, and spend heavily to restore the
paper's vigor and woo back editorial talent.
   The Daily News's near demise has been most beneficial for
the Post, which has literally risen from the dead. Last
September, the tabloid needed major union wage concessions
just to stay in business. Now Publisher Peter Kalikow fairly
beams at his prospects. Ad pages have grown 2.5 times since
the Daily News strike began, and demand is so high that the
Post has dropped some editorial features to make room for
ads. Mr. Kalikow said the Post had its most profitable months
in years in the fourth quarter. He describes the profit for
the period only as "something less than a million."
   A Sunday New York Post failed in 1989, but Mr. Kalikow
says the Post will come out with a Sunday edition if the
News, which had a 1.4 million Sunday circulation, closes.
Until then, Mr. Kalikow simply watches. "We do nothing until
we know what happens to the Daily News on a permanent basis,"
he says.
   At New York Newsday, meanwhile, ad lineage was declining
prior to the strike, and media analysts pegged the paper's
losses at about $10 million a year. The picture changed
sharply after Oct. 25. Besides daily gains, New York
Newsday's Sunday circulation has jumped a whopping 225,000 to
more than 400,000. Advertising has increased by an average of
140 pages a week from the pre-strike average. Mr. Johnson now
says "prospects look good" for New York Newsday's first
profitable year in 1991.
   According to a study by Mr. Polich at the Fordham
University Graduate School of Business that will be released
this week, the Daily News strike has cost the Daily News 40%
of its readers in the borough of Queens, its traditional
stronghold. In Queens, the Daily News is now second to New
York Newsday, which has added about 30% more weekday readers
and 50% more on Sundays.
   So confident is Newsday that it will keep the circulation
it has won, the ad rate increase guarantees a minimum
circulation for advertisers for one year, a practice used in
magazines but rarely in newspapers.
   The windfall has its drawbacks. New York Newsday is
pulling in more revenue, but costs, including staff overtime,
have risen too. Yet, the longer the strike continues, Times
Mirror executives say that with a higher newsstand price and
new ad rates, they can recover those costs.
   The News has lost some of its best editorial talent to its
two rivals. Robert Johnson, president of New York Newsday and
its Long Island-based parent publication Newsday, has picked
off Daily News columnists Gail Collins and Bill Reel. A Daily
News veteran, Mr. Reel is starting a column focusing on
Brooklyn and Queens, the same turf where Newsday and the
Daily News have waged a fierce circulation battle.
   "The Daily News looks thin," says James Dolan, managing
director of the Jordan Group, a New York media consultant.
"One of Jim {Hoge's} strengths was nurturing a stable of high
profile talent.
   Now he's being robbed of that."
   The biggest catch remains at large: veteran Daily News
gossip columnist Liz Smith, whose column is syndicated to 70
papers. Ms. Smith's contract is up Feb. 14, and Newsday's Mr.
Johnson says he would love to hire her. In 1988, New York
Newsday paid at least $400,000 to lure columnist Jimmy
Breslin from the Daily News.
   At a recent charity gala, Newsday's Mr. Johnson chatted up
Ms. Smith, and in the words of Ms. Smith "he tendered the
idea that they would talk to me if I wanted to talk to them."
Ms. Smith says she will likely not sign another contract, but
that she will stay at the Daily News. "I won't leave this
paper until Jim Hoge leaves it," she says.
   ---
         Competitors Gain As Daily News Struggles
                                                                                                       

   Circulation before and after the start of Daily News
strike, Oct. 25, 1990
                                                                                                       

                                PRE-STRIKE*   POST-STRIKE**
                                                                                                       

   The New York Times           1,108,447       1,146,800
   New York Daily News          1,097,693         600,000
   New York Post                  510,219         750,000
   New York Newsday               230,000**       345,000
                                                                                                       

   Sources: *Audit Bureau of Circulations, six-month average
paid circulation for the period ended Sept. 30, 1990.
**Company estimates before Persian Gulf war began.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
