ID: 218	RANK: 49	SCORE: 10.218113
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910325-0103
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910325-0103.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Kalikow Runs Into Real Estate Woes;
   New York Post Operations May Be Hurt
   ----
   By Neil Barsky
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
03/25/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B7A
</SO>
<CO>
   LABOR
</CO>
<IN>
REAL ESTATE INVESTMENTS (REA)
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
</IN>
<LP>
   New York Post owner Peter Kalikow's real estate empire is
running into financial trouble, which could cripple his
ability to fight New York City's tabloid wars, according to
real estate executives.
   Within the past month, European American Bank sued Mr.
Kalikow for failure to pay the principal portion of a $25
million loan. Many of Mr. Kalikow's real estate holdings,
which include prime Manhattan office towers and a square
block of Upper East Side residential buildings, are believed
to be not earning enough money to pay their debt service. Mr.
Kalikow is also developing a hotel in downtown Manhattan in
the midst of a serious economic slump.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   As a result, Mr. Kalikow's creditors, which include
Bankers Trust, Manufacturers Hanover, Chase Manhattan Corp.,
and Citibank, are expected to meet sometime soon to devise a
plan to give Mr. Kalikow time to work out his problems,
persons close to the banks say. Real estate executives say
Bankers Trust has lent Mr. Kalikow tens of millions of
personally guaranteed money to help the developer fund the
Post's operations.
   Some of Mr. Kalikow's more aggressive creditors, such as
European American, are believed to want to be bought out of
their positions by Mr. Kalikow's larger creditors, but so far
the other banks have not agreed to such a deal.
   Phone calls to Mr. Kalikow's publicist were not returned.
A spokesman for European American confirmed a lawsuit had
been filed in Nassau County (N.Y.) Supreme Court against Mr.
Kalikow, but declined to elaborate. Spokesmen for the other
banks wouldn't comment.
   Mr. Kalikow, whose net worth has been estimated by Forbes
magazine to be more than $500 million, owns about a dozen New
York City buildings. Some of the banks with relationships
dating back to when Mr. Kalikow's father, who was also a
developer, hold the younger Mr. Kalikow in high esteem, and
consider him an innocent victim of the city's economic slide
and the national credit crunch.
   Mr. Kalikow's troubles, while not as serious as those
afflicting developers such as Donald Trump or William
Zeckendorf, are somewhat ironic because he was one of the
more conservative players on the New York real estate scene
in the 1980s. By and large, he shunned speculative office
buildings. His plan to evict hundreds of middle-income
tenants to make way for an 81-story luxury high-rise
embroiled him in lengthy controversy that was settled long
after the red-hot Manhattan real estate market cooled. Mr.
Kalikow paid $43 million for that site in 1984, and is
believed to be losing money carrying the mortgage.
   Mr. Kalikow departed his conservative business style,
however, in 1988 when he purchased the unprofitable New York
Post from Rupert Murdoch for $37 million. Since then, Mr.
Kalikow has reportedly invested as much as $100 million more
in the newspaper. Last fall, the Post came close to closing,
but was saved when its unions agreed to $19 million in
concessions.
   When it appeared the Daily News, the Post's chief
competitor, might go out of business as a result of a strike,
it looked as if Mr. Kalikow's gamble might pay off. During
the strike, the Post was said to be making about $2.5 million
a month.
   But with the settlement of the strike and the sale of the
News to British press baron Robert Maxwell last week, the
Post could once again become unprofitable, if the News
recaptures the advertisers and readers it lost during the
strike. Already advertisers such as A&amp;S, Stern's, and other
major companies have said they would resume advertising in
the News.
   The Post has historically been New York City's raciest and
least-profitable tabloid. The city's third tabloid, New York
Newsday, has yet to turn a profit but has been consistently
building market share since entering the competition in
earnest in 1985. People familiar with Mr. Kalikow's agreement
with the Post unions said he is expected to demand the same
concessions Mr. Maxwell received from the Daily News unions.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
