ID: 222	RANK: 28	SCORE: 10.785052
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-15589</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CJDAFABHFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921003
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  03 OCT 92 / Books: Ottoline, a lady loved in fiction - Anthony Curtis
admires a stylish brand of eccentricity
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANTHONY CURTIS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
OTTOLINE MORRELL: LIFE ON THE GRAND SCALE by Miranda Seymour Hodder &amp;
Stoughton Pounds 25, 452 pages
'THE so-called portraits of Ottoline can't possibly be Ottoline', DH
Lawrence wrote from Florence in 1928 to the subject of this biography. It
was a letter ostensibly to commiserate with Ottoline on her 'mysterious
illness' and operation on her jaw, where cancer had been diagnosed. The
resulting shape of her chin was a hideous disfigurement of a once beautiful
woman. As well as sending a get-well-soon greeting Lawrence took the
opportunity to try to heal the 12-year-long breach in their relations.
Contact between them, initially so warm, had ceased abruptly on the
appearance of Women in Love.
Almost all the novelists whom Ottoline entertained in her celebrated salon
in Bedford Square before the First World War, and at Garsington Manor during
and after the War, found her stylish brand of eccentricity an irresistible
challenge. Ottoline, a half-sister of the Duke of Portland, was a maze of
contradictions - simultaneously an aristocrat, an aesthete and an artists'
groupie.
Aldous Huxley put her into three of his books: as Priscilla Wimbush in Crome
Yellow (1921) - where she appears against the background of a typical
Garsington weekend; as Mrs Aldwinkle in Those Barren Leaves (1925); as Mrs
Bidlake in Point Counter Point (1928). Virginia Woolf embellished letters to
friends they had in common and her journal with some coruscating vignettes
of 'Ott'. Miranda Seymour believes that there is also more than a hint of
Ottoline in Clarissa Dalloway. Graham Greene confessed to borrowing Ottoline
for Lady Patricia Bury in Its A Battlefield.
Osbert Sitwell in Triple Fugue (1924) called her Lady Septugesima Goodley.
The name guys Ottoline's lifelong passion for do-gooding. It had been
sparked by Charles Kingsley, whose books she loved as a child and who was a
friend of her parents, the Bentincks. Readings from Thomas a Kempis
confirmed her ambition to occupy the high moral ground. Height was indeed
what immediately struck you on meeting Ottoline. As Sitwell put it: she was
so tall she looked like 'an animated public monument' and with a voice that
resembled the 'peaceful lowing of cattle and the barbed drone of wasp and
hornet'.
Miranda Seymour also cites obscure Otto-novels by Gilbert Cannan, 'JA
Revermort' (John Cramb), the Australian-born music critic WJ Turner, and the
Irish actress Constance Malleson, Ottoline's rival in the great game of
being bedded by Bertie Russell. This the actress eventually won, but only
after a series of strenuous heats. Ottoline had ditched the painter Henry
Lamb as her lover for the more intellectual allurements of the philosopher.
Ottoline shrugged off the lesser fictional caricatures. It was Lawrence's -
Ottoline as Hermione Roddice ('. . . she had no natural sufficiency, there
was a terrible void, a lack, a deficiency of being within her . . . ', etc.
etc.') - that left the lasting wound. But in that belated olive-branch
letter Lawrence did his best to restore Ottoline's self-esteem. 'And in the
world today', he continued, 'full of women, how rare to find one that can
move the imagination] No, I wish, and wish deeply, there could be Ottoline
again and Garsington again, and we could start afresh'.
Crocodile tears? Lawrence had at that moment just completed a new novel. It
concerned a married woman with a title who had a passionate affair with a
game-keeper on her estate and he felt sure that Ottoline would understand
what he was trying to do in it - 'the re-entry into life' he told her 'of a
bit of the old phallic awareness and the old phallic insouciance.' Could
this, Miranda Seymour asks, have been yet one more fictional go at Ottoline
herself?
The parallels between Ottoline and Lady Chatterley are in some respects
close. Ottoline's relations with her husband Philip Morrell, the lawyer and
Liberal MP by whom she had a daughter, soon became companionable rather than
passionate. Though not disabled like Clifford Chatterley, Philip did suffer
from bouts of mental illness that had probably prevented him from reaching
ministerial rank; even though Asquith was a personal friend of theirs who
enjoyed meeting literati like Desmond MacCarthy on the Garsington lawn, he
never promoted Morrell
After Ottoline ceded Russell to the Irish actress she had what her
biographer believes to be the only truly satisfactory sexual liaison of her
life. It was with a local Oxfordshire stone mason - Lionel Gomme, always
known in her journals as 'Tiger' - who had come to mend a damaged plinth in
the garden at Garsington. It wasn't only the statue around which he put his
arms and relocated.
Clearly a woman of this calibre, reflected in so much of 20th-century
fiction and its annals, deserves a biography. There was a life of her
published in 1976, but much new material has become available since then.
Unlike the previous biographer, Miranda Seymour has a double-focus: on Ott
in the foreground and, in the middle distance, on her ever-changing circle
of eminent friends.
Sybil Colefax certainly entertained as many, if not more, celebrated people
in her time; but she was, at heart, a mere collector. Ottoline, for all her
absurdities, was an inspiration. From an early age she saw her role as one
of helping creative people to realise themselves, and in this regard her
discernment was exceptional and her altruism tireless - even though,
contrary to general belief, the Morrells were never really rich. Among the
many writers she encouraged when they were unknown was Henry Green, who paid
a memorable tribute to her after her death in 1938 aged 64.
What Ottoline had not quite bargained for was the astonishing vindictiveness
of the inhabitants of the London literary world, their compulsion to bite
the hand that feeds them. In Ottoline's far too forbearing case she would
often continue feeding someone after he or she had snapped at her. She was
immensely supportive of Roger Fry when he was being reviled for organising
the first post-impressionist exhibition in London, and she helped him in the
formation of the Contemporary Art Society. They became great friends until
he turned on her viciously because someone had spread the rumour that he was
in love with her. The other Bloomsberries followed suit in undermining her
reputation.
Logan Pearsall Smith had more cause for hatred since his sister was
Russell's first wife. But luckily Ottoline acquired new friends as easily as
she shed old ones. She made much of the Oxford connection. A visit to
Garsington was essential for any undergraduate with literary leanings in the
Brideshead years. Evelyn Waugh, Peter Quennell, David Cecil, LP Hartley,
Eddy Sackville-West, Robert Gathorne-Hardy and Anthony Powell were among her
visitors.
Miranda Seymour is infinitely more successful here than she was in her
previous group-book, Ring of Conspirators, concerning Henry James and his
circle at Rye. Here, there really was a ring of conspirators who did what
they did in envy of great Ottoline. They are all seen off the premises
brilliantly.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XVII
</PAGE>
</DOC>
