ID: 222	RANK: 4	SCORE: 19.924673
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911021-0124
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911021-0124.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Technology (A Special Report)
   ---
   Past Predictions:
   Sci-Fi Can Be Fun,
   But Don't Count on It
   ----
   By Laurence Hooper
</HL>
<DATE>
10/21/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE R20
</SO>
<NS>
SCIENCE &amp; TECHNOLOGY (SCN)
</NS>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   BY DEFINITION, science fiction isn't obliged to reflect
reality. Not today's, not tomorrow's.
   That said, it's still fun to hold the futurists to
account. The following are seven images of high technology in
the home, dreamed up by some of history's notable visionaries
-- and seven reports on how accurate those images have turned
out to be. The main lesson, probably, is that guesses about
the direction of technology (yes, including those made in
this publication) shouldn't be taken too seriously. As George
Orwell would be happy to learn, the only certainty about
prophecies is that they often miss the mark.
                                                                                                       

</LP>
<TEXT>
   1516: Thomas More "Utopia"
                                                                                                       

   The roofs be plain and flat, covered with a certain kind
of plaster that is of no cost, and yet so tempered that no
fire can hurt or perish it. . . .They keep the wind out of
their windows with glass, for it is there much used, and
somewhere also with fine linen cloth dipped in oil or amber .
. .
                                                                                                       

   Although it isn't set in the future, Thomas More's seminal
book is an early form of futurism. Following his era's
literary conventions, More simply places his futuristic
society on a faraway island rather than in another time.
   Although the book is mainly a political treatise, some of
the technological features of Utopian houses remain
interesting today. Utopia's fireproof plaster, for example,
might draw emissaries from the construction industry. And
glass windows have yet to be improved upon, although some
companies are now experimenting with windows that can be made
opaque -- and perhaps, in the future, made to display video
pictures -- at the touch of a button.

   1888: Edward Bellamy, "Looking Backward"
                                                                                                       

   She made me sit down comfortably, and, crossing the room,
so far as I could see, merely touched one or two screws, and
at once the room was filled with the music of a grand organ
anthem. . . ."Grand]" I cried, as the last great wave of
sound broke and ebbed away into silence. "Bach must be at the
keys of that organ; but where is the organ?"
                                                                                                       

   Edward Bellamy's hugely popular romance, in which the hero
awakes from a mesmeric sleep to find himself in the year
2000, predicts several technological advances -- although, as
with More, the author's main point is a political one.
Bellamy typified the utopianism of the late 19th century,
which embraced technology as a way to increase human
happiness.
   The Music Room described above is a prescient vision of
radio. Bellamy didn't foresee "wireless" broadcasting, but
imagined that live performances would be transmitted through
special telephone lines to subscribers. In other words, cable
radio. A cable system is now being tested in the U.S. for
high-quality digital audio transmissions, and some
cable-television companies -- especially those in Europe --
tout interference-free reception of regular radio stations.
   Egregiously, Bellamy makes no mention of recorded music,
even though Thomas Edison's phonograph was 10 years old at
the time. He can be forgiven, however, for failing to predict
the latest stereo components -- digital sound processors that
allow listeners to "reshape" their living room's acoustics to
mimic much larger spaces. If Bellamy had only known, his hero
would have been mystified not only by organ music but also by
cavernous echoes that seemed to issue from 100 yards behind
his sofa.
                                                                                                       

   1902: H.G. Wells, "Anticipations of the Reaction of
Mechanical and Scientific Progress Upon Human Life and
Thought"
                                                                                                       

   One always imagines a cook working with a crimsoned face
and bare, blackened arms. But with a neat little range,
heated by electricity and provided with thermometers, with
absolutely controllable temperatures and proper heat screens,
cooking might very easily be made a pleasant amusement for
intelligent invalid ladies.
                                                                                                       

   In addition to writing some of the first true science
fiction, H.G. Wells was also the dean of all futurism. Among
other things, he correctly predicted the growth of suburbia
and the atom bomb. In his "Anticipations," which started as a
series of articles envisioning life at the end of the
century, Wells anticipates the transformation of the era's
dark, sooty kitchens to bright, clean rooms where even the
idle rich experiment with recipes. Clearly, he wouldn't have
been surprised to find that many cookery books became best
sellers by the close of the millennium.
   But even the gadget-happy Wells never hinted at many of
the myriad devices that populate today's kitchens -- talking
refrigerators, fuzzy-logic bread makers, dishwashers with
brains as powerful as early computers. Especially puzzling
would be the microwave oven, a truly new technology that has
become so commonplace and easy to use that companies now sell
microwavable snacks that little kids can nuke for themselves.
                                                                                                       

   1932: Aldous Huxley, "Brave New World"
                                                                                                       

   A blast of warm air dusted her with the finest talcum
powder. Eight different scents and eau-de-Cologne were laid
on in little taps over the wash-basin. She turned on the
third from the left, dabbed herself with chypre and, carrying
her shoes and stockings in her hand, went out to see if one
of the vibro-vacuum machines were free.
                                                                                                       

   Futurism turned pessimistic after the Great War, and
technological progress began to be feared because of its
potential for abuse -- a more sophisticated fear than the
visceral Luddism of previous eras. To dramatize such fears,
dystopian literature flourished and reached an apotheosis of
sorts in Aldous Huxley's "Brave New World," which depicted an
ominous society of genetic manipulation and drug-hazed
consumerism.
   Like the rest of the book, Huxley's vision of home
technology depended heavily on sensuality. In the home, the
decadent tone of his other inventions -- scent organs,
synthetic music, and feelies (movies where the audience
actually "felt" the action) -- had its most natural
expression in the bathroom, to which his characters retreated
as regularly as cocaine addicts. But strangely, apart from
the still-rare Jacuzzi, technology has had little to say
about the bathroom since the advent of indoor plumbing.
   Innovation seems to entail putting more nozzles in a
shower stall or heating toilet seats. Despite an emerging
Japanese interest in the electronic bathroom, the only widely
used modern items that echo Huxley's lush vision -- apart
from potpourri, which continues to exert its low-tech charm
-- are cheesy gadgets such as electric back-massagers and
"aroma disks" that play on mail-order scent diffusers.
                                                                                                       

   1949: George Orwell, "1984"
                                                                                                       

   "Smith]" screamed the shrewish voice from the telescreen.
"6079 Smith W] Yes, you] Bend lower, please] You can do
better than that. You're not trying. Lower, please] That's
better, comrade."
                                                                                                       

   Anyone who sweats regularly through a Jane Fonda workout
tape will cringe at George Orwell's dark vision of "Physical
Jerks," daily exercises coordinated and enforced through
telescreens, the two-way video screens that monitor the dingy
lives of the citizens of Oceania. Fortunately, two-way
screens linked to the government aren't yet standard issue in
our homes -- though it could be argued that the spirit of Big
Brother lurks now in ordinary devices such as pagers, credit
cards and cellular telephones.
   Inside the home, two-way communication has never really
caught on. Household intercom systems flared and died years
ago and, while many cordless telephones now double as in-home
pagers, most parents are probably relieved to have the kids
out of mind. In a corporate experiment that may someday reach
the home, a Xerox Corp. lab is now testing a system of
two-way video screens that allows workers to "enter" another
office for a chat -- or stay tuned in all day, just like a
telescreen. Unlike Big Brother's screens, however, these
monitors can be switched off.
                                                                                                       

   1952: Ray Bradbury, "The Veldt"
                                                                                                       

   Perhaps Lydia was right. Perhaps they needed a little
vacation from the fantasy which was growing a bit too real
for ten-year-old children. . . .It seemed that, at a
distance, for the past month, he had heard lions roaring, and
smelled their strong odor seeping as far away as his study
door. But, being busy, he had paid it no attention.
                                                                                                       

   In Ray Bradbury's chilling tale of consumerism, the Hadley
family falls victim to the ultimate in home technology: The
Happylife Home, "which clothed and fed and rocked them to
sleep and played and sang and was good to them." Central to
the story is a nursery whose walls can create convincing
illusions of reality, complete with sounds and smells -- an
immersion experience akin to Huxley's feelies. Things go
awry, however, when the spoiled Hadley children ask the
nursery to conjure up an African scene.
   Much of the Happylife Home is deliberately cartoonish (the
dining-room table cuts food into bite-size pieces, for
instance), but Bradbury's nursery can be seen as the ultimate
in a new technology called virtual reality. In virtual
reality, people don goggles, gloves and other devices that
let them feel as if they're moving in, and interacting with,
a computer-generated world. Bradbury takes it one step
further and creates a world so enveloping that no gloves or
goggles are needed: The viewer is swallowed up by the
illusion.
   Research into virtual reality is being conducted now at
firms such as VPL Research Inc., but early consumer devices
have already emerged. For the home, Mattel Inc. makes a gizmo
called PowerGlove, which lets kids control Nintendo video
games with hand gestures. It's a long way from the Happylife
nursery -- but maybe that's not such a bad thing.
                                                                                                       

   1968: Arthur C. Clarke and Stanley Kubrick, "2001: A Space
Odyssey"
                                                                                                       

   "Are you coming to my party tomorrow?"
   "I'm sorry, sweetheart, but I can't."
   "Why not?"
   "Well, you know -- Daddy's traveling."
                                                                                                       

   Daddy, of course, is calling home from a Bell PicturePhone
while en route to the moon -- and paying a mere $1.70 for the
privilege. Video telephones, first demonstrated in the early
1960s, are perhaps futurists' biggest flub so far: The
reasonable rates in "2001" notwithstanding, they have always
cost too much to catch on. Even in the corporate world, where
video teleconferences were supposed to be a cheap alternative
to air travel, it wasn't until earlier this year that a firm,
PictureTel, started selling a complete system for less than
$20,000.
   Part of the problem is infrastructure: Conventional
telephone lines don't have the capacity to transmit moving
pictures, meaning that exotic means such as satellites or
special lines must be used. Since it will be a decade or more
before high-capacity, fiber-optic cables are commonplace,
video phones won't become a household appliance for a long
time. In the meantime, Japanese consumer-electronics firms
have been offering phones that can transmit still images;
they've met with an understandably tepid response. Similarly,
other relatively modest prophecies of "2001" -- a permanent
space station, for example -- are years behind schedule. The
human-seeming HAL 9000 computer, of course, is only slightly
closer to reality than he was when Arthur C. Clarke dreamed
him up.
   Still, one piece of "2001" technology has already made it
into many homes: a computer that can wallop most humans at
chess. It may not seem like much compared with HAL, who was
supposedly completed in 1992 to be "foolproof and incapable
of error." But then again, HAL ultimately snapped and turned
homicidal. Some prophecies are best left unfulfilled.
   ---
   Mr. Hooper is a staff reporter in The Wall Street
Journal's London bureau.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
