ID: 222	RANK: 51	SCORE: 9.181277
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911231-0097
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911231-0097.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   An Indian Lawyer and His Ruby as Big as the Ritz
   ----
   By Anthony Spaeth
</HL>
<DATE>
12/31/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A5
</SO>
<LP>
   Bangalore, India -- The Guinness Book of Records has its
loonies, its freaks of nature and its 5,500-pound hamburgers.
But it also has gemsreal gems, huge gems-and that list is the
most glittering in the book. There's the giant Star of Africa
diamond, Queen Elizabeth's crown jewel, sunk in a high-tech
vault in the Tower of London. And there's a 136-pound
flawless crystal ball on display at the Smithsonian
Institution in Washington, D.C.
   The two largest star rubies in the world, according to the
Guinness Book, are the Rajaratna and the Indumathi from
India. One of the largest double star sapphires is the
Neelanjali. For years -- possibly centuries -- these three
stones, and a smaller fourth stone, were disguised beneath a
covering of black soot. Then, in 1983, an aging lawyer named
G. Vidyaraj found the black lumps in his parents' house,
attempted to give them away and then, mildly curious, took an
old toothbrush to them. Overnight, he became the owner of one
of the most stupendous gem collections in the world.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "The value of these gems is impossible to estimate," says
Mr. Vidyaraj, a tall, lumbering and, these days, ailing man.
"Literally, they're priceless. Some people say I am the
richest person in the world."
   It's one of those amazing fairy tales that seems only
possible in India -- the homeland of Queen Elizabeth's
Kohinoor, another crown jewel -- but one with a bittersweet
ending. Seven years after his find, Mr. Vidyaraj has his
rubies, his sapphire and his three entries in the Guinness
Book. Otherwise, he's gotten nothing. He's reluctant to sell
the gems, wondering if anyone can afford such treasures. He
and his wife live on a stipend sent by his engineer son, who
lives in Washington, D.C. He's bitter that his own country
has shown no interest in the collection. And he constantly
worries about robbers and kidnappers. Threats come through
the mail and by phone; the local police are frequently
dispatched to guard his modest, first-floor rental apartment
in this southern Indian city.
   Mr. Vidyaraj is a distinguished man, with precise,
lawyerly speech, an impeccable double-breasted suit and
starchy, white hair. He is a direct descendant of the
Vijayanagara kings, who controlled much of south India from
the 14th to 16th centuries. History recalls the strongest
king, Krishna Deva Raya (1509-30), as an early advocate of
free trade. He imported velvets and damasks from Aden and
China, horses from Arabia, elephants from Ceylon, gold,
silver -- and precious gems. Presumably, this solves the
essential mystery of Mr. Vidyaraj's gems: They were court
jewels, or the spoils of the Vijayanagara era, which someone
protectively blackened against invasion or plunder. How,
when? Mr. Vidyaraj doesn't have a clue. All he knows is that
his parents inherited the four black lumps, which they kept
in the family "puja", or offering, room. They considered them
sacred, not invaluable.
   "I remember my father worshipping them," says Mr.
Vidyaraj, "and singing songs in praise of Shiva {a major
Hindu god}." His parents died in the 1960s and 1970s. In 1982
he cleaned out the family house and brought the sacred stones
to his cramped apartment here, storing them in a cupboard.
The next year he and his wife tried to donate them to a
temple, but the donation got caught in India's infamous red
tape. Driving home from the temple, he examined the black
lumps for the first time. He wondered aloud whether they
might contain gold. His wife, Indumathi, reacted with horror.
She said it would be sacrilege to melt them down and insisted
they be donated to another temple as soon as possible.
   But Mr. Vidyaraj had different plans. One day, he
dispatched his wife, daughter and the family chauffeur to the
movies. He brought the lumps to the kitchen and went at one
of them with a soapy toothbrush. "Until then I thought it was
metal," he says. "I held it against the light. I saw specks
of red." Underneath the soot was a star ruby weighing 2,805
carats. The second lump was a double star ruby weighing 1,125
carats. The third was a double star sapphire of 2,470 carats
and the fourth lump, though not Guinness Book material, was a
ruby of 650 carats.
   The lawyer-turned-gem-owner took a crash course in
gemology and hauled the stones to a succession of local
jewelers for cleaning and cutting. He was security conscious
from the start, using different cutters for different stones
and never revealing the full extent of his find. He went
public with the smallest ruby, the Vidyaraj, named for
himself, in 1984. The Indumathi, which was named after his
wife, was revealed a few months later. In 1987 he displayed
the big ruby, the Rajaratna, which after cutting, weighed
2,475 carats, and then the sapphire. He had them certified
and made the Guinness Book, which he considers his highest
achievement, or, as he puts it, "this height of eminence. If
I was in another country I'd probably be honored."
   Mr. Vidyaraj has hidden the gems in bank vaults and won't
even disclose if they remain in India. No one is allowed near
them, including journalists. The gems, which are uninsured,
are cut in cabochon shape, producing convex round stones
that, to a layman, lack the visual appeal of the glittering,
faceted gems in jewelry shops. "To an untrained eye, they are
rough stones not meaning anything," says Mr. Vidyaraj. "But
they can't be faceted: These are not ordinary articles of
commerce. For a person well-versed in gemology they are
geological wonders because of their size." Gem experts say
the value of the stones depends largely on their color and
their purity, which need to be assessed. Mr. Vidyaraj
believes they are worth a fortune easily exceeding $500
million. "The person who wants to buy them would have to be
the richest person in the world," he says. "I am just an
ordinary person, maybe below ordinary, out of fashion. And
yet, if my collection is valued . . ."
   Why hasn't Mr. Vidyaraj tried to sell the stones? Because
he's terrified of a "web of intrigue." His wife is a content,
pious woman, he says, totally uninterested in money. He and
his family have lived in the same one-bedroom apartment for
decades. His rent: $5.80 per month. His son supports the
couple and pays Mr. Vidyaraj's medical bills. (Last year, he
almost died of complications from diabetes.) He's spent his
savings getting the gems cut and recognized by the outside
world.
   The government of India once considered issuing postage
stamps honoring Indians in the Guinness Book, but the plan
never came through. This disappointed Mr. Vidyaraj, who sees
his gems as a national treasure. He also considers himself
the top Indian in the Guinness Book. There are quite a few,
most of them holding records for such feats as the longest
after-dinner speech or consumption of the greatest quantity
of glass. "How much publicity does a guy get who grows the
longest fingernails?" Mr. Vidyaraj asks sarcastically
(apparently referring to Shridhar Chillal of Pune, who
stopped cutting his nails in 1952. The Guinness Book reports
that Mr. Chillal is having trouble sleeping with his
14.4-foot nails and is willing to clip and sell them to any
interested party).
   But Mr. Vidyaraj still talks big about his gems, peppering
his conversation with quotes from Shakespeare and Aldous
Huxley. "My intention is to donate this treasure to humanity.
In its humble way, it could help with the scourge of cancer,
AIDS or education. So large is my head, so big is my
thinking]"
   His is a strange and somewhat sad tale, but perhaps not as
unique as it sounds. The Guinness Book relates that the
largest natural intense fancy blue diamond was found in 1904.
It was exhibited in Paris in 1925 and then sold. The buyer
was an Indian maharajah. According to Guinness: "Its current
owners are unknown."
   ---
   Mr. Spaeth is a journalist and novelist living in New
Delhi.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
