ID: 126	RANK: 11	SCORE: 19.147894
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911002-0107
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911002-0107.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Change of Heart:
   Venezuela Now Woos
   Oil Firms It Booted
   In '70s Nationalization
   ---
   That Is Good News for U.S.;
   Many Countries Now Vie
   For Expertise and Capital
   ---
   President Perez's Turnaround
   ----
   By James Tanner
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
10/02/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<CO>
   AN BP BTN C.PDV ELF G.VEB I.ENI J.MIB P RD SC XON
</CO>
<MS>
ENERGY (ENE)
INDUSTRIAL (IDU)
</MS>
<IN>
OIL-DRILLING AND EXPLORATION (DRL)
DIVERSIFIED INDUSTRIAL (IDD)
HEAVY MACHINERY, FARM EQUIPMENT (MAC)
OIL-EQUIPMENT AND SERVICES (OIE)
OIL-INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)
PETROLEUM (PET)
</IN>
<NS>
JOINT VENTURES (JVN)
ORGANIZATION OF PETROLEUM EXPORTING COUNTRIES (OPC)
PETROLEUM MARKET (PET)
</NS>
<RE>
AFRICA (AF)
CALIFORNIA (CA)
EUROPE (EU)
FAR EAST (FE)
FRANCE (FR)
GERMANY (GE)
ILLINOIS (IL)
ITALY (ITA)
JAPAN (JA)
NIGERIA (NI)
NETHERLANDS (NL)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
OKLAHOMA (OK)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
SOUTH AMERICA (SM)
TEXAS (TX)
GREAT BRITAIN (UK)
UNITED STATES (US)
VENEZUELA (VE)
WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)
</RE>
<LP>
   CARACAS -- When he was president of Venezuela in the
mid-1970s, Carlos Andres Perez booted out foreign oil
companies. Now, president again, he is trying to get them
back.
   Mr. Perez makes no apology for the turnaround. Times and
nations have changed, he tells some visiting foreign
journalists over breakfast at the Miraflores Palace here.
"Remember that in the past, warships even came to Venezuela
to claim debts," he says.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Now, Mr. Perez envisions a major new role for foreign
companies -- especially multinationals such as Exxon Corp.
and Royal Dutch/Shell Group, with their technology and deep
pockets -- in a $40 billion-plus plan to speed development of
Venezuela's vast energy base.
   The heart of the expansion plan is a 40% leap in
oil-producing capacity, a net gain of a million barrels a
day, in just five years. "Our goal, and we stand firm on it,
is to produce 3.5 million barrels per day for the year 1995,"
says Mr. Perez.
   Mr. Perez's change of heart is part of a world-wide
pattern. From the Soviet Union to Peru, governments that once
shunned Western oil expertise and capital now are vying to
attract them. The turnaround is especially remarkable in
countries such as Venezuela, where oil is so closely tied to
nationalism. Even now, Mr. Perez may have some persuading to
do at home, where Venezuela's congress still must approve any
direct private roles in oil and gas projects.
   Venezuela's new direction holds particular significance
for the U.S. Venezuela helped found the Organization of
Petroleum Exporting Countries, but it long has been a leading
and reliable supplier of oil to the U.S., even during the
Arab oil embargo. Venezuela provides nearly one million
barrels a day, or nearly 7%, of the oil used by the U.S. That
ranks it third as a source of U.S. oil imports, behind only
Saudi Arabia and Canada.
   Among the handful of countries that still have spare
producing capacity -- basically the five founders of OPEC --
only Venezuela is outside the volatile Persian Gulf region.
The others are Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Iraq and Iran.
   Venezuela's oil reserves are respectable even by Middle
East standards. Its proven conventional crude reserves are
estimated at 60 billion barrels. That is 6% of the world's
total. Counting the Orinoco Belt's huge deposits of
extra-heavy oil, Venezuela's recoverable reserves reach an
astonishing 330 billion barrels. Orinoco's oil is not highly
prized because it is hard to pump, hard to refine and dirty
to burn, but all of those are problems that can best be fixed
with the technology of big oil companies.
   Michael Skol, the U.S. ambassador here, calls Venezuela
"the Saudi Arabia of the Western Hemisphere."
   To get the international oil companies back, however,
President Perez must convince them that Venezuela not only
offers fewer political risks but bigger economic rewards than
other oil lands. It is suddenly a buyers' market for these
oil companies, largely because of the producing nations'
urgent need for more revenue.
   It is generally assumed that oil prices will remain flat,
after adjustments for inflation, over the next several years.
With the oil exporters no longer able to bank on escalating
prices, they must produce more barrels to produce more
income. But their older oil fields are running dry. That
means new technology and substantially more capital are
needed to rejuvenate these fields and develop new ones.
   Even most members of the 13-nation OPEC are reaching for
capital and technical assistance from the oil companies. E.
John P. Browne, British Petroleum Co.'s chief executive for
exploration, estimates that OPEC needs investments of $150
billion to meet the demand for its oil over the next decade.
   BP already is going back into some OPEC countries where
former "concessions" had been expropriated or nationalized.
Only a few weeks ago, it resumed its search for oil in
Nigeria, where operations had been taken over in the 1970s in
a spillover of a political dispute between the Nigerian and
British governments over policies toward South Africa. "Our
breath has been taken away by the speed" in which producing
nations are putting out the welcome mat, Mr. Browne says.
   BP has begun technical studies in Venezuela. It also is
participating in a venture that developed and is marketing a
new boiler fuel -- Orimulsion -- in which water is mixed with
extra-heavy oil from Orinoco in a process that uses an
emulsifier. In addition to BP, four other oil companies have
signed "strategic association" agreements with Petroleos de
Venezuela, or PDVSA, the state-owned oil company, so far this
year. The agreements are designed to lead to possible
joint-venture megaprojects in which the foreign companies
will help build multibillion-dollar refineries in Venezuela
or abroad that can process Orinocotype oil.
   PDVSA, according to its president, Andres Sosa Pietri,
would own less than 50% of each of these associations, in
order to keep them attractive to foreign investors. Also, the
foreign firms may get a crack at exploring for the more
valuable conventional crudes. "The heavy oil is less and less
attractive in today's green-type environment, but if they
give us the linkage of exploring lighter crude areas, it will
change the picture considerably," says an official of one oil
company holding talks with PDVSA.
   Other companies already signed up for the "association"
agreements are Veba A.G. of Germany, Elf Aquitaine of France,
Ente Nazionale Idrocarburi of Italy and Amoco Corp. of the
U.S. Other multinationals and smaller oil companies are
sending technical teams to investigate.
   In addition, a subsidiary of PDVSA and units of Exxon,
Royal Dutch/Shell and Mitsubishi Corp. recently signed a
preliminary development agreement for the huge Cristobal
Colon project. This is a proposed $3 billion liquefied
natural gas project on Venezuela's Paria Peninsula, where
Christopher Columbus first landed in South America.
   The project is still in its early stages -- economic
studies must be done and the congress must approve it before
anything happens -- but Venezuelan oil officials see it as a
test case for the first direct hydrocarbon activity by
foreign firms since the nationalizations.
   President Perez cites Cristobal Colon as the best evidence
of what he calls the "new reality" in relations between
Venezuela and the foreign oil companies. "If need arises to
have objective proof," he says, "we can look at Shell and
Exxon, two nationalized oil companies in our country that
have renegotiated with us."
   In fact, international oil companies, most of them based
in the U.S., were the chief developers of Venezuela's oil
industry, which began when oil was discovered in 1922, and so
much flooded out that world oil prices crashed. But Venezuela
was a world leader in wringing better terms from the oil
companies and, by the 1960s, oil nationalism was beginning to
surge. In 1971, the Venezuelan congress decided that as oil
concessions ended, they wouldn't be renewed, but instead
would revert to the government.
   Although the first concession wasn't due to expire until
1983, the oil companies promptly began to slow their
investments. Venezuela's oil production plunged. That led to
anger toward the companies and set the stage for the 1976
nationalization. Meanwhile, the architect of the
nationalization, Mr. Perez -- then considered Latin America's
leading economic interventionist -- won a landslide
presidential victory.
   During his first term, from 1974 to 1979, the oil bounty
was plentiful. Oil prices were surging, thanks in part to the
1973-74 Arab oil embargo, when Venezuela pumped flat out. Oil
prices were expected to escalate forever. Waste was rampant.
Venezuela spent billions on superhighways and luxury imports.
But then, less than a decade later, the heady days were over.
Oil prices were plunging. Venezuela's market share began
drying up. By the time Mr. Perez became president again, in
1989, Venezuela was nearly bankrupt.
   To provide the harsh medicine Venezuela needed to recover,
Mr. Perez came into office the second time as a free marketer
rather than a free spender, ready to undo what he had wrought
earlier. He reduced tariffs, removed price controls, raised
interest rates and began a painful task of restructuring
through privatization and deregulation. Some banks already
have been privatized. Up for sale are the airline and
telephone companies.
   When Iraq invaded Kuwait last August, once again pointing
up the instability of Middle East oil, Mr. Perez and others
in Venezuela saw an opportunity to attract oil investment
anew.
   Fortunately, President Perez had not burned his bridges to
the oil companies. He had used a pragmatic approach to the
nationalization, which was handled in a businesslike way.
Generally, the oil companies' compensation was considered
fair, although many of the companies grumbled about the
terms.
   Now, a few major oil firms such as Phillips Petroleum Co.
are snubbing Venezuela's overtures. "We have priorities in
other parts of the world," says C. J. Silas, chairman of
Phillips. But one firm indication of the attractions
Venezuela holds for foreign oil companies came this summer
after PDVSA called for "expressions of interest" on a new
program to resurrect washed-out oil fields. That brought more
than 200 inquiries.
   Some of those fields were discovered as long ago as the
1920s and 1930s, and most have been closed for 30 years after
cumulative oil production of 1.4 billion barrels. One PDVSA
official calls them "squeezed oranges." Still, with their
reactivation by foreign firms, "we expect to increase
Venezuela's production by 150,000 to 200,000 barrels a day,"
says Celestino Armas, minister of energy and mines.
   One company interested in the fields is Benton Oil &amp; Gas
Co. of California, a small oil and gas producer. "That is our
niche: old fields that the majors leave behind which still
have enough oil and gas that a company like ours can make a
profit," says Clancy Cottman, a Benton vice president. Also,
he says, Venezuela is a stable country with good relations
with the U.S. and very large oil and gas reserves. "If you
want to be a player there," he says, "it might do you well to
participate" in the marginal fields program.
   In addition, many oil people point out that Venezuela has
the infrastructure that oil companies need -- the roads to
get their rigs in and the pipelines to get the oil out. It
also has a large number of refineries, both at home and in
Europe and the U.S. And, in Petroleos de Venezuela, it has
perhaps the world's most highly regarded and efficient
state-owned oil company.
   Before nationalization, the oil companies were largely
staffed by Venezuelans, and by the time of the
nationalization some 95% of all the employees in the oil
industry -- including many in top management -- were
Venezuelan. As a result, the successor companies were run
essentially as they had been before the nationalization, with
the same people but with a new owner, the Venezuelan
government.
   Since nationalization, PDVSA has tripled Venezuela's
reserves with new finds. Its oil sales now total more than
$14 billion a year. A recent Salomon Brothers report called
PDVSA "the fourth-largest oil conglomerate in the world."
   Oil companies still have some concerns about Venezuela's
internal politics. Bringing in foreign companies remains a
highly charged issue, and the policy reversals of Mr. Perez
aren't being welcomed wholeheartedly in Venezuela. There were
riots when gasoline prices were raised soon after he took
office. Subsidized gasoline prices, still dirt cheap by the
standards of most other countries, continue to increase, but
gradually.
   In addition, there is a hot debate over whether oil policy
should be set by the oil industry or the government. PDVSA's
president, Mr. Sosa Pietri, says the government is just a
shareholder in the industry and should limit its role to
supervision of the budget at the annual meeting. Mr. Armas,
the oil minister, sees it differently. "The ministry is not
the manager of the {oil} industry, but the controller who
sets the policy," he says.
   Foreign companies are watching. "The politics casts a
little fresh doubt on the Venezuelan deals," says an official
of one major oil company, "but everything wouldn't crater if
Sosa Pietri lost his job tomorrow."
   Mr. Perez will likely have the last word. He appointed
both men. "There is no dispute," he says.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
