ID: 126	RANK: 78	SCORE: 9.834146
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910506-0008
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910506-0008.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Venezuela Will Cut Oil Output if OPEC
   Sets New Quotas, President Perez Says
   ----
   By James Tanner
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
05/06/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A9
</SO>
<CO>
   AN C.PDV G.VEB
</CO>
<MS>
ENERGY (ENE)
</MS>
<IN>
OIL, INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)
PETROLEUM (PET)
</IN>
<NS>
PETROLEUM MARKET (PET)
</NS>
<RE>
GERMANY (GE)
ILLINOIS (IL)
VENEZUELA (VE)
</RE>
<LP>
   HOUSTON -- Venezuela will cut back oil output if OPEC sets
new quotas but still plans to go ahead with a major expansion
of its production capacity, President Carlos Andres Perez
said.
   In an interview, the president also said he welcomes
investments by foreign oil companies in Venezuela's petroleum
industry -- but in "downstream" joint ventures such as
refineries and petrochemical plants. Except for some marginal
fields being offered to bidders for redevelopment, he ruled
out any direct stakes by foreign companies in Venezuela's
crude oil production.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "We cannot have private exploitation because the law
prohibits it," said Mr. Perez, who was in his first term as
president in 1976, when Venezuela's oil industry was
nationalized. He was in Houston over the weekend to address
the Greater Houston Partnership's world trade division after
meeting President Bush Friday in Washington.
   It was at the urging of the Bush administration in August
that Venezuela, a major supplier of petroleum to the U.S. for
many decades, began to expand rapidly its production capacity
to help replace Iraqi and Kuwaiti crudes lost to world
markets as a result of the Persian Gulf crisis. Saudi Arabia,
the United Arab Emirates and Venezuela produced enough
additional oil to enable the Organization of Petroleum
Exporting Countries to fill the gap.
   Also, each country accelerated plans to expand capacity.
The Perez administration set Venezuela's 1995 target at 3.5
million barrels, one million barrels a day higher than
current capacity. But there has been some doubt the three
OPEC members would be willing to reduce their production
after the Gulf crisis ended.
   In the interview, however, President Perez made clear that
Venezuela would be willing to reduce production if necessary.
"There is no problem in returning to the quotas," he said.
"We have foreseen this," he added, noting that Venezuela has
based its 1991 budget on production of 1.9 million barrels a
day, its OPEC quota before the Gulf crisis, and a
$16-a-barrel oil price.
   Currently OPEC's oil prices, which lag behind those in the
U.S. by around $2 a barrel, average about $18 a barrel. Mr.
Perez said production is slightly more than 2.2 million
barrels a day, down some 300,000 barrels a day from maximum
capacity.
   But Mr. Perez believes OPEC's quotas ultimately will
disappear. "Our view of the future oil market is that there
won't be any surplus of supply," he said. "What is
important," he added, "is that we don't want to push prices
up" by producing too little.
   Still, Mr. Perez indicated that the price of oil should be
slightly higher if Petroleos de Venezuela, the national oil
company, is to meet its capacity goal at an estimated cost of
$8 billion. "Right now," he said, "about $20 to $25 is a good
price range." He didn't specify whether he was referring to
Venezuelan crudes.
   The 1976 nationalization gives Petroleos de Venezuela a
monopoly on the nation's oil resources but permits some
private-sector participation in special cases as long as
state control continues. An example is the offering of some
50 marginal fields where redevelopment would be financed and
operated by outside companies but under the jurisdiction of
Petroleos de Venezuela. Many of these fields have been closed
for several years.
   Mr. Perez said he recently appointed a special commission
"for an in-depth study" of Venezuela's oil policies. Also, he
said his administration is studying new ways of using future
sales of oil to finance some projects. And he cited several
joint ventures that are being negotiated with foreign
companies, such as a massive natural gas development and
refining projects in Venezuela.
   Venezuela has been a leader among OPEC nations in buying
into refining ventures abroad to ensure foreign markets for
its crude oil. But now, Mr. Perez said, the emphasis will be
on putting new refining joint ventures in Venezuela to
provide added value there for its oil industry. A letter of
intent has been signed with Germany's Veba AG for one
Venezuelan refining joint venture, and Mr. Perez said
Venezuela is going to sign another with Amoco Corp.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
