ID: 126	RANK: 87	SCORE: 9.558517

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-56375 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drlat085_t_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-LAT-94-085 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  28 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Venezuela </F>
<H3> <TI>   Foreign Minister Discusses General Issues </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Foreign Minister Discusses General Issues </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   PA0205013894 Caracas Venevision Television Network in 
Spanish 1030 GMT 28 Apr 94 </F>

<F P=103> PA0205013894 </F>
<F P=104>  Caracas Venevision Television Network </F>
<F P=105>  Spanish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Foreign Minister Miguel Angel Burelli Rivas </F>
by Carlos Fernandez, host of the "24 Hours" program, in the 
television network's studio in Caracas--live] 
  [Text] [Fernandez] We are going to be talking with Foreign 
Minister Miguel Angel Burelli Rivas. We will also talk later 
with Pedro Paris Montesinos, Democratic Action president, and 
Aldemaro Romero. Let's begin with Foreign Minister Miguel Angel 
Burelli Rivas. 
  There are several topics of current international interest, 
which, of course, have repercussions in our country. I would 
like to talk first about an important meeting scheduled for 6 
May. President Rafael Caldera will be meeting with Colombian 
President Cesar Gaviria, who will be the next OAS secretary 
general, during that meeting. We do not know if there is a 
previously established agenda or if they are going to be talking 
about general topics. I believe that due to the close relations 
between Colombia and Venezuela, a contact between two presidents 
is always important. Welcome, Foreign Minister Miguel Angel 
Burelli Rivas. Let's talk about those details. 
  [Burelli] We invited President Cesar Gaviria to a 6 May 
meeting with our president in Caracas. It will be a working 
meeting exclusively. It will only take place on 6 May. President 
Gaviria will be coming with his entire cabinet. 
  [Fernandez] That is very good. 
  [Burelli] Fourteen ministers will be coming; their 14 
Venezuelan counterparts will also be present. 
  [Fernandez] Have there been recent previous meetings between 
Colombia and Venezuela in which such a large delegation 
participated? 
  [Burelli] Not of this size. The first experience with these 
types of meetings was when I was ambassador to Colombia with 
President-elect Carlos Lleras and Venezuelan President Raul 
Leoni. I brought President-elect Lleras over with some of the 
individuals that were to become his ministers. We held a very 
important and pleasant meeting with them at La Casona 
[presidential residence], but we have never held such a massive 
meeting before. 
  [Fernandez] This type of meeting is important, because, as 
we 
all know, the problems between Colombia and Venezuela are not 
strictly diplomatic in nature. These problems are not limited 
only to the discussions of the delimitation of maritime areas. 
It is a succession of problems and difficulties that both 
countries must face. 
  [Burelli] That is true. We are going to hold bilateral and 
multilateral talks. We are going to talk about all divine and 
human topics, you may say. I want to speak quite frankly. The 
topic of vehicle theft, for example, is apparently a commonplace 
one; the problem of delimitation is a prominent one. Both are 
the alpha and the omega of a long list of well-known topics. 
What we need to do is put the topics in order. Both foreign 
ministers, both defense ministers, and both ministers in charge 
of border affairs will meet in San Cristobal on 29 April to talk 
about the agenda both presidents will discuss. 
  [Fernandez] What fundamental aspects could result from a 
meeting of this type when Gaviria's government is about to turn 
over power? 
  [Burelli] The same results that could be achieved with a new 
Colombian Government. Colombia has a coherent and continuous 
international policy. 
  [Fernandez] That has not been our case. 
  [Burelli] Our international policy is starting to be 
coherent 
and continuous. I would say Venezuela's international policy is 
not the best, but it has not been the worst either. We have lost 
the things we have lost due to Venezuelan policy. 
  [Fernandez] If we look at the past, we realize many of the 
things we have lost have been our responsibility. 
  [Burelli] True. 
  [Fernandez] What fundamental aspects do you think will be 
discussed in this open dialogue between Presidents Rafael 
Caldera and Cesar Gaviria and the members of both cabinets? 
  [Burelli] I would say the fundamental topics are: the 
delimitation of river basins. It is something that is extremely 
important for us, because, as you know, Venezuela is a country 
of river mouths. Venezuela's river sources are located in 
Colombia. The source of the Orinoco River is in Colombia. 
  [Fernandez] That is so important that many analysts of the 
bilateral situation between Colombia and Venezuela are saying 
today the delimitation of maritime areas is less important than 
the delimitation of river basins. 
  [Burelli] Correct. That is many people's opinion. The main 
river of Maracaibo Lake is the Catatumbo River, the source of 
which is in Colombia. You can see the seriousness and importance 
of this topic. We must also talk about the integration that is 
taking place between the two countries, integration which is not 
the greatest but is certainly the most intense from Alaska to 
Patagonia. 
  Shortly, we are going to be trading products worth an 
estimated 2 billion [currency unspecified]. It has allowed 
Venezuelan and Colombian industries to successfully market their 
products to other countries. Colombia is a country that has a 
very important industrial base. It has the most important 
thing--an infinite number of mini-industries or family 
industries. That constitutes a country's actual wealth. We have 
to follow that model with our handicrafts industry and with 
family-type industry in the production of goods that can be 
exported, something Venezuela has already been doing for the 
past few years. That will give us a true wealth. 
  [Fernandez] Now that you are broaching the economic topic, a 
month and a half ago spokesmen of various Colombian industries, 
banks, and small- and medium-size industries talked about trade 
relations between our two countries. They have many fears, and 
Colombian newspapers, EL TIEMPO, EL ESPECTADOR, and others, have 
great doubts and questions about our country's economic future. 
They, of course, link it to the trade relations that exist 
between our two nations. 
  [Burelli] Some journalists are very pessimistic about what 
is 
going to happen here. I have already met with some Colombian 
journalists who want to see a catastrophe in relations with 
Venezuela. It does not happen only with the Colombians. There is 
a succession of international spokesmen who are betting 
something terrible will happen here; that will not occur. 
Venezuela is in no worse shape than any other country of the 
world. In this marvelous, gigantic world of disorder in which we 
live Venezuela is not the worst of all countries. Look at 
Europe, Asia, and Africa, and you will find huge dramas. 
  [Fernandez] That should not be a consolation for us. 
  [Burelli] It should not be a consolation, but it should 
serve 
as an example. In other countries with less self-criticism than 
we have here, they are rebuilding their countries. It is each 
country's obligation to put its pieces back together after the 
collapse of the political empires dispersed them. 
  [Fernandez] Could these fears mentioned in the Colombian 
media, which pick up statements by business association and 
private sector spokesmen, be discussed in one way or the other 
within this open agenda for the 6 May meeting? 
  [Burelli] Spokesmen from all sectors will be coming here. We 
are going to invite all sectors of Venezuela to meet them, even 
though many of them already know each other. The relationship 
between Colombia and Venzuela is impressive. It is like a 
discovery. Venezuelans suddenly found out that Colombia is a 
very important country with which to do business and that they 
have to refine their capabilities of negotiation, because 
Colombians already have that capability. Colombians have 
discovered this is a country that has a great capability for 
consumption, where many of its products can be sold. If we, as a 
government, would like to interrupt this integration, we could 
not do it. Our integration has reached a desirable point. It has 
reached the private individual; it has reached a point where 
governments and politicians are practically no longer needed. 
  [Fernandez] Concerning those pessimists who insist on 
disrupting the possibility of an expansion of trade relations 
between the two countries, could they be successful? 
  [Burelli] Absolutely not. This trade relationship is no 
longer in the hands of any comptroller. Bankers, industrialists, 
businessmen, and technological experts are the ones who are 
dealing among themselves. When integration began the enemies of 
the politicians, the businessmen, thought we the politicians 
would ruin their domestic market. The businessmen are now doing 
all the work and have forgotten about the politicians; that is 
important for integration. 
  [Fernandez] That is a positive angle despite the ups and 
downs; there are conflictive situations, however. We have 
already talked about the river basins. On various occasions the 
Venezuelan Government and the Foreign Ministry have set clear 
guidelines on certain things. We do not know if Colombia has 
been reciprocal regarding these things. If we look at the other 
border problems we are going to find topics that I imagine will 
be discussed in depth. 
  [Burelli] Any problem between neighbors are the problems of 
two neighbors. I used to say we do not have any problem with 
Finland. As relations with Colombia intensify, our problems will 
intensify, but that is why the governments and the foreign 
ministries are there, to solve these kinds of problems. All 
ties, all associations, and all communities produce problems of 
friction and misunderstanding. 
  The Andean Integration Court will soon begin operations; it 
will settle cases. Businessmen need a court to which to go when 
there is a disagreement between them. The European Court, for 
example, has an impressive amount of work, because every time a 
businessman or an industrialist fails to honor a contract they 
resort to this court. We have the Andean Court in Quito, but it 
does little work, because we do not have the culture to resort 
to this court. The integration that we see as impressive with 
Colombia is beginning to occur between Colombia and Ecuador. The 
volume of trade will go from 300 million to 800 million 
[currency unspecified] between Colombia, which has 32 million 
people, and Ecuador, a much smaller country. Tomorrow it will be 
between Ecuador and Peru and then between Peru and Colombia. 
Little by little these things will be achieved. As integration 
intensifies there will be more cases to settle at the Andean 
Court. 
  [Fernandez] That is very important. Now, by contrast, those 
pessimistic voices, those that are maintaining extreme and 
radical positions in Colombia as well as those here in Venezuela 
are always trying to create differences between both countries. 
An example of this is a recent article by former Colombian 
Foreign Minister Carlos Lemos Simmonds who cited a report by an 
EL TIEMPO correspondent here who had interviewed you, 
[Environment and Natural Renewable Resources] Minister Perez 
Lecuna, and [Special] Minister Pompeyo Marquez. Lemos Simmonds 
maintains radical and extreme positions toward Venezuela, and in 
the end he recommended what he seems to like: war, the 
possibility of a confrontation. 
  How does the Venezuelan Foreign Ministry view this kind of 
position, because Mr. Lemos Simmonds bears some weight in 
Colombia? 
  [Burelli] He served as foreign minister. 
  [Fernandez] Correct. 
  [Burelli] He is a good writer, but we view his statements 
naturally. These are the characteristics and freedoms of 
democracy. We view these things.... 
  [Fernandez, interrupting] Such statements are perhaps 
responsible for instigating Colombian military officers, much 
the same way some extremists brew ideas among Venezuelan 
officers. 
  [Burelli] We have had many Lemos Simmondses here, and we 
believe this is normal. We consider this kind of attitude an 
encouragement to our activity. They are not the ones, though, 
who impose their views. These gentlemen, given they no longer go 
to war, are calling for war. It is very easy to call for war 
when one does not have to go to war. 
  [Fernandez] Another important detail of these articles is 
the 
fact the nomination for OAS secretary general is addressed 
again. They suggest Venezuela will now assume a radical position 
or attitude, and President Caldera's government maintains a 
different position and it will be more belligerent; in sum, the 
trumpets of disaster are sounding once more. 
  [Burelli] You have seen our reaction. I will meet tomorrow 
with the Colombian foreign minister, with whom I traveled for 
six hours to Sao Paulo recently. About 12 generals of Colombia's 
general staff are coming to meet with an equal number of 
Venezuelan officers, including the defense minister, to define 
the agenda tomorrow. You have seen the preparations for the 
reception we will give President Gaviria here and how we have 
launched an offensive of friendship. This is what corresponds to 
countries with so many and important common interests. 
  [Fernandez] That is very important. A short while ago you 
said there were certain foreign interests abroad trying to sell 
a more complex and difficult image than the one we actually 
have. There was, at some point, talk of international campaigns 
against our country. I would like to hear your comments on this 
important topic, an ever present one, because comments and 
observations continue among Venezuelan public opinion. This has 
had some repercussions and has caused a reaction among people's 
opinion. What does the Foreign Ministry make of all these 
campaigns? Who is behind the campaigns? 
  [Burelli] Basically, there are economic interests behind 
these campaigns. Competition among certain Venezuelan products 
that are entering the markets of industrialized nations has 
generated a marked reaction from environmental agencies, 
violated human rights, when it is simply a matter of commercial 
competition. 
  In the United States, for instance, Citgo gas stations, many 
in number, have prompted the opposing reaction of others. They 
have claimed our gasoline needs to be reformulated, because it 
causes pollution, but it is not inferior to U.S. gasoline. This 
scheme is invented. Industrialized countries are trying to 
replace former protectionism, which must come down as a result 
of the universal implementation of GATT. They are simply 
inventing something new to close the doors on importation of 
other products. 
  [Fernandez] By the way, did Venezuela withdraw its suit 
before GATT on the gasoline issue? 
  [Burelli] It is still pending a resolution. [Words 
indistinct] do not think it will be necessary, because the 
United States has maintained an attitude of understanding in the 
last few days, but we could use this right. There are a series 
of arguments, such as the case of tuna and the case of 
Orimulsion [boiler fuel made from heavy oil] which caused [words 
indistinct] in Europe, where we finally made it. Our products 
had been denied access to the European Union, because we were 
not a drug-producing country and because we had a high per 
capita income. 
  In the Sao Paulo meeting last week, I had the pleasure of 
receiving from the EU the promise Venezuela will be included in 
the Andean tariff preference. This will open the European market 
for us. Indeed, we also obtained a 2-percent share of the EU's 
banana market. We are not yet a banana-producing country, and 
the collapse of Banco Latino had a negative impact on big banana 
crops in the southern Lake Maracaibo area with which we hoped to 
meet our quota, but we must now work to correct the situation. 
This will allow us to begin exporting and to take advantage of 
our market share, which we could lose if we fail to meet it. 
  [Fernandez] Now Dr. Burelli, some say there are Venezuelans 
abroad who have become spokespersons for these international 
campaigns. Some letters written by former ministers in the 
Carlos Andres Perez administration were published this weekend 
denying that possibility. Based on what the Venezuelan Foreign 
Ministry knows, is that assertion true? 
  [Burelli] Not really. There is the idea that some..... 
[pauses] I think they are as patriotic as you and I. 
  [Fernandez] But we hear everyday--perhaps you hear it more 
than I do--that many Venezuelans abroad like to speak ill of 
their country. That is very disappointing. In the specific cases 
of people who have held important positions, the Foreign 
Ministry is obligated to investigate this situation, but so far 
nothing has been done. 
  [Burelli] No, we know what is being said abroad about 
Venezuela. We receive reports from all our missions, and we have 
not heard of any former ministers speaking ill of our country. 
That is mere speculation. We don't think it is significant if a 
Venezuelan residing abroad, a Venezuelan without access to 
organizations or media sources, criticizes the country. 
  We have a bad image abroad largely because of what we 
project 
from here, from what is seen from here. 
  I have seen live Venezuelan television newscasts abroad in 
which 17 out of 17 news stories broadcast portrayed a bad image 
of Venezuela. These reports were on local issues that are of no 
interest abroad. Those who prepare the newscasts aired abroad 
must keep in mind that their audiences are not living in Caracas 
slums or in the countryside but in the world, where we are 
sending a discouraging message. 
  What good does it do for the Foreign Ministry and the 
Venezuelan Government to try to improve Venezuela's image abroad 
to bring investors by saying that this country now has legal 
security with clear rules if the television stations, with 
larger audiences.... 
  [Fernandez, interrupting] The image of a corrupt country is 
projected abroad. Indeed, there are reasons to sell the idea 
that this country has had corrupt governments in the past. 
  [Burelli] Well, that is something different. The daily 
insecurity is what is projected abroad. It is overstated as if 
there was nothing good in the country, and there are many 
positive things in the country. 
  [Fernandez] Certainly. Many television reporters only send 
the worst news abroad and convey the idea that we are crumbling. 
  [Burelli] Let's be frank. Our own television stations do not 
emphasize the message of our country's positive, noble aspects. 
  [Fernandez] Well, we cannot deny the truth. 
  [Burelli] But this kind of news reporting cannot continue 
indefinitely. 
  [Fernandez] Of course. We now have some viewer questions for 
Dr. Miguel Angel Burelli Rivas. One viewer from Los Naranjos 
asks: What is your opinion--this is another matter, but it is 
important to address anyway--of the personnel working at the 
Foreign Ministry, who, according to your statements to the 
media, seem to be underqualified? 
  [Burelli] The problem is that there are too many employees, 
among whom there are some good employees. I am trying to 
identify those who are inefficient so I can get rid of them. 
  [Fernandez] We have another call. Our numbers are 793-1845 
and 793-1634. When will the Foreign Ministry help raise the 
self-esteem of Venezuelans? 
  [Burelli] The Foreign Ministry is working to raise the 
self-esteem of Venezuelans, not just now but always. Our 
diplomats have done their share in an unassuming way, and their 
task has been made more complex by the preconceived notion that 
the Foreign Ministry is useless. I have said before that the 
important causes Venezuela has lost were not lost because of the 
Foreign Ministry. 
  [Fernandez] From Valle Abajo--this is a question that would 
have to be answered by other authorities, not the Foreign 
Ministry--a viewer asks: The Peruvian Consulate has not 
delivered passports for the last four months. Could you take 
some action? Can you speak to the Peruvian consul in this 
country? 
  [Burelli] That is not my responsibility. 
  [Fernandez] From Valencia, a viewer asks: When will a 
selective policy of immigration be implemented in Venezuela? 
  [Burelli] It is currently under way. Commissioner (Jans 
Norman) is in Asia right now setting quotas for the number of 
emigrants we can receive. He is working so all state governors 
can offer facilities to install selected groups of emigrants and 
their families in the interior. 
  [Fernandez] [Words indistinct] what we Venezuelans need are 
foreign ministers who do not allow the constant theft of our 
land. 
  [Burelli] No foreign minister allows it; no Foreign Ministry 
has allowed it. The Foreign Ministry won the Orinoco River for 
Venezuela in 1833 with 300,000 km east, or rather west of the 
Orinoco River with half of Guajira. Congress refused to ratify 
the treaty just to prevent Santos Michelena, who was the noble 
negotiator, from becoming president based that success. That was 
when we first began to lose Venezuelan territory. We have to 
know history. 
  [Fernandez] The political ineptness of the last century is 
responsible for the controversy in which we are immersed with 
Colombia. The last question has to do with the Curacao Branch of 
Banco Latino. Legislators Walter Marquez and William Davila 
Barrios were here yesterday and urged the Foreign Ministry to 
intervene because this is a state to state problem. 
  [Burelli] I am very fond of Walter Marquez, and his actions 
have our full support. He knows it. His is a very noble, 
selfless task with a great spirit. We must look at the matter, 
however, with a cooler head. We have followed all the steps. The 
Netherlands has its laws; banks are autonomous in Curacao. We 
must always keep in mind that the Netherlands is the second 
largest investor in Venezuela after the United States. It is the 
only country that never lost faith in our capabilities. We are 
following the procedures as they should be followed. We told the 
Curacao Central Bank president that he can hold a news 
conference at Foreign Ministry to explain how Banco Latino works 
in Curacao, the operations it has conducted, and the measures to 
be taken. 
  [Fernandez] Tomorrow's guest on this program will be the 
president of the Central Bank of the Netherlands Antilles. 
  [Burelli] That is great. I think that is great. 
  [Fernandez] He is coming from Curacao. Depositors have 
complained of the humiliation they suffered in Curacao. 
Lawmakers said they were not treated well. We will discuss all 
those things. At some point there was mistrust, or some said 
there was an armed operation around the assembly. 
  [Burelli] I watched that program yesterday morning, and I 
asked the consul in Curacao to file a report. As a matter of 
fact, I found this to be rather odd and worrisome. 
  [Fernandez] Will the Venezuelan Foreign Ministry intervene 
in 
this case? 
  [Burelli] It will intervene by asking our authorities to 
inform us of all the investigations that legislators like 
Marquez and Davila Barrios are conducting. From a legal 
standpoint, the Venezuelan Foreign Ministry intervenes when a 
body, a court, or the entity with jurisdiction officially asks 
us to act. We cannot step in except for providing logistical 
support or the assistance of our consul and ambassador to 
conduct an investigation and expedite all the necessary 
proceedings. Legally, we cannot act and order an extradition or 
file a request before a foreign court unless we are asked to do 
so by the Venezuelan legal system. 
  [Fernandez] We thank Foreign Minister Miguel Angel Burelli 
Rivas for being with us on "24 Hours" and you for your telephone 
calls. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
