ID: 289	RANK: 78	SCORE: 13.800124

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-34167 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drlat116_r_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-LAT-94-116 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Peru </F>
<H3> <TI>   Military Operation in Huallaga Evaluated </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Military Operation in Huallaga Evaluated </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   PY1506201294 Lima LA REPUBLICA in Spanish 3 Jun 94 pp 19-21 </F>
<F P=103> PY1506201294 </F>
<F P=104>  Lima LA REPUBLICA </F>
<F P=105>  Spanish </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Juan F. De La Puente Mejia] </F>
  [Text] "Operation Aries" has, among other things, proved 
that Upper Huallaga some months ago became the last great 
stronghold of the Shining Path [SL] and that, as in most of the 
Peruvian jungle, it is still too early to talk about a "post-SL 
era." 
  One of the first lessons learned from the events in April is 
that the current antisubversive strategy must be reviewed. The 
strategy that has been most effective--which weakened the 
peoples' support for the SL and prevented its infiltration in 
the towns--was devised by General Arciniega between 1989 and 
1990. This strategy simultaneously sought to militarily defeat 
the terrorists and to restore the confidence of the people in 
the state. This strategy recovered the initiative, give military 
actions a bit of an edge, and thus changed the course of the 
war; it gave up the idea of repressing coca plantations and 
isolating the civilian population--especially coca growing 
peasants--from the SL; it began assistance programs and 
encouraged coca growers and the inhabitants of Uchiza and 
Tocache to become organized. 
  The strategy used throughout "Operation Aries," seems to be 
a 
more schematic and less creative application of the strategy 
that has been implemented--with the exception of Arciniega's 
time--nationwide. Its objectives seem to be exclusively military 
and nonpolitical, leaving little room for civilians, with the 
exception of their participation in the assistance programs. The 
people do not understand why security forces appear one time 
with foodstuffs and medical assistance and another time on an 
operation that violates their rights. 
  Since the start of terrorist actions in Upper Huallaga, the 
antiterrorist struggle has overlooked the fact that this 
territory is substantially different to that in other emergency 
zones. Violence continues in Upper Huallaga--unlike in the 
mountains and in coastal regions--due to endemic poverty, the 
concentration of wealth, and the lack of development. The 
peoples' need for protection from abuse by drug traffickers and 
the struggle against a government obsessed with eradicating coca 
plantations helped the Shining Path to grow strong. What the SL 
saw as "rebellion," the people interpreted as "protection." 
  Likewise, it would be interesting to assess the results of a 
military operation that was described as an orderly offensive 
when in truth it was a counteroffensive. 
  It was obvious, and reported in various forms, that during 
the past few months the SL has been engaged in a desperate 
offensive and a geographic relocation, a fact that was not 
acknowledged or wrongly assessed by the military command of the 
zone. Following its most recent nationwide meeting--last 
February--the SL began a nationwide offensive on 1 April with 
its greatest expectations centered in Upper Huallaga. 
  The same sources stated that between 1 and 6 April the Armed 
and Police Forces lost many agents due to SL ambushes, 
commenting that "Operation Aries" was a hasty and poorly planned 
action. This explains why the SL "Red Sea" column easily eluded 
the military barrier, why no significant arrests took place at 
the theater of operations, and why the military command made the 
great mistake of holding the International Red Cross 
Organization responsible for the terrorists' escape. 
  This is explained in the fact that "Operation Aries" had 
purely military objectives. 
  The following factors were not taken into account when the 
Cuchara, Primavera, and Yanajanca valley's were surrounded and 
when the towns scattered throughout the 80,000 hectares were 
bombed (with rocket fire): 
  First, that territory has for a long time rejected the SL 
units and settlers have refused to cooperate with them. Second, 
that territory has been covered by the "Red Sea" column which 
came to intimidate the settlers. Third, that territory is of 
political interest to the government and the other institutions 
that are carrying out projects to replace coca. It is also the 
place where Enaco [National Coca Enterprise] is campaigning to 
legalize the illegal coca plantations, and these initiatives 
require the confidence and cooperation of the civilian 
population for their success. 
  The second problem that transcends the defeat of the SL is 
the endemic lack of democratic institutions, and the profound 
economic, and social backwardness of the zone. The people blame 
successive governments for the lack of democracy and 
development, these governments promised great projects but did 
not carry them out and only remember the existence of the zone 
every time there is an antidrug or an antisubversive operation. 
The people recognize, however, that small progress to combat the 
endemic evils of the region have been made since 1990. 
  It would be a mistake, therefore, to fail to appreciate the 
few civilians who live in Upper Huallaga and to use them 
exclusively to form peasant defense patrols. An antisubversive 
strategy that destroys what little government and democracy 
there is there could achieve a military victory in the 
short-term but it would leave the next governments with their 
hands tied when they try to manage that region which is part of 
the large Peruvian jungle of which it is said a great deal of 
our future depends. It is necessary to consider that in the 
post-SL era, the lack of a development model to successfully 
replace the drug trafficking economy with the state economy will 
again be a reason for confrontation and demand. It would be 
risky if the legacy of the Armed Forces amounts to nothing more 
than simply arming peasant defense patrols. 
  To give an example of the current situation of the towns and 
cities of Upper Huallaga, we should look at Uchiza and Tocache, 
which were the magic cities of the past and always full of life. 
Today they have electricity for just a few hours a day, their 
streets are not paved, and health care and education are poor. 
Until a few years ago, the association of parents in high 
schools gave "allowances" of food and housing to graduated 
teachers who agreed to stay in the zone despite the dangers. 
  Aucayacu is not connected to the Mantaro Electrical Plant, 
it 
has thermal equipment like Uchiza and Tocache. Its streets are 
not paved and the highway to Tingo Maria, which was once paved, 
is unrecognizable--the 300 or so ditches opened by the SL some 
years ago have been filled but not paved. 
  Tingo Maria is the worst case of neglect. Even though it is 
the capital of the province, the state has invested very little 
in this town where 50 percent of the shantytowns have no 
electricity and 30 percent of its streets are not paved. 
  Following the heated municipal elections which many believe 
were won by Ramon Julca, the people had great hopes of Mayor 
Loyseth Reategui Lopez's administration. But Tingo Maria 
inhabitants were disappointed in less than a year. It turns out 
that the worst municipal administration in Peruvian history has 
spurned the people and handed over all its power to the 
military. Reategui's recent statements justifying cases of abuse 
and denying the violation of human rights and dubious actions by 
her administration prompted the creation a few days ago of the 
Leoncio Prado Defense and Development Front, headed by Guanilo 
Lopez. 
  The Front has protested over the signing of a huge contract 
between the Fonavi [National Housing Fund] and Tecnicos 
Ejecutores S.A. The deal is endorsed by Reategui and will 
supposedly provide electricity to the shantytowns. The funny 
thing is that, after the contract was announced, it became 
apparent that the shantytowns will benefit least while Tingo 
Maria, which already has nine electricity supply lines, will be 
further electrified at a very high cost that will be paid by its 
neighbors. 
  Guanilo Lopez has warned of a possible fraud and pointed out 
that while the electrification of the rest of the country is 
funded by the Treasury through Foncodes [National Compensation 
and Social Development Fund] or the Ministry of the Presidency, 
in Tingo Maria--a town plagued by poverty and fear--development 
costs the earth. Lopez stated that this contract sounds even 
more suspicious when one considers that another enterprise, 
Orion S.A., quoted for the same job for half the price. 
  One of the most vulnerable towns is Tingo Maria, due to the 
constant overflowing of the Huallaga River. It has not had the 
municipality's support to create a Civil Defense office. On the 
contrary. According to the Front, donations by the National 
Civil Defense following the floods early this year have 
disappeared. The list of irregularities also mentions the 
over-invoicing of the roof of the market place (by 100,000 
soles), the paving of airstrips, and the hiring of enterprises 
that belong to councilmen, which is prohibited under the penal 
code. 
  Nevertheless, the mayor continues on her controversial path 
and reacts to any complaint by recalling Huanuco's campaign to 
become annexed to Ucayali. Sectors of the local media maintain 
this would be even worse, that Ucayali will not worry about 
Tingo Maria if currently it does nothing about Aguaytia which is 
much nearer to Pucallpa. Many believe the only solution is for 
the government to take care of Tingo Maria. 
  The situation in rural areas is no better. Rural 
investments are limited and, despite some achievements by the 
Upper Huallaga Development Project (PEAH), the main objective 
has failed: to broaden the agricultural border. 
  The main problems facing agricultural development are the 
transfer of technology and the successful diversification toward 
the eradication of coca plantations. 
  But things are not that easy: Decades of coca plantations, 
which hardly require any technology, have created a mentality 
that prefers easy crops and despises technology. Despite its 
potential, the farming sector in Upper Huallaga uses less 
technology than anywhere else in the country. 
  The same occurs with the coca replacement. Although it has 
been proven that traditional crops (cocoa, corn, fruit, rice, 
and others) would be best to replace the coca plantations, most 
implemented projects tend to try other crops (silkworms, the 
luisa plant [small plant grown in Peru for medicinal purposes]) 
which are not working. Among the identified problems in the 
development of the rural sector are the lack of markets, 
technical assistance, and product promotion. 
  To meet Upper Huallaga's demands, the government would have 
to change its attitude toward that region. It has been proven 
that the replacement of coca plantations and neoliberalism are 
contradictory. 
  The SL began the year by consolidating a strategy it has 
been 
using for months. It involves the regular use, for the second 
time, of the corridor from Monzon Valley (in Upper Huallaga) to 
the northern mountain region in Huanuco Department and from 
there to the provinces east and south of Ancash; at the same 
time they moved their forces north, toward Lower Huallaga 
(Campanilla, Juanjui, Bellavista, and Picota, in San Martin 
Department) and east, toward Padre Abad Province (Ucayali 
Department). At the same time, its Huanuco Zone Committee was 
elaborating a plan that has clear objectives for Huanuco 
University and the shantytowns that surround this city. 
  This movement is the alleged result of undeniable facts: the 
SL's relationship with the rural population of Upper Huallaga is 
coming to an end and in many zones (for example the pockets near 
Aucayacu) it is openly rejected. Other factors include the SL's 
failed attempt to administer the coca economy, a substantial 
reduction in the rural population due to the crisis affecting 
the coca production, the shifting of the drug trade to the north 
of San Martin Department, the Central Jungle, and Madre de Dios, 
and the harsh blows by the Armed Forces over the past few years. 
  At the height of its power, members of the SL took over 
small coca producing peasant villages scattered throughout the 
Huallaga Valley where they imposed their law and their 
organization. They appointed delegates and established a "local 
force." They appointed those responsible for logistics, 
military, and political affairs; they issued rules and punished 
those who violated them. The town that had been "taken 
over"--more often than not with the consent of its 
inhabitants--was revisited several times and became an SL 
recruiting center. 
  It seems that the villages are now disavowing SL impositions 
and it looks like relations between SL and the civilian 
population are no longer cordial. The strict SL moral codes, 
which generally do not apply to SL members themselves, are no 
longer welcome. The so-called "local forces" and the 
"grass-roots forces" are experiencing a true crisis. 
  In this new stage, SL has decided to strengthen its 
so-called 
"main force," that is, the mobile columns that make up the 
People's Guerrilla Army (EGP). The most important of these 
(comprising 120 to 150 men) is the "Red Sea" battalion; another, 
comprising 60 to 70 men, operates in Pucayacu--a town near 
Aucayacu--where they killed four people, among them the 
president of the local Mothers Club and a Foncodes [National 
Compensation and Social Development Fund] promoter. On 17 and 18 
May, when an "armed stoppage" was staged, SL columns were 
spotted near the Padre Luyando district and between Crespo, 
Castillo, and Aucayacu. In spite of this, the "armed stoppage" 
was a failure. 
  This reversal could be fatal for the SL. By resorting to its 
columns, SL is entering a field it does not dominate, that of 
large-scale guerrilla warfare. So far, SL has preferred to 
perpetrate simple ambushes or bomb attacks, killing civilians or 
military personnel, and attacking towns that have no police or 
military protection. There have been very few instances of 
clashes over the past 14 years (the takeover of the Huamanga and 
Vilcashuaman jail; the attack on the Uchiza police post; and the 
attack on the Madre Mia military base in Upper Huallaga, among 
others). It is well-known that in its creed, SL puts heroism 
before military training; dedication before sophistication. To 
counter this disadvantage, the SL has been forced to violate one 
of the most sacred rules of "President Gonzalo" [top SL leader 
Abimael Guzman]: "Do not buy weapons, seize them from the enemy." 
  Everything indicates that the SL has become modernized in 
the 
Upper Huallaga area and now has sophisticated weapons; this is 
proven at the military command's press appearances. Until 
recently, we saw shotguns, booby traps, and handguns. Now they 
carry FAL [Light Automatic Rifles] and RPG [antitank grenades], 
Instalaza rockets, fragmentation grenades, etc. 
  This is not the only rule the SL members in Upper Huallaga 
are violating: Compared with their traditional ideological 
anachronisms, their current actions have no political meaning 
and they are acting more like bandits. An example of this is 
their incursion in Pucayacu on 14 May: The president of the 
local Mothers Club was killed "for accepting food assistance 
from imperialism" yet later...SL members carried off 3 metric 
tons of the same food supplies. 
  Stern nom de guerres alluding to the Maoist tradition have 
yielded to nicknames and aliases. Among these are "Chapulin," 
"Bigotes," "El Manco," "Yersi," "Napo," "Pepe," "Jeshuco," 
"Michel," "Anuje," "Taruca," "Chocolate," "Cucharita," "Popeye," 
etc. None of these would suggest to us Peruvian Maoist 
combatants. 
  Villagers have reported that one of them, "El Manco," who is 
believed to be the leader of the "Red Sea" column, is known for 
his blood-thirstiness with his victims. Many legends have been 
created about him. The most incredible removes him from the 
political world and places him in the world of black magic: 
Villagers say he made a pact with the devil who demanded one of 
his arms in exchange for immortality. This is why he remains 
unscathed in all the clashes. 
  Everything seems to indicate it will be hard for SL to 
relocate itself in other areas and to base its actions on its 
"main force." Moreover, it experienced a serious defeat in 
Huanuco over its plans for the "Hermilio Valdizan University. 
The arrests made in the last three months are believed to have 
seriously damaged the party and the "party organizations." 
[quotation marks as published] 
  Local experts have said these difficulties follow a 
slackening of internal discipline. For example, it has been 
reported that Huanuco SL members commemorated Mao's 100th 
anniversary on 26 December in the town of Vichayoto (15 km from 
Huanuco) with such a huge party that the following day scheduled 
operations had to be canceled: The local main square was not 
taken over. This resulted in the sparing of the lives of Mayor 
Luzmila Temple, local regional government president Lucia 
Shinsato, and Provincial Prosecutor Carlos Tucato, who were 
supposed to have been assassinated. 
  In Huanuco, arrests have followed the detention of German 
Campos Mallqui. He was arrested in January and numerous 
documents were seized from him. His delayed repentance resulted 
in the arrest of others, including some university professors 
who are not directly involved in seditious activities. In light 
of this, the proposed SL takeover of the Huanuco University 
seems more and more unlikely. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
