ID: 289	RANK: 97	SCORE: 13.118652
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890711-0209 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-11-89 1400EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>s w BC-CocaineCheckmate Adv16   07-11 0954</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-Cocaine Checkmate, Adv 16,0973</SECOND>
<HEAD>$Adv16</HEAD>
<HEAD>For Release Sunday July 16 and Thereafter</HEAD>
<HEAD>President's Plan to Kill Cocaine at Source All But Dead</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By BRYNA BRENNAN</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   President Bush's plan to combat cocaine at the
South American source is all but dead just months after its
inception, according to officials who cite turf battles among U.S.
agencies, poor planning and a lack of coordination.
   The plan to eradicate and intercept cocaine in Peru and Bolivia _
the world's main coca plant producers _ also suffered serious
setbacks because the two Andean nations are rife with corruption,
lack resources and face enormous economic and political problems,
the officials say. In Peru, the largest coca leaf grower, an
ambitious U.S. program has been halted because increasing guerrilla
activity threatened American personnel.
   South America was to be the battleground for stopping the cocaine
flow into the United States. Bush, in his presidential campaign,
called for an ``international strike force to hit back, quick and
hard and often at foreign drug operations'' to stop narcotics
production at the source.
   Most of the world's coca leaves, the source of cocaine, grow in
Peru's Upper Huallaga Valley, a lush region at the foothills of the
Andes known as the ``cocaine cradle.'' The sprawling region is a
stronghold of leftist guerrillas known as Sendero Luminoso, or
Shining Path.
   U.S. efforts to operate in the region and set up Bush's strike
force were halted because of the security threat, said a spokeswoman
for the State Department's Bureau of International Narcotics
Matters. She spoke on condition she not be identified.
   Ground-level eradication, already inefficient because it is done
by hand, was slowed further. Aerial spraying, which would
effectively stop the plants' four harvests a year, is banned by
Bolivian law and repeatedly put off in Peru.
   Attempts by about a dozen agents of the Drug Enforcement
Administration to locate and destroy makeshift cocaine laboratories
and clandestine airstrips have been curtailed by the guerrilla
activity, forcing agents to move out of the region and ferry in by
helicopter for daytrips.
   With the strikeforce approach stalled, DEA agents are falling
back on long-standing programs of advising local authorities. They
continue to train Peruvian police while work goes on in the Upper
Huallaga Valley to shore up a helicopter base to offer enough
security against the guerrillas for American personnel to operate
full-time in the region.
   The work, according to a State Department official, includes
``everything from lighting and wires to clearing the area outside
the fence so you can see who's coming in.''
   At the same time, DEA agents will be undergoing a course tailored
for them by the U.S. Army later this month at Fort Benning, Ga.
Charles J. Gutensohn, chief of cocaine investigations for the DEA,
said in an interview that the training is primarily to teach the
agents to deal with Peru's jungle environment and the Maoist
guerrillas operating there.
   U.S. officials still disagree on where prime responsibility for
the South American drug mission should lie, with options ranging
from the DEA, whose primary role is law enforcement, to the U.S.
armed forces, which would go after the traffickers and growers using
counterinsurgency tactics.
   The CIA, noting the lack of definition, set up a Counter
Narcotics Center in April to ``combine operational and analytical
support to our country's fight against international drug
trafficking,'' says spokesman Bill Devine. He said the plan is to
unite the intelligence community _ the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, the Defense Intelligence Agency, the National
Security Agency, the Customs Service and the DEA.
   Declining to elaborate on the mechanics of the CIA center, Devine
added: ``The whole idea is to prevent overlap, for everyone to read
from the same book.''
   Some officials say the CIA center is yet another layer of
bureaucracy. And a Senate aide who has traveled to the drug-growing
region says the CIA center could prove unworkable because the agency
routinely refuses to cooperate with other agencies because it
``doesn't give up its sources, doesn't want to see them in court.''
   Bush's drug czar, William Bennett, is to issue a report in
September to define the strategies for overseas and at home. A
National Security Council report on ``who does what'' is under way,
Bennett spokesman Don Hamilton said.
   ``Some countries have approached us and asked for military and
economic assistance,'' Hamilton added, declining to name the
nations. ``Such requests are indeed under consideration.''
   An administration official who works closely with drug issues
said Peru expressed an interest in military training and upgrading
its equipment, mostly aged Soviet weaponry. But the official, who
refused to be further identified, said direct U.S. military
involvement of the kind reportedly being considered by the National
Security Council is ``effectively a dead issue'' because none of the
cocaine-producing countries will invite American troops.
   The idea of increased U.S. involvement or sending soldiers to
South America has generated strong opinions, with opponents citing
the possible loss of American lives and proponents arguing that a
direct role increases the chance of success.
   Gutensohn, the DEA's chief of cocaine investigations, opposes a
military role but endorses his agency's overseas involvement.
   ``The tactics are paramilitary; the mission is law enforcement.
When we get issued the badge you know it could happen,'' he said,
referring to the chances of being killed as a DEA agent. ``Upstairs
there are 35 badges of (dead) agents hanging on the wall.''
   But Arnold Trebach, president of the Drug Policy Foundation, a
liberal think tank, sees U.S. involvement in South America as futile.
   ``If we can't control marijuana growing in our own country, what
person would dare suggest we could control it in Peru, Bolivia?'' he
asked.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Sunday July 16</NOTE>
</DOC>
