ID: 206	RANK: 69	SCORE: 19.475771
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911018-0007
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911018-0007.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Bristol-Myers, Pfizer Post Record Net,
   Schering, Lilly Two-Digit Profit Rises
   ----
   By Suein L. Hwang
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
10/18/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B7
</SO>
<CO>
   BMY LLY PFE SGP
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
</MS>
<IN>
DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)
EARNINGS (ERN)
</IN>
<NS>
EARNINGS (ERN)
</NS>
<RE>
INDIANA (IND)
NEW JERSEY (NJ)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- Four health care companies reported robust
double-digit third-quarter earnings gains despite the
slightly negative effects from foreign currency adjustments.
   Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. earnings rose 14%; Pfizer Inc.,
13%; Schering-Plough Corp., 11%; and Eli Lilly &amp; Co. rose
16%.
                                                                                                       

</LP>
<TEXT>
   Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.
                                                                                                       

   The New York drug and consumer products company reported
record earnings; profit growth outstripped sales gains by a
significant margin. Sales rose a more modest 5% to $2.76
billion. The company noted that excluding the sales of
divested businesses and the effect of foreign exchange, sales
growth was 8% for the quarter and 9% for the nine months.
Exchange rate fluctuations had a slightly negative effect on
sales of about 2% for the quarter and no affect for the nine
months.
   For the first nine months, Bristol-Myers sales rose 9% to
$8.22 billion from $7.56 billion. On the New York Stock
Exchange, Bristol-Myers shares closed at $82.125 a share,
down $1.375 a share.
                                                                                                       

   Pfizer Inc.
                                                                                                       

   Fueled primarily by sales growth in the health care
products segment, which was led by a number of new drugs, the
New York company reported record earnings.
   Net sales for the quarter rose 8% to $1.77 billion from
$1.64 billion. Previous year's results were restated to
reflect a 1991 two-for-one stock split.
   Sales growth was dominated by the health care segment,
which rose 16% compared to a 2% increase in consumer products
and a 1% gain in the animal health division. Within the
health care segment, pharmaceuticals sales increased 17% and
hospital products sales rose 13%. Sales of specialty
chemicals and minerals continue to be slow, declining 5%,
excluding the company's divested citric acid business.
   "Third quarter results reflected the success of our new
pharmaceutical products and increased profitability in our
consumer products business," said William C. Steere, Jr.,
president and chief executive officer. He noted that Pfizer's
new pharmaceutical products accounted for 49% of total drug
sales, up from 33% the year before. In particular, sales of
cardiovascular drug Procardia XL and antifungal Diflucan
jumped 84% and 55% respectively.
   The company said three "significant" new drugs have been
favorably reviewed by the Food and Drug Administration
advisory committees: Zithromax, an antibiotic; Norvasc, a
high blood pressure and angina treatment; and Zoloft, a
depression treatment expected to compete with Eli Lilly &amp;
Co.'s big seller Prozac. It also noted that Advocin, an
antibacterial for cattle, swine and poultry, is doing "very
well" in early launch markets.
                                                                                                       

   Schering-Plough Corp.
                                                                                                       

   Schering-Plough Corp. attributed the 11% gain in
third-quarter earnings to strong performances in its health
care products segment.
   Sales rose 12% to $887.8 million from $793.8 million.
Excluding the impact of foreign currency exchange, third
quarter sales would have risen 14%
   "Schering-Plough's continuing solid performance is the
result of an outstanding mix of pharmaceutical and consumer
products, both in-line and newer offerings," said Robert P.
Luciano, chairman and chief executive officer. Third-quarter
sales gains were led by the world-wide pharmaceutical
business, which posted a 10% increase. Third-quarter sales
for HealthCare Products was up 18% compared with 1990.
   The company cited U.S. drug sales growth to the Proventil
and Vancenase lines of asthma drugs; Eulexin, a prostate
cancer therapy; and K-Dur, a potassium supplement. Higher
international sales was led by Claritin, an antihistamine and
Losec, an ulcer treatment.
   Mr. Luciano said he expects continued growth in the fourth
quarter and reiterated his projection that full year earnings
per share should increase between 18% and 20%.
                                                                                                       

   Eli Lilly &amp; Co.
                                                                                                       

   The Indianapolis pharmaceutical giant said sales rose 5%
to $1.34 billion, reflecting sales growth in the company's
three major divisions.
   World-wide sales of such pharmaceutical products as Axid,
Lilly's anti-ulcer drug; cardiovascular product Dobutrex; and
its Humatrope growth hormone, continued to be strong
contributors. Lilly also cited improved sales of Prozac, the
anti-depressant drug that has been recently the subject of
controversy.
   Additionally, the company said that its medical devices
and diagnostics division continued to show sales growth, led
by the division's Cardiac Pacemakers Inc., Devices for
Vascular Coronary AtheroCath, and Hybritech Inc. Lilly also
said sales in its animal health products division was
"balanced across the product line."
   Lilly said manufacturing costs and operating expenses
increased at a slower rate than sales growth, resulting in a
12% gain in operating income. The company's third-quarter net
income of $1.01 fell on the low end of analyst expectations
for $1.01 to $1.09 a share, according to Zacks Investment
Research Inc.
   ---
                            1991             1990
                         in      per      in      per    %
                      millions  share  millions  share  chg.
                                                                                                       

                 THIRD QUARTER NET INCOME
                                                                                                       

   Bristol-Myers ....  $563.4   $1.08   $495.9   $0.94    14
   Pfizer ...........   274.7    0.81    243.3    0.72a   13
   Schering-Plough ..   156      0.74    140      0.62    11
   Eli Lilly ........   297.5    1.01    256.8    0.90    16
                                                                                                       

                  NINE MONTHS NET INCOME
                                                                                                       

   Bristol-Myers .... $1545.5   $2.97  $1322.2   $2.51    17
   Pfizer ...........   721.2    2.13    646.4    1.92a   12
   Schering-Plough ..   496.6    2.30    434.5    1.92    20
   Eli Lilly ........  1003.6    3.44    872.0    2.99    15
                                                                                                       

   a-Restated to reflect first quarter 1991 two-for-one stock
split.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
