ID: 304	RANK: 77	SCORE: 8.667236
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880929-0157 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-29-88 2111EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r w AM-VolunteerList     09-29 1108</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Volunteer List,1,080</SECOND>
<HEAD>With AM-Reagan-Volunteers</HEAD>
<DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The following businesses and organizations
received Private Sector Initiative awards Thursday during a White
House ceremony recognizing outstanding volunteer efforts:
   _American Express Roads to Liberty: Magna Carter to the
Constitution.
   The American Express Co. and the Commission on the Bicentennial
of the U.S. Constitution conducted a traveling museum program to
educate Americans about the foundations of liberty from the Magna
Carta.
   _Inner-City Ventures Fund.
   BP America Inc. of Cleveland and the National Trust for Historic
Preservation, Washington, D.C., created a fund to help nonprofit
community organizations rehabilitate historic buildings to create
affordable housing and job opportunities for low-income local
residents.
   _Drugs: A Deadly Game.
   The Boy Scouts of America, Cola Cola USA and Champion
International in Irving, Texas, aimed at educating people about the
dangers of drugs.
   _Food Bank Trucking Team.
   California Trucking Association, West Sacramento, in which
member companies transported food donated for the needy to food
banks in the Los Angeles area.
   _The Dollar General GED and Learn To Read Information Program.
   Dollar General discount stores offered programs in 1,300 of its
outlets in 23 states offering low-income customers information on
learning how to read.
   _Cities in Schools.
   Federated Department Stores, Inc. of Atlanta, created a program
to address the problems created by more than a million high school
dropouts each year, in which alternate schooling programs were set
up at various business locations.
   _We're All in This Together.
   First Interstate Bank of California in Los Angeles conducted a
variety of community sponsored fund-raisers with proceeds going to
California's ``Just-Say-No'' campaign against drug abuse.
   _Food Banks.
   A&amp;P supermarkets used a variety of food collection methods to
help end hunger, including setting up collection bins in
supermarkets serving as ``designated redemption centers'' for a
national coupon program.
   _Drug Awareness and Prevention Program.
   Henry Ford Hospital &amp; Maplegrove Chemical Dependency Program;
Detroit Edison; Royal Oak. Mich., School District.
   _Daring Goals for a Caring Society.
   Set up by a volunteer committee of the Independent Sector,
Washington, D.C., the program was designed to encourage all
Americans to increase their givinfg and volunteering to the
charitable causes of their choice.
   _Rochester Brainpower Program.
   Industrial Management Council, Rochester Chamber of Commerce,
Rochester, N.Y., developed a program to identify the most effective
responses businesses could make to lower the drop-out rate of
students in the public schools.
   _Shelter Aid.
   Johnson &amp; Johnson gathered funds to create the first national
toll-free domestic violence hot-line for 24-hour information,
shelter referrals and discussions about options.
   _Needy Kids Fund, Inc.
   KEX Radio in Portland, Ore., created in November 1987 a
non-profit corporation to provide needy children with necessities
such as eyeglasses, clothing, shoes, hearing aids and so forth.
   _For Kids Sake.
   KOMO Radio and Television in Seattle set up an intensive program
aimed at informing audiences of the plight of needy children. The
campaign included eight prime-time specials focusing on the problem
in the Northwest.
   _Adopt-a-School Partnership in Education.
   McKee Baking Co. of Collegedale, Tenn., adopted an inner-city
school of 400 students six years ago, and since has given $75,000
for capital improvements and $8,000 per year for educational
projects.
   _Mobil Clean Team-Mobile Green Team.
   For the past six years, more than 10,000 low-income inner city
youths have been provided with summer employment due to $7 million
in grants from Mobile Corp.
   _Tomorrow's Scientists, Technicians and Managers.
   Nalco Chemical Co. and Quad County Urban League of Naperville,
Ill., offered after-school tutoring in algebra, biology, physics,
chemisty and English.
   _Public Service Program.
   National Association of Life Underwriters in Washington, D.C.,
set up a public service initiative aimed at assisting in a number
of areas, including screening for high blood pressure, help for the
elderly and food drives.
   _The National Exchange Club, Toledo, Ohio.
   The club adopted a program aimed at preventing child abuse and
has set up 37 child abuse prevention centers across the United
States and in Puerto Rico.
   _The Jennifer Creed Fund.
   New England Convenience Store Association of Newton, Mass., set
up a fund for young people suffering from leukemia and birth
defects. Since 1983, the retail and supplier members of the
association have raised more than $138,400 to purchase items not
normally reimbursed by insurance, such as babysitter and homemaker
services.
   _Operation Smile.
   People from 16 states and the District of Columbia set up this
organization in Norfolk, Va., to bring reconstructive surgery to
children in developing countries. More than 2,100 children in Third
World countries had been treated through last year.
   _Midtown Corridor.
   Premier Industrial Corp. of Cleveland, ran a program
cooperatively with local government in which a depressed and
blighted area of Cleveland's inner city was transformed into a
vibrant center of economic development.
   _Missing Children Project.
   Quality Inn International and National Center for Missing and
Exploited Children, Silver Spring, Md.
   The project has served nearly 500 families of missing children
since 1985. It includes a program in which Quality Inns provide a
place for families to be reunited with their children.
   _Senior Citizens Volunteer Project.
   TES Division, TU Electric, Fort Worth, Texas, involving a
program started in 1984 to repair and paint the homes of low-income
senior citizens.
   _Manager of Volunteers Program.
   TRW Foundation, Cleveland, out of a concern that nonprofit
agencies would suffer the effects of budget cutbacks in the early
1980s, a program was set up to provide general funding to such
organizations and assistance to allow them to establish their own
volunteer managers system.
   _Talking Book Repair Program.
   Telephone Pioneers of America in New York, donated thousands of
hours to a project of repairing and servicing talking-book discs,
cassette players and related equipment, for the Library of Congress.
   _Genesis: A New Beginning for Abused Children.
   Telephone Pioneers of America, Thunderbird Chapter 94 in
Oklahoma City, Okla., set up a progject to provide a home with a
safe and caring atmosphere for battered children.
   _Travelers Older Americans Program.
   The Travelers Companies, Hartford, Conn., developed a program to
alert retirees and people still working of the impact of aging on
business and setting up community initiatives benefiting older
people.
   _Revitalizing a Community's Spirit and Economy.
   Union National Bank of Laredo, Texas, took the lead in civic
activities aimed at pulling the city of Laredo out of its high
unemployment slump, a program that over three years helped drop the
city jobless rate from 28 percent to 15 percent.
   _Wal-Mart Foundation.
   Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. of Bentonville, Ark. Funds raised by
various community action groups are matched by the foundation. the
program was developed out of the belief that if the employees of
Wal-Mart and the community recognized a project as a viable need,
then they would be willing to share the fund-raising
responsibilities.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
