ID: 190	RANK: 97	SCORE: 9.518215
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911007-0092
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911007-0092.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Media:
   Three Major TV Networks Will Gamble
   On Live Newscasts in Wee Morning Hours
   ----
   By Kevin Goldman
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
10/07/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   CBS CCB GE TBSA TBSB
</CO>
<MS>
CONGLOMERATES (CGL)
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)
CONGLOMERATES (CGL)
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
</IN>
<NS>
NEW PRODUCTS &amp; SERVICES (PDT)
</NS>
<RE>
CONNECTICUT (CT)
FAR EAST (FE)
GEORGIA (GA)
JAPAN (JA)
NORTH CAROLINA (NC)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Insomniacs can soon stop counting sheep and start counting
anchormen.
   All three major broadcast networks will begin filling the
graveyard shift -- the wee and weary hours from 1 a.m. to 6
a.m. -- with live, elongated newscasts in the next few
months. They are gambling millions of dollars at a time when
all three network news divisions, pressed by an advertising
slump, have resorted to painful cutbacks in employees and
spending.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The ABC, CBS and NBC networks are chasing a puny and
elusive audience that may already have more news than it
needs. Most of America goes to bed by midnight. According to
A.C. Nielsen Co., the proportion of homes with a television
set on plunges from 23.4% at midnight to 6.4% by 5 a.m. The
drop occurs mostly in the first few hours after midnight.
During those hours, the sleepless get plenty of news from
CNN, CNN Headline News and replays of local newscasts.
   The networks are coming anyway, albeit somewhat belatedly.
NBC premieres "NBC News Nightside" on Nov. 4, beaming an
endless stream of live news updates to local NBC stations.
Then ABC weighs in on Jan. 6 with a similar service,
tentatively titled "Overnight."
   And CBS News, according to insiders, will overhaul its
nine-year-old "Nightwatch," changing the two-hour series of
taped interviews into a live newscast running from 2 to 6
a.m., with reports from CBS correspondents and local
affiliates. A CBS News spokesman declined to make any
specific comment, saying only the division was "studying all
options."
   "Everybody is going to be getting into a fairly dormant
{time period} soon, and it's going to be news wars," says
Robert Horner, head of NBC News Channel, which distributes
news footage to affiliates. NBC is owned by General Electric
Co.
   The race to light up overnight with news strikes some as
curious. "It flies in the face of logic," contends Calvin
Siemer, a vice president of the National Association of
Broadcast Employees and Technicians, which represents
engineers, news writers, producers and graphic artists in the
news divisions. "It doesn't make a lot of sense, especially
when they're shutting down bureaus and firing people."
   Even most network officials concede that news after
midnight will be a losing venture, at least in the
short-term. "We don't expect to make money," admits Richard
C. Wald, senior vice president at ABC News. ABC's
"Overnight," with a staff of 40, start-up costs of $5 million
and an annual budget of $5 million, expects a loss of $2
million or more a year.
   NBC hopes its overnight operation can break even, says
NBC's Mr. Horner. It will run on a nightowl staff of just 25
employees based in Charlotte, N.C., working on a budget that
will probably be smaller than ABC's $5 million operation.
CBS's current wee-hour newscast, "Nightwatch," has a staff of
21 and an annual budget of $6 million. But it takes in only
$2.5 million in ad revenue, running a yearly loss.
   The obstacles facing overnight newscasts are plentiful.
Most viewers seem to prefer old movies and sitcom reruns. The
overnight news provided by Cable News Network is watched by
an average audience of only 193,000 households.
   Moreover, some of the local stations won't carry the
overnight news at all. Other stations will run only two hours
instead of the whole package. About 125 of CBS's 216 stations
carry all or some of "Nightwatch." ABC News, whose
"Overnight" will run from 1 to 6 a.m. or 3 to 6 a.m.,
depending on affiliates' preference, doesn't have a station
total yet, but it hopes at least 80% of its 225 affiliates
will broadcast a portion. Of NBC's 209 stations, 140
representing 92% of the country have signed on so far. Mr.
Horner hopes 80% of the stations will carry some portion of
"Nightside," which will air from 2 to 5:30 a.m. Eastern time.
   The limited reach will make it all the tougher to sign up
advertisers. (ABC and NBC will air eight minutes of ads each
half hour, letting local stations sell six 30-second spots
and keeping the rest.) "All you see overnight are ads for 800
numbers to order knives or old records, or 900 numbers to
order dates," says Joel M. Segal, executive vice president at
McCann Erickson USA Inc.
   But the networks are proceeding because overnight news
lets them block their local stations from using rival
overnight news feeds from Cable News Network; get more
mileage out of their huge news division budgets; and develop
the programming to expand into the international market for
U.S.-supplied news, which is dominated by CNN.
   Until now, ABC and NBC stations had to provide their own
shows overnight. CBS Inc. shuts down for only a half-hour,
between 1:30 and 2 a.m. ABC, a unit of Capital Cities/ABC
Inc., will sign off at midnight beginning Nov. 14, and NBC
shuts down at 2:30 a.m. Late at night, stations air old
movies and dated reruns, and some, including 38 NBC stations
and 25 ABC stations, carry at least 30 minutes of CNN
Headline News.
   William L. Bolster, president of Multimedia Broadcasting
Co. and a proponent of overnight news, says each of his four
NBC affiliated stations will "take 90 minutes or maybe more"
of "Nightside." "People want information," he says, "and
they'll go to where that information is. We have to take away
the image of CNN as being the first place to go."
   Each overnight newscast will vary somewhat in content. CBS
News and NBC News will rely greatly on their affiliate news
services for reports. Each day, hundreds of produced news
pieces are fed to them via satellite from the individual
stations. The best will be seen overnight, along with pieces
from network correspondents. s
   ABC's Mr. Wald says "Overnight" may use interviews
conducted during the day. "We interview politicians for a
half-hour and use only seven seconds on `World News
Tonight,'" he says, referring to the broadcast anchored by
Peter Jennings. "Overnight" could use the rest.
   Some officials at CNN, which is viewed in more than 120
countries, say they're puzzled no one has yet challenged
CNN's lock in the world-wide arena. "I think you're seeing
the networks getting a program and a structure in place to go
international," says Jon Petrovich, executive vice president
of CNN Headline News.
   To help give "Overnight" an international flavor, ABC News
is negotiating with Japan's public broadcasting corporation,
Nippon Hoso Kyokai, to provide the show with five minutes of
Asian news each hour. Mr. Wald confirms the talks, but
declines further comment other than saying "we may have
nontraditional news sources."
   No sales have been made yet, and it's unclear what the
appetite is overseas for a U.S. newscast. But "the overnight
news is perfect for all the privately owned networks cropping
up in European countries," says Celeste Panepinto, director
of ABC News international marketing. When it's the wee hours
of the morning in the U.S., the day has already begun in
Europe. "The second it goes on the air here," she says, "we
have the ability to put it on internationally."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
