ID: 92	RANK: 6	SCORE: 21.857351
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910508-0012
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910508-0012.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Guitar-Pickers Are Making a Market
   ---
   Rock of Ages Spurs
   Old-Model Prices
   ----
   By Robert Tomsho
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
05/08/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C1
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
FINANCIAL (FIN)
</MS>
<IN>
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, CREDIT INSTITUTIONS (FIS)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)
</IN>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
TENNESSEE (TN)
</RE>
<LP>
   DALLAS -- Visitors to the Mandolin Brothers' booth at the
recent Greater Southwest Guitar Show found an eye-popping
price tag hanging from one instrument. "OK, so it's
$100,000," read a sign the Staten Island, N.Y., dealer had
placed nearby. "Go find another one."
   That would be hard to do. The rare 1958 Gibson "Flying V"
was one of only 81 shipped the year it was built. Amid a
recession that has driven down prices for Impressionist
paintings and folk art as well as many collectibles, vintage
guitars are hot -- especially those used by vintage rock 'n'
roll stars.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   At a London auction last year, Sotheby's Holdings Inc.
sold a 1968 Fender Stratocaster used at Woodstock by Jimi
Hendrix for $334,000 -- nearly four times the expected price.
And actor Gary Busey, who portrayed Buddy Holly in a movie,
recently paid $242,000 at a Sotheby's auction in this country
for a 1945 Gibson J-45 acoustic once owned by the late
rocker.
   In 1989, an unidentified buyer even paid $1,300 for a
fragment of a guitar smashed by rock guitarist Pete Townshend
of the Who. "The guitar market has gone berserk," says
Nashville guitar dealer George Gruhn, also a columnist for
Guitar Player magazine.
   Some industry publications have begun tracking prices
monthly, and major manufacturers such as Gibson Guitar Corp.
of Nashville and Fender Musical Instruments Corp. of Brea,
Calif., are building high-priced "reissues" of their own
classics. Gibson's 1959 Les Paul reissues, named for the
legendary guitarist who originally designed the model, sell
for as much as $4,199, compared with about $1,699 for a
similar new model.
   The original pre-1960 Gibson Les Paul models regularly
sell for more than $20,000. And rare prewar Martin D-45
acoustics are going for as much as $50,000 -- nearly
quintuple the top price of just five years ago. Still, these
prices don't come near the cost of a Stradivarius; one of the
violins sold for $1.7 million in London last November.
   The vintage guitar boom is being spurred on, in part, by
aging baby boomers seeking to recapture a piece of their
past. "We've got money to spend, and guitars, banjos and
fretted instruments are the instruments of our youth," says
Kerry Keane, a musical instrument appraiser for Skinner Inc.,
an auction house based in Bolton, Mass.
   As with most collecting fads, though, fortune hunters
should beware. Like cars, most used guitars still sell for
far less than they cost new, and dealers -- who pay top
dollar only for mint-condition guitars -- complain that many
would-be sellers expect any battered instruments they drag in
to be worth a small fortune.
   Moreover, with prices skyrocketing, guitar counterfeiters
are altering serial numbers and name plates, modifying
cheaper models, and even making pseudovintage instruments
from scratch. Some dealers now dismantle instruments before
buying to check for original paint, wiring and hardware.
"There is no such thing as a perfect forgery," says Mandolin
Brothers President Stanley Jay.
   As in so many other collecting areas, prices of vintage
guitars are being driven up by free-spending foreign
collectors and dealers. Many of them are Japanese, who prize
the American-made instruments for their tone, craftsmanship
and continuing status as the choice of most international
recording artists.
   Many U.S. guitar dealers send their inventory lists
directly to foreign collectors and dealers, despite grumbling
from some musicians and dealers about the number of vintage
instruments leaving this country. While industry figures are
hard to come by in a largely cash-and-carry business, some
dealers say foreign buyers account for as much as 75% of
their vintage sales.
   Overseas buyers have even hired U.S. "brokers" to scour
pawnshops and newspaper want ads. "They're out in the
heartland looking for these guitars," says Mark Pollack, of
Charley's Guitar Shop here.
   High-bidding Japanese buyers have become fixtures at the
growing number of guitar shows, which is why Mr. Pollack made
sure he had a Japanese-speaking employee in his booth at the
recent Dallas show, the largest of its kind. Japanese
investors have been known to buy instruments by the truckload
for shipment back to their country, where even mass-produced
workhorses like 1970s-vintage Fender Stratocasters are
selling for as much as $2,500 -- nearly three times the U.S.
price.
   "Mostly, it's the sound," says collector Mac Yasuda of
Newport Beach, Calif., an executive with Tsumura &amp; Co., a
large Tokyo-based manufacturer of pharmaceuticals and bath
additives. With the help of a toll-free U.S. telephone
number, Mr. Yasuda buys instruments for both himself and
company President Akira Tsumura, who recently opened a Tokyo
museum to display his huge collection. Mr. Yasuda's own
collection includes 50 Gibson J-200 acoustic guitars, 15
vintage Gibson Les Pauls, and seven out of the 91 D-45
acoustics made by C.F. Martin Co. of Nazareth, Pa., before
World War II.
   A variety of factors make some guitars worth more than
others. Rarities such as the prewar D-45s -- first made for
cowboy crooner Gene Autry -- and the elegant jazz guitars
handmade by the late John D'Angelico have long been prized
for their tone and craftsmanship.
   Collectors seek out certain early Les Paul models because
of the "flame" patterns in the curly maple wood used to make
them. And the Fender Stratocasters' mystique is due largely
to their use by rock stars such as Jimi Hendrix and Eric
Clapton.
   Meanwhile, a small but growing nostalgia market has
developed for some instruments that never had much snob
appeal. Dealers say baby boomers, apparently recalling the
first budget-priced instruments that their parents bought
them, are paying as much as $1,000 for Danelectro electric
guitars once sold in Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co. catalogs for $59
and up.
   Dominick Montuoro, a disabled New Rochelle, N.Y.,
construction worker, began collecting them after playing one
that belonged to a friend's son. "I just fell in love with
it," says Mr. Montuoro, who now has 90 of the homely
instruments, which feature Masonite tops with pickups, a
piece of electronic hardware, made from modified lipstick
tubes.
   With prices for many vintage guitars rising and falling on
such quirky factors as which model certain rockers used on
their last tour, appraisers caution that vintage guitars are
not for investors seeking huge profits. "For the most part,
it's a slow, steady increase," says Mr. Keane, the instrument
appraiser.
   Moreover, veteran dealers like Mr. Gruhn of Nashville warn
that prices could plummet if economic troubles beset Europe
or Japan. "If anything happens to reduce foreign demand, this
market will react as though it were struck in the solar
plexis," he says.
   Some professional musicians wouldn't mind seeing that
happen. "It's outrageous," says Warner Brothers recording
artist Ry Cooder, who attended one guitar show a few years
ago, but "crawled out" when he saw the prices. To musicians,
a guitar is a tool, says Mr. Cooder, adding that "a carpenter
wouldn't pay $100 for a hammer."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
