ID: 303	RANK: 19	SCORE: 11.081261
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP881122-0174 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-11-22-88 1815EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u w AM-KennedyRdp 1stLd-Writethru a0731 11-22 0867</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Kennedy Rdp, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0731,820</SECOND>
<HEAD>JFK Remembered: `The Heartbeat Of A Nation Stood Still'</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: SUBS 17th graf pvs, bgng: ``Wearing a ...'' to correct typo
in
trenchcoat and change word to `said' sted `uttered' silent prayer.</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By ROBERT M. ANDREWS</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   John F. Kennedy's family and friends paused
Tuesday to celebrate his life and mourn the dreadful moment 25 years
ago when the youthful president was murdered in Dallas and ``the
heartbeat of a nation stood still.''
   Kennedy was remembered in the salutes of an elite Army unit, in
the simple, graveside tribute of his longtime secretary, in a
private Mass for his widow and children, in a vigil in the Capitol
Rotunda, and with flowers at home and abroad _ including the single
white rose left by his youngest and only surviving brother at a
historic meadow in England.
   Although no official ceremonies were held in Dallas, about 2,500
people thronged Dealey Plaza, where Kennedy was felled by an
assassin's rifle as he waved to crowds from an open limousine at
midday Nov. 22, 1963.
   Twenty people clapsed hands along the motorcade route Tuesday,
and a crucifix and two bouquets of flowers were deposited at the
approximate spot on Elm Street where the president was struck.
   A note on one bouquet read, ``We still miss you _ Nov. 22.'' On
the other, the message read, ``After 25 years, we still love you,
John.'' Schoolteacher Jean Hill, who saw Kennedy killed that day,
brought her 50 third-graders to the scene.
   The president's widow, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, and her two
children, John Jr. and Caroline, attended a private Mass at St.
Thomas More's Roman Catholic Church in New York City. A spokeswoman
for the former first lady said the family planned no public
appearances.
   In Washington, hundreds of former Peace Corps volunteers ended a
24-hour vigil in the Capitol Rotunda and attended a memorial Mass at
St. Matthew's Roman Catholic Cathedral, where Kennedy's funeral
service was held.
   Officiating at the Mass was the Rev. Theodore Hesburgh, a former
Peace Corps adviser who also took part in Kennedy's funeral service.
Hesburgh, the retired longtime president of Notre Dame, recalled
that when Kennedy was killed, ``the heartbeat of a nation stood
still.''
   He told the former volunteers that if Kennedy ``was here today,
he'd probably say that `you are the people who delivered the message
I gave to the world' and that the Peace Corps `will be my best and
brightest memory.'''
   Eunice Kennedy Shriver, the president's sister, and a black-clad
Ethel Kennedy, widow of Sen. Robert F. Kennedy, D-N.Y., who was
assassinated in June 1968, made early-morning visits to the two
Kennedy gravesites at Arlington National Cemetery.
   Mrs. Shriver said she hoped people would remember John Kennedy
for ``the high points of his life, the laughter and the vision.''
   Ethel Kennedy was one of the first mourners to appear at the
cemetery when the gates opened at 8 a.m. She knelt silently before
the eternal flame that burns at the president's grave and then
walked to her husband's grave nearby.
   ``I think for the family it's a private moment,'' she said.
``It's a wonderful outpouring of love.''
   Evelyn Lincoln, the late president's personal secretary, made her
annual pilgrimage to the grave and laid three red roses near the
eternal flame. ``It's the least I can do,'' she said.
   About 30 uniformed Green Berets, the U.S. Army Special Forces
unit created by Kennedy, laid a large wreath at the grave. They then
formed a semicircle and saluted their former commander in chief.
Members of Kennedy's former White House staff attended a Mass at the
cemetery amphitheater and placed a bouquet of roses on his grave.
   The president's only surviving brother, Sen. Edward M. Kennedy,
D-Mass., laid a single white rose at the foot of a British memorial
to the president at Runnymede, England, west of London, during a
private visit with friends.
   Wearing a black trenchcoat, the senator crossed himself and said
a silent prayer before the memorial, a large slab of stone on the
side of a hill at the place where King John in 1215 granted the
charter of civil and political liberties known as the Magna Carta.
   ``We think it's extremely important to celebrate the life of
President Kennedy rather than the tragedy,'' Kennedy told reporters.
``We're focusing on the birthday (May 29) and the hope of his life
rather than dwelling upon his loss.''
   In the vaulted Capitol Rotunda, where the president's body lay in
state 25 years ago, the last of an estimated 450 former Peace Corps
volunteers or their surrogates completed a 24-hour vigil of readings
and songs dedicated to Kennedy, who founded the overseas development
agency in March 1961.
   Former Sen. Paul Tsongas, D-Mass., who was a Peace corps
volunteer in Ethiopia when Kennedy was killed, told his audience
that ``only part of John Kennedy died 25 years ago. The best part of
him is alive and here in all of us.''
   Sen. Christopher Dodd, D-Conn., who was a volunteer in the
Dominican Republic in 1966-68, said the Peace Corps was ``a living
memorial'' to Kennedy and its volunteers ``will always be our best
ambassadors.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
