ID: 303	RANK: 49	SCORE: 9.350074
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910618-0172
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910618-0172.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Letters to the Editor:
   Do Pro-PCers Set Up Straw Persons?
</HL>
<DATE>
06/18/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A19
</SO>
<LP>
   Katharine T. Bartlett's defense of the "politically
correct" movement on college campuses has a factual
misstatement that's cropping up in many pro-PC arguments --
that the term "politically correct" was invented by the
anti-PC side, as a form of derision (Counterpoint, op-ed
page, June 6). It is indeed being used derisively, but it
originated as a term of mutual congratulation within and
among the denizens of the campus left. I first heard it at
Yale in the early 1980s, as one of several slogans on buttons
worn by feminist leaders.
   Prof. Bartlett's call for debate is undercut by her
intriguing point that all concepts of "neutrality" reflect a
pre-analytical commitment of some kind. It is scarcely
deniable that claims of neutrality often mask
presuppositions, but if neutrality is a null concept, then it
is hard to see how debate can go forward. Debate requires
some agreed-upon core. That core need be no larger than the
elementary rules of logic, yet even these are rejected by
some PC-ers, as reflecting "oppressive" Western rationalism.
No wonder so much "debate" takes the form of antiphonal
sloganeering and organized intimidation.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   David M. Wagner
   Manassas, Va.
   ---
   Hurrah for Ms. Bartlett] Finally someone refutes the
hysterical attacks on the PC epidemic supposedly threatening
higher education. At the University of Alabama, where I am
employed, I have seen no evidence that PC is anything like
the threat claimed by you and others. I think it's a bogyman
created by those who want the right to be offensive and
insensitive without being made to feel guilty.
   If women, blacks, Hispanics, Arabs, Asians and Africans
are tired of having their feelings and cultures treated as
marginal, the PC critics don't want to hear about it.
   Efforts to introduce sensitivity and balance to campus
life have undeniably led to excesses. But the main point of
these efforts is not, for example, that
Aristotle-Shakespeare-Hemingway should be discarded as
unimportant; it is that writings and ideas from other
cultures are important, too.
   John Gever
   Birmingham, Ala.
   ---
   Ms. Bartlett complains that PC critics attack the
insistence by some "`blacks' and `Indians' that they be
called `African-Americans' or `Native Americans'" and "yet
they take for granted their own titles of `Professor' or
`Doctor' . . . as a matter of simple civility."
   Isn't there a difference, Ms. Bartlett? People earn
academic titles. And when they do, they usually are addressed
with their titles because they deserve the respect of others.
But they would be laughed off campus if they went around
demanding that they be so honored. And when was the last time
a student was threatened with expulsion because he/she wasn't
civil (i.e., failed to use the correct form of address) to a
professor?
   Frank J. Stagnaro
   Los Gatos, Calif.
   ---
   Ms. Bartlett argues that the critics of "political
correctness" exemplify the academy's real problem. Their
complaints and their assertion that classic literary works
are superior to certain others, are, she says, a "smoke
screen" behind which "those who have power" defend their
"privilege" against the "voices" of women and minorities,
from which there has hitherto been "silence." Thus, she
categorizes authors by sex, race and ethnicity, assumes that
authors so grouped represent corresponding political
perspectives, and substitutes calculations of group interest
for intellectual standards.
   Her position is equally anti-individual and
anti-intellectual. It denies individuals the ability to think
as individuals and reduces the complexity of the Western
cultural tradition to a uniform defense of the status quo.
Her claims that Western civilization courses are in
"alignment" with "points of view . . . dominant . . . in our
society" is patently false; yet Ms. Bartlett, a professor at
Duke Law, assumes its truth without evidence or argument.
This adds up to a thumbnail sketch of "political correctness"
-- a malaise Ms. Bartlett evidently exemplifies. By
construing debate over intellectual issues as a struggle for
power, she unwittingly reveals the root cause of the
academy's new intolerance.
   Stephen H. Balch
   President and Executive Director
   National Association of Scholars
   Princeton, N.J.
   ---
   Ms. Bartlett sets up straw men (straw persons?) and then
tries to knock them down. Her suggestion that PC radicals are
only now being heard as a result of "surplus visibility"
requires us to believe the feminist-left wave on campuses
beginning in the 1960s has been silent up to now. This
requires a willing suspension of disbelief, and requires the
believer to have lived on another planet during this period.
   In times past, the liberal-arts community was more than
hospitable to reappraisals and fresh discoveries. It was
happy to welcome new, contemporary authors, until it was
asked to believe these trendy new authors were possessed of
the kind of genius that put them in a class with the
immortals of literature. They were superior to
dead-white-males such as Shakespeare, Milton and Dante, and
with cries of "Hey, hey, ho, ho, Western culture's got to
go]" sensitive souls like Ms. Bartlett are trying to issue in
the New Age. With apologists like Ms. Bartlett, I am almost
ready to believe the average female Duke student shuns the
label "feminist."
   Arie J. Korving
   Chesapeake, Va.
   ---
   I am reminded of an old British limerick regarding the
creation and execution of the Magna Carta. At the end it
reads:
                                                                                                       

   It's on account of that Magna Charter
   As were signed by the barons of old
   That in England today you can do what you please
   So long as you do what you're told
                                                                                                       

   With the spreading of PC, I suggest the following
modification for Americans:
                                                                                                       

   On account of the First Amendment
   That was signed by some statesmen of old
   In the U.S. today, you can say what you please
   So long as you say what you're told.
                                                                                                       

   John H. Martin
   Glendale, Calif.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
