ID: 303	RANK: 5	SCORE: 15.545894
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910828-0103
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910828-0103.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Rule of Law:
   Soviet Coup Blocked the Planned All-Union Runnymede
   ----
   By L. Gordon Crovitz
</HL>
<DATE>
08/28/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A9
</SO>
<IN>
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)
LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)
</IN>
<NS>
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)
LAW &amp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)
</NS>
<RE>
EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)
EUROPE (EU)
FAR EAST (FE)
SOVIET UNION (UR)
</RE>
<LP>
   The totalitarian government had long overstayed its
welcome. Reformers insisted that the ruler no longer use
arbitrary power. They wanted wider distribution of power and
a presumption in favor of political and economic freedom for
the people. Functionaries of the central power tried
intimidation, but the top official eventually lost the
support of almost every group in society. He was forced to
give up what had been nearly absolute power.
   The place was Runnymede in England, the year was 1215 and
it was King John who was forced to submit to the Magna Carta
and its revolutionary idea of legalized political and
economic liberty. The king's promises included more power to
regional lords, trials by juries of peers, due process and a
ban on expropriation of private property. This defining
moment for what we now know as "the West" never found an echo
in the Duchy of Muscovy, czarist Russia or communist U.S.S.R.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The closest the Soviets ever came to the Magna Carta was
scheduled for last week, when the All-Union Treaty was
supposed to be signed. The treaty was canceled during the
coup that couldn't. The timing of the failed "Putsch" has
been linked to provisions in the treaty that would have given
more power to the republics. It hasn't been widely noted that
the treaty and implementing laws also threatened the power of
the Communist Party by introducing counterrevolutionary legal
reform.
   The treaty would have been the first Soviet charter of
rights for the people, not for the state. The treaty, which
does not mention the word socialism, would have created a new
Union of Soviet Sovereign Republics. The republics and
central government would pledge to "create a rule-of-law
state which would serve as a guarantor against any tendencies
to totalitarianism and arbitrariness."
   Which raises the question, why a Soviet Union? Since its
founding, the U.S.S.R. has been defined as a state above the
law. Lenin, a lawyer before he switched careers, proclaimed
that "A law is a political measure, it is politics." Marxism,
he said, requires the withering away of such bourgeois
concepts as equal justice under impartial law. Local party
bosses have administered "telephone justice" to dictate the
correct verdict and sentence, prosecutors administered
psychiatric prisons and judges owed their tenure to party
bosses.
   Appropriately enough for a country founded on
expropriation, the All-Union Treaty also included a section
on property rights. "The Union and states forming it ensure
free development and protection of all forms of property,"
the treaty said, "and create conditions for the functioning
of enterprises and economic organizations." This is not as
precisely worded as the prohibition against expropriation in
either the Magna Carta or the U.S. Constitution. Still, it
would have been enough, for example, to block the Soviet
decree earlier this year that seized 50- and 100-ruble notes.
   The treaty also would have created a new Constitutional
Court whose judges would be appointed with the approval of
popularly elected representatives from the republics. At
least some of the Soviet judiciary would have been
independent of the party for the first time.
   Recent laws would also clip the powers of prosecutors,
known as procurators, who are also traditionally appointed
for their fealty to the party. Jury trials would become more
common and defense lawyers would get access to their clients
from the beginning of a case. "We must have one dictatorship
for all -- the dictatorship of law and not a dictatorship of
any political group or body of power, Mikhail Gorbachev told
a meeting of Soviet procurators earlier this year. "A
procurator or judge must be guided by law and law alone."
This was a direct challenge to party apparatchiks.
   Indeed, these legal reforms may have posed an even greater
threat to totalitarian rule than the treaty plan to spread
power to the republics. It's one thing to lessen the grip of
Moscow, it's another also to strip local party officials of
their arbitrary power to block licenses, jail "black
marketeers" or seize property.
   By blocking the All-Union Treaty, the hard-line communists
gambled that they could block the double whammy of a rule of
law that protects private property. Instead, many republics
now refuse to join any union, confederation or commonwealth
for fear that some other group of communists will again try
to block reforms. It's no wonder many leaders of the
republics and democratic parliamentarians this week asked why
there should be a Soviet Anything.
   Now reformers face one of the greatest challenges to the
idea of a rule of law. They say they will punish even the
coup plotters with law. "We must all pull away from euphoria,
including from the euphoria of victory," Russian President
Boris Yeltsin said on Monday. "And only the law must operate
-- no euphoria related to vindictiveness, otherwise we would
lose our self-respect as democrats."
   Legal punishment for the coup would be extraordinary in a
country that wrote the script for show trials. There are laws
against treason, though just who represented the "state" is a
nice question. It's also not yet clear whether the suicides
of plotters and sympathizers will turn out to be a variant of
"coup flu"; the translation from the Russian could make
suicide a transitive verb -- as in Interior Minister Boris
Pugo was suicided by parties unknown. And of course many of
Mr. Yeltsin's post-coup decrees against the party had no
apparent legal authority, including his decision to fire the
coup-backing director of Tass and head of the Novosti news
agency.
   Still, there is high irony in pleas for legal protection
by party functionaries. One of the final acts of a group
called the Ruling Council of the Communist Party Control
Commission was to invoke the rights the party denied everyone
else for the past 74 years. "We appeal to leaders of state
organs not to fall for emotions" against the party for the
coup attempt, citing "violations of human rights and people's
prosecutions for political convictions."
   Russia and the other republics will find that there are
those in even the most advanced countries who, given the
chance, will abuse the law for political ends. American
manufacturers faced with deep-pocket-picking
product-liability laws could give tutorials on the dangers of
politicized law. So could executive-branch targets of
Congress's "independent counsel" and RICOed defendants.
   Still, the coup plotters were entirely right to understand
that introducing modern legal concepts to the Soviet Union
would be fatal to communism. Assuming that the Communist
Party's over, it will be fascinating to watch the newest
adherents to the rule of law join the Western world.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
