ID: 273	RANK: 11	SCORE: 10.599515
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910403-0161
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910403-0161.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   OTC Focus:
   Small Stocks Surge
   To Nasdaq High;
   Index Hits 491.20
   ----
   By Anne Newman
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
04/03/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C1
</SO>
<IN>
STOCK INDEXES (NDX)
OTC GENERAL MARKET COMMENT (OTC)
STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
U.S. STOCK MARKET STATISTICS (STT)
</IN>
<NS>
STOCK AND OTHER INDEXES (NDX)
STOCK &amp; OTHER MARKET NEWS (STK)
</NS>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- The over-the-counter stock market sprinted to
a record that marks a 51% gain from mid-October, but many
investors say small stocks still aren't dangerously
overpriced.
   The day brought a 2.2% surge in the Nasdaq Composite Index
to 491.20, breaking the previous record of 485.73 set shortly
before the market's late 1989 plunge.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   About 3,900 smaller stocks make up the index, and their
average market value is $103 million. Small stocks have
roared ahead of the Dow Jones Industrial Average, which has
risen by nearly one-fourth since mid-October but remains more
than 50 points shy of last July's peak.
   Slowing economies abroad and the stronger dollar have
damped the attraction of bigger companies and, "longer term,
created a new bull market in small stocks," contends Carmine
Grigoli, investment strategist for First Boston Corp. Yet he
is a short-term bear, expecting the Standard &amp; Poor's 500
companies to report first-quarter earnings an average 14%
lower than a year earlier. He warns that any disappointment
could spread to smaller stocks.
   "A correction could be coming after the Dow {Jones
Average} makes a new high," agrees Peter Da Puzzo, co-head of
worldwide equities for Shearson Lehman Brothers.
   Still, at yesterday's new high, small stocks are less
costly by several yardsticks than they were before the
October 1989 mini-crash, the October 1987 market collapse and
in June 1983, the last bull-market peak for small stocks.
   A look at the Russell 2000 small-stock index shows that at
the end of March, the stocks were trading at 1.5 times their
book value, or assets minus liabilities. That figure was less
than the multiples of 1.7 before the October 1989 mini-crash,
2.1 before Black Monday 1987 and 1.8 right before small
stocks collapsed in July 1983.
   Another popular measure compares stock prices to corporate
sales. The Russell 2000 stocks now trade at just 48% of sales
per share, compared with 58% in September 1989, 68% before
Black Monday and 56% at the end of the last bull cycle.
   Based on earnings, however, many small stocks look pricey
and could be headed for a fall if companies disappoint
investors. The companies that were profitable in the Russell
2000 have spurted to trade at 18 times reported annual
earnings. That doesn't look cheap compared with the 16.9% in
September 1989 and 17.1% in 1983, though it is well below the
pre-Black Monday pinnacle of 22.4%.
   Shearson, which trades about 20% of total Nasdaq volume,
says it is scrambling to keep up with orders for small issues
from both large and small investors. The firm's total OTC
volume rose 54% in January and February from the first two
months a year earlier, as traders executed nearly 760,000 OTC
tickets, according to Mitchell Meisler, director of OTC
marketing. More than 300,000 of those were orders for fewer
than 2,000 shares, a sign of interest from individual
investors, he says.
   At Herzog, Heine &amp; Geduld in New York, one of the OTC
market's largest market makers, orders from institutional
investors for small stocks are up 30% to 40% since the 1987
market collapse, says E.E. "Buzz" Geduld, president of the
firm. Daily volume is double the pre-crash level, he says.
   "From our point of view, the new investors in small stocks
are institutional investors who've now found a new glamor boy
on the block," he says.
   OTC volume rose yesterday to more than 150.5 million
shares from 126.2 million Monday. Advancing stocks overtook
decliners, 1,226 to 684 as 335 issues soared to new highs and
27 fell to new lows.
   Technology issues led the market's advance. Apple Computer
jumped 4 1/4 to a new 52-week high of 72 3/4. The stock has
nearly tripled from its October 1990 lows.
   Among other technology stocks, Intel gained 1 to 48 1/2,
Lotus Development added 1 to 27 1/4, Microsoft gained 5 1/2
to 112 1/4 and Sun Microsystems advanced 1 1/2 to 33 5/8.
   Oracle Systems added 1 3/8 to 10 3/4 on heavy volume of
5.5 million shares, Seagate Technology rose 1 to 16 3/4 on
3.1 million shares and DSC Communications gained 1 to 9 1/4
on 2.8 million shares.
   First Executive, however, fell 11/32 to 3/4 on 3.9 million
shares after the troubled Los Angeles insurer reported late
Monday a fourth-quarter loss of $465.9 million.
   A new issue, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, also was snubbed.
The 4.5 million common share issue, which came to market at
$22 a share, closed at 21 1/8 on volume of 2.3 million
shares.
   Another initial offering, Input-Output Inc., closed at its
offering price of 8. About 3.2 million of the 4.9 million
share offer were sold by Triton Energy. Triton will continue
to hold a 28% stake.
   Optical Radiation rose 2 1/2 to 28 1/4 after the company
received pre-market approval from the Food and Drug
Administration for its Orcolon product. The product is a gel
that is to be used to protect ocular tissue and maintain the
shape of the eye in surgical procedures.
   FileNet Corp. added 2 3/4 to 15 1/2. The firm estimated
that it would have first-quarter net of about 15 cents a
share, compared with 12 cents a year earlier. Revenue rose
16% to $27.5 million for the period.
   United Healthcare gained 3 to 41 3/4. The health
maintenance organization company received a five-year
contract to provide prescription drug management services to
clients of Empire Blue Cross &amp; Blue Shield. Terms weren't
disclosed, but the firm said 500,000 people would be covered
in the first year of the program.
   Mentor Graphics gained 1 1/4 to 16 1/4. The company began
shipping a new product, called Release 8.0 Concurrent Design
Environment software.
   Aldus Corp. gained 3 1/2 to a 52-week high of 56 1/4. The
firm began shipments of the 4.01 version of its PageMaker
desktop publishing software product for the Apple Macintosh.
   Among the day's losers, Fastenal slid 1 1/2 to 27 1/4
after Robert W. Baird analyst Judith G. Scott cut her
first-quarter earnings estimate for the firm to 16 cents a
share from 17 cents, Dow Jones Professional Investor Report
said. The company earned 14 cents a share in the year-ago
period.
   Aritech Corp. slid 1/4 to 3 after posting a fourth-quarter
loss of $10.18 a share compared with net income of eight
cents a year earlier. The latest figure includes a
restructuring charge.
   ---
   David Pettit contributed to this article.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
