ID: 273	RANK: 24	SCORE: 9.746267
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910401-0030
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910401-0030.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Abreast of the Market:
   Technical Analysts Cheer Market in Small Stocks
   ----
   By Douglas R. Sease
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
04/01/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C1
</SO>
<IN>
STOCK INDEXES (NDX)
NYSE GENERAL MARKET COMMENTARY (NYS)
STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
U.S. STOCK MARKET STATISTICS (STT)
</IN>
<NS>
STOCK AND OTHER INDEXES (NDX)
STOCK &amp; OTHER MARKET NEWS (STK)
</NS>
<LP>
   Think small.
   That's the advice to investors from technical analysts,
the people who chart the stock market for clues to its future
course. Despite the economic uncertainty and high stock
prices worrying many investors these days, technicians are
among the stock market's biggest cheerleaders. And they are
rooting most enthusiastically for the junior varsity -- the
so-called small-capitalization stocks.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "For the first time since 1988 we're seeing a long-term
move into secondary stocks," says Ken Spence, director of the
technical analysis group at Salomon Brothers. "I think
secondary stocks will continue to outperform the large-cap
stocks."
   That's been the case now for several months. Since last
October, for instance, the Nasdaq Composite Index has risen
from 325.44 to 482.30, or 48%, while the Dow Jones Industrial
Average has gained 23%, from 2365.10 to 2913.86. More
important to technicians, however, is the fact that during
pullbacks in stock prices, small-stock indexes such as the
Nasdaq Composite and the Russell 2000 are falling much less
than the Dow, which is dominated by big stocks.
   Mr. Spence cites the reaction of small technology stocks
in the aftermath of International Business Machines' recent
disclosure that its first-quarter results would be far below
analysts' expectations. The disclosure sent IBM's share price
tumbling; the industrial average lost 89 points that week.
   "Six months ago, the whole technology sector would have
plummeted" along with IBM, Mr. Spence says. "But if you look
at Apple, Microsoft, Borland and other secondary or tertiary
tech stocks, they didn't react in any way, shape or form to
how IBM did. What that's showing you is that investors are
looking for smaller companies that have intact superior
growth prospects compared to the overall market."
   That isn't to say that technical analysts are down on big
stocks. While many nervous investors are concerned about
whether the recession is really about to end and what will
happen to stock prices, most technical analysts are
confidently predicting the Dow industrials will be up sharply
by year end.
   "All we've experienced in the last four or five weeks has
been a short pause that refreshes," says Dennis Jarrett,
technical analyst at Kidder Peabody. He and other analysts
cite such positive technical indicators as breadth (the
number of issues advancing compared with those declining),
volume (overall trading activity) and money flow (more trades
on price gains, or upticks, than downticks) for their bullish
views. Mr. Jarrett predicts the Dow will hit 3200 by year
end, and some of the most optimistic technical analysts are
talking about a Dow of 3700 by the close of 1991.
   Indeed, they view strength in the smaller stocks -- and by
"smaller" many analysts simply mean those stocks that aren't
in the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index -- as healthy for
the overall market. While smaller stocks up until October had
lagged behind the performance of big stocks since 1983, there
were periods during those years when small stocks were doing
very well. And during those periods, says Mr. Jarrett, big
stocks did well, too.
   "Those were among the most positive periods for the stock
market," he says. "The ice gets thinner when the secondaries
lag."
   But the current rally in smaller stocks isn't just a
short-term phenomenon that will once again fade away, Mr.
Jarrett says. "You can make a case going back to 1960 that
small stocks move in seven-year cycles up and down," he says.
"The last peak was in 1983, and the bottom was last October.
We could be in the early phase of another seven-year up
cycle."
   The appeal of small stocks, say technical analysts, is the
chance for investors to earn far more profits than they will
sticking with big blue chips, even though blue chips probably
will do well, too.
   "A Dow of 3700 a year from now is still going to make
plenty of money for folks who want to be conservative," says
Mark Leibovit, a technical analyst and editor of the Volume
Reversal Survey. "But a 25% gain in the Dow may translate
into a 50% to 60% gain in small stocks, because they're that
much more volatile." A recent study by Richard Pucci, vice
president of the Institutional Brokers Estimate System, a
unit of Lynch, Jones &amp; Ryan, shows that as of five months
ago, stocks with an average stock market capitalization of
$50 million showed a long-term earnings growth rate of 16.4%
a year, while they were priced at 7.6 times their annual
per-share earnings.
   Meanwhile, the largest stocks showed long-term earnings
growth of 12% and a price-earnings ratio of 11.5%. Prices of
small stocks have risen faster than big stocks since that
study, but the conclusions remain valid, says Mr. Pucci.
   "In simple terms, you're paying an awful lot for average
growth from the big stocks, while small stocks with much
better growth are a lot cheaper," Salomon's Mr. Spence says.
   Clearly, the possibility that small stocks will outstrip
the performance of big stocks has some implications for
investment styles. One reason big stocks did so well in the
1980s was that many large institutional investors pursued a
so-called passive investment strategy in which they merely
tried to match the performance of such popular market
indicators as the S&amp;P 500.
   "All you had to do through much of the 1980s was stay in
front of large blue-chip stocks because of the huge amount of
money being put into those stocks by institutions pursuing
passive investment strategies," Mr. Spence says. "That's what
made the S&amp;P such a difficult proxy for active money managers
to beat."
   But if the small-stock surge continues, active money
managers who can pick the winners will come out far ahead of
the big market indexes, analysts say. Indeed, at some point,
the rise in small-stock prices could become a chain reaction
as money managers scramble to add small stocks to their
portfolios.
   "The reality of money management is that managers are
evaluated every quarter," Mr. Leibovit says. "They tend to be
trend followers, and the rise in small stocks could become
self-fulfilling if managers start to sell Coca-Cola and
Philip Morris and roll over into Amgen and Intel and
Microsoft."
   ---
                                                                                                       

   Comparison of long-term growth rates and price/earnings
ratios of company groups based on their market capitalization
                                                                                                       

 AVERAGE MARKET
 CAPITALIZATION
 OF COMPANIES                LONG-TERM             P/E
 In Millions                    GROWTH           RATIO
                                                                                                       

      $50.11                     16.4%             7.6
      153.66                     17.1              8.6
      360.58                     14.2              8.6
      987.19                     12.6              9.8
    6,339.18                     12.0             11.5
                                                                                                       

   Source: IBES
</TEXT>
</DOC>
