ID: 273	RANK: 30	SCORE: 9.627592
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920206-0053
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920206-0053.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   OTC Focus:
   Index Climbs to New High as Financial
   And Transportation Shares Join Rally
   ----
   By Anne Newman and Dave Pettit
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/06/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C6
</SO>
<CO>
   SCH
</CO>
<MS>
FINANCIAL (FIN)
</MS>
<IN>
STOCK INDEXES (NDX)
OTC GENERAL MARKET COMMENT (OTC)
SECURITIES (SCR)
STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
U.S. STOCK MARKET STATISTICS (STT)
</IN>
<NS>
STOCK AND OTHER INDEXES (NDX)
STOCK &amp; OTHER MARKET NEWS (STK)
</NS>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- Over-the-counter stocks soared to another
all-time high as financial and transportation shares joined
technology stocks in the small-stock gala.
   The Nasdaq Composite Index jumped 5.97 to 636.97, a 0.95%
gain, as advancing shares swamped decliners, 1,337 to 890;
238 issues climbed to new highs while a mere nine dropped to
new lows. Total OTC volume rose to 270.1 million shares from
226.1 million Tuesday.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The gains were broad-based. The Nasdaq Transportation
Index, two financial indexes and the Nasdaq Industrial Index,
which includes many computer-related shares, all hit new
highs.
   Among transportation stocks, Alexander &amp; Baldwin rose 1/2
to 28; American depositary receipts of Stolt Tankers &amp;
Terminals rose 1/2 to 20 3/4; and trucker Arnold Industries
jumped 1 1/2 to 31.
   Among financial issues, State Street Boston climbed 1 1/2
to 63 3/4; CoreStates Financial jumped 1 1/8 to 46 1/8; and
Wilmington Trust added 1 to 53 1/4. Among computer networking
companies, Cisco Systems jumped 2 3/8 to 82 7/8 and Novell
climbed 1 to 58 3/4; software maker BMC Software climbed 1 to
68 1/2 and huge Microsoft added 2 3/4 to 127 1/4.
   Despite this year's successive new highs in OTC shares,
smaller stocks with market values of $350 million to $1
billion remain attractive, says Steven G. Einhorn, market
strategist for Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co. Individuals, who often
favor smaller stocks, will help sustain a multiyear rally in
the group as they move money from low-yielding certificates
of deposit and money market funds into stocks, he said.
   With the economy inching along, he also expects
acquisition activity to pick up as large companies look for
growth by buying small, fast-growing concerns. Small
companies with business specialties also have more pricing
flexibility than big companies do when the economy is
plodding along, Mr. Einhorn added. Goldman emerging-growth
analyst Steven Kent cautions, however, that careful stock
selection is critical. "There's a real lack of forgiveness
towards earnings disappointments," he warned.
   Although some shares are soaring, a number of smaller
stocks still look attractive relative to larger shares, the
Goldman analysts add. Indeed, the Russell 2000 index of
smaller stocks still isn't as expensive as shares in Standard
&amp; Poor's 500-stock index when their prices are compared with
sales and book value (assets minus liabilities).
   On an earnings basis, however, small stocks are getting
pricey -- but they still haven't outdistanced large stocks by
as wide a margin as they have at the peaks of previous
small-stock rallies. The Russell 2000 now trades at an
average 21.9 times last 12 months' earnings, excluding
losses, compared with 19.9 for the S&amp;P 500 -- or nearly 1.1
times the price-to-earnings multiples of larger stocks, says
Frank Russell Co. analyst Lisa Schulz. Compared with larger
shares, however, small stocks still aren't as rich as they
were at the peak of the last small-stock boom in June 1983,
Ms. Schulz adds, when the Russell 2000 traded at 1.4 times
the S&amp;P 500 on an earnings basis.
   Shares of two disk drive makers were the most active
Nasdaq issues. Quantum added 3/4 to 16 1/4 on 4.5 million
shares, while Seagate Technology rose 1/2 to 14 on 4.1
million shares. Also active were Intel, which gained 1/8 to
62 3/4, and Medco Containment, which jumped 1/2 to 33 3/4.
   EcoScience, a new issue, closed at 10 3/4 on volume of 1.9
million shares, down from its offering price of $11 a share.
The offering, originally expected to total 2.2 million shares
priced at $8 to $10 each, was increased to 2.6 million
shares. The Worcester, Mass., company makes pesticides using
naturally occurring micro-organisms.
   Shorewood Packaging lost 1 to 9 1/2. The company estimated
that its earnings for the third quarter, ended last Saturday,
were significantly below analysts' projections, which it said
were in the range of 13 cents to 17 cents a share. Revenue
for the period totaled $34.5 million, up from $34.1 million a
year ago, but it said earnings "will be negligible." In the
year-ago quarter, Shorewood earned 16 cents a share.
   Mentor Graphics jumped 1 1/4 to 20 1/4. The company posted
fourth-quarter net income of two cents a share, compared with
nine cents a share a year earlier. Analysts surveyed by Zacks
Investment Research expected the company to earn about one
cent a share in the latest period.
   Vestar gained 1 3/4 to 21 after it reported fourth-quarter
net income of $1.1 million, or eight cents a share, reversing
a year-ago loss of $2.6 million, or 44 cents a share. The
company had more shares outstanding in the latest quarter.
   Everex Systems closed with a gain of 1/8 to 6, after
trading as high as 6 1/2 intraday. Its president, Harold L.
Clark, said he expects the personal computer concern to
secure a new $70 million to $80 million financing agreement
within 30 days. The funds will be used as working capital and
to retire a $30 million credit facility that is secured by
nearly all of the company's assets.
   Orbital Sciences jumped 1 to 17 after Cowen &amp; Co. analyst
Cai von Rumohr issued a "buy" recommendation on the stock,
Dow Jones Professional Investor Report said. Previously, he
didn't formally follow the Fairfax, Va., space technology
company.
   Choice Drug rose 1 to 8 7/8. The company entered a
tentative agreement to acquire a drug and medical products
company that it didn't identify. The acquisition target has
annual revenue of about $28 million. Terms weren't disclosed.
   Nam Tai Electronics rose 4 1/4 to 22 1/4, after gaining 2
1/4 Tuesday. The maker of calculators and electric
typewriters attributed the gains to its fourth-quarter
earnings report, which was released last week. It earned 82
cents a share in the period against a loss from continuing
operations of eight cents a share a year ago.
   Machine Technology fell 3/8 to 4 1/4. The company said it
will take a restructuring charge of two cents to three cents
a share in the second quarter, ending this month. A year ago,
it earned 14 cents a share.
   ---
   NASDAQ INTERNATIONAL: Major discount broker Charles Schwab
&amp; Co. plans to join six other securities firms now active in
early-morning trading of OTC stocks on Nasdaq International.
Schwab spokesman Tom Taggart said that by the end of the
month the San Francisco firm plans to allow customers using
its 24-hour telephone lines to place orders for execution
during Nasdaq International's 3:30 a.m. to 9 a.m. EST trading
session. The electronic, trans-Atlantic system was launched
Jan. 20 to allow European and U.S. customers to trade stocks
during London trading hours and before trading in U.S.
markets begins.
   Schwab's big business from individual investors could help
build the light volume on Nasdaq International, which has
averaged just 61,000 shares a day and prompted two small
firms -- Castle Securities and Rauscher Pierce Refsnes -- to
withdraw from the system. Schwab's telephone lines receive an
average of 1,000 calls an hour between 3 a.m. and 6 a.m. EST,
and an average of 2,000 to 2,500 an hour between 6 a.m. and 9
a.m. Mr. Taggart said Schwab won't specifically recommend
customers use the overnight session rather than the regular
session. Overnight orders now are typically filled during
regular market hours the next morning.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
