ID: 273	RANK: 57	SCORE: 9.303246
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920120-0017
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920120-0017.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   OTC Focus:
   Nasdaq Party
   Still Has Room
   For Latecomers
   ----
   By Anne Newman
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/20/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C1
</SO>
<IN>
STOCK INDEXES (NDX)
OTC GENERAL MARKET COMMENT (OTC)
STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
U.S. STOCK MARKET STATISTICS (STT)
</IN>
<NS>
STOCK AND OTHER INDEXES (NDX)
STOCK &amp; OTHER MARKET NEWS (STK)
</NS>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- Investors who arrived late at the small-stock
party take heart: You can still get in on the merrymaking, if
history serves as a guide.
   Even latecomers fared well in three out of the four
small-stock rallies since the Great Depression that most
closely resemble the current surge in small stocks.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Like the current rally, those four began as the economy
was crawling out of recessions. They gained steam as the
economy strengthened. Only one of the four died. But the
loser was the most recent rally, which followed the early
1980s recession.
   Small stocks soared a remarkable 46% last year, as
measured by the Russell 2000 index. Now many investors wonder
whether they can still profit handsomely if they missed the
powerful first stage of a small-stock rally.
   It is a question "that I was asked at least 15 times last
week," says Jim Collins, small-stock money manager and
publisher of OTC Insight of Moraga, Calif. He is advising
clients to invest after the powerful Christmas rally cools a
bit.
   History shows that in similar rallies a cautious soul "on
average, would have done extremely well" by getting into
small stocks after the robust first surge, holding them
throughout the rally, then selling after the first year that
small stocks lagged behind larger ones, says Laurence B.
Siegel of Ibbotson Associates Inc., a Chicago research
company. "In the years that it worked, it's a trading
strategy that worked grandly," he says.
   Mr. Siegel tracked the four small-stock rallies rooted in
the 1930s Depression; World War II; early 1970s oil-price
shock and early 1980s recession. He measured the total return
-- price change plus dividends -- of small stocks starting in
January after the first powerful full-year surge, and
continuing through to the end of the first year that small
stocks underperformed the market. Here is how small stocks
fared, compared with shares in Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500
large stocks.
   Ibbotson's small-stock index measures the bottom fifth of
stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange and, after 1981,
over-the-counter and American exchange stocks of a similar
size. The current market value of stocks in the group ranges
from $10 million to $100 million.
                                                                                                       

   Great Depression: Small stocks surged 142.9% in 1933,
overpowering a 53.9% climb in larger stocks. Investors who
missed the first year still earned an average 31.9% a year
until the rally faded at the end of 1935, compared with a
20.6% annual return for big stocks.
                                                                                                       

   World War II: Small stocks jumped 44.5% in 1942, while big
stocks climbed 20.3%. Investors who hopped on board at the
end of 1942 earned 45.2% a year through 1946, when smaller
shares faded, compared with 17.3% a year for the S&amp;P 500.
                                                                                                       

   Oil-Price Shock Recovery: Small-stock investors rode a
nine-year rally that began in 1975, as the economy recovered
from the shock of the Arab oil embargo. Those who missed the
52.8% surge in 1975 still earned 28.1% a year until the rally
faded in 1984, compared with a return of 12.5% for the S&amp;P
500 during the same period.
                                                                                                       

   The Eighties Fizzle: Investors who missed the 1970s
small-stock rally might have been tempted to climb on board
in 1983, when the recession was ending and smaller shares
surged 39.7%, big stocks just 22.5%. Their euphoria would
have died quickly. The next year, big stocks climbed 6.3% but
small shares plunged 6.7% -- and slumbered until October
1990, when the current rally began its powerful climb.
   Veteran money managers recall that small-stock investing
wasn't always the fine-tuned, closely watched craft that it
is today. Peter L. Bernstein, who runs a New York consulting
company by the same name, remembers his surprise in 1975 when
low-priced, obscure stocks known as "flyers" began to surge.
"Until the academics discovered the small-stock phenomenon in
the late 1970s, people didn't talk about
`small-capitalization' versus `large cap' stocks," he
explains.
   "The stock market was cheap and the economy was in a
shambles," he remembers. "I was amazed at the quality of
stocks that were moving." Many represented troubled companies
whose shares had dwindled as their fortunes died. They
blossomed as the economy recovered, but most institutions
still shunned the "risque" stocks, Mr. Bernstein recalls.
   Not Scudder Stevens &amp; Clark Inc. In 1971, Ned Swanberg
founded the Scudder Development Fund to invest in "good
quality, small growth companies," the semi-retired Mr.
Swanberg says. Scudder searched for small companies with
earnings growing at 20% a year or more and planned to hold
their shares until their growth slowed, "unless they went to
the moon," he recalls.
   But it took Scudder more than two years to convince the
Securities and Exchange Commission that the fund wasn't going
to be filled with risky "junk," Mr. Swanberg says. By the
time it was approved in 1973, "the small company market was
going down twice as fast as the {broader} market," he says.
The fund didn't take off until 1975 when, for example, Flight
Safety International more than doubled in market value to
$22.6 million from $10.1 million a year earlier; its current
market value is $1.7 billion.
   By the early 1980s, however, small stocks were no longer a
secret.
   "That's what drove them up to an unsustainable peak in
1983," Mr. Bernstein says. "Everybody and his brother were
getting into them." Valuations soared: The average
price-to-earnings ratio, or stock price times last 12 months'
earnings, of the Scudder Development Fund jumped to more than
twice the multiple of the S&amp;P 500. "Greed overtook avarice,"
says Mr. Swanberg.
   Valuations are the key to how long small-stock rallies
last, says Edward J. Mathias, chairman of the granddaddy of
small-stock funds, T. Rowe Price Associates' New Horizons
Fund. After lagging behind big stocks for nearly eight years,
small stocks still haven't become dangerously pricey compared
with larger shares, Mr. Mathias and Mr. Swanberg agree.
   Drawing from New Horizons' 30-year history, Mr. Mathias
says that small stocks now appear to be in the second phase
of a typical rally: a sustained period of strong, but not
extraordinary, performance relative to larger stocks. If
history repeats itself, he adds, the final phase will be
another powerful surge, followed by a resounding crash.
   OTC Insight's Mr. Collins, a 30-year veteran of small
stocks, agrees that it would be a mistake not to invest in
small stocks this year. But he advises prudence until the
market cools: "When the market moves sharply up, if you don't
have exceptional stock-picking skills, you should be very
cautious." He suggests buying favorite stocks with strong
growth prospects if they drop 10% to 15%.
   ---
   Friday's Market Activity
                                                                                                       

   Over-the-counter stocks slipped in heavy trading, missing
a rally in larger stocks traded on the New York Stock
Exchange.
   The Nasdaq Composite Index slipped 0.49 to 626.85, a 0.08%
loss, as OTC volume fell to 282.5 million shares from 302.3
million shares Thursday. Advancing stocks, however, outpaced
decliners, 1,268 to 959, as 229 shares climbed to new highs
and only 10 fell to new lows.
   For the week, the Nasdaq Composite Index rose 1.8% and
lagged behind the 2.1% gain in the Dow Jones Industrial
Average.
   Biotechnology stocks ended a two-day slump as bellwether
Amgen rebounded 1 3/8 to 70 after falling nine points since
Wednesday. Among the day's hottest stocks was a new
biotechnology issue: Amylin Pharmaceuticals soared 6 3/4 to
20 3/4 from an offering price of $14 a share; the offering
was raised to four million shares from the originally planned
three million shares. The San Diego company is developing a
new treatment for diabetes based on Amylin, a hormone
produced by the pancreas.
   Newly public Farrel Corp. closed at 9 3/4 after offering
two million shares at $9.50 each. Farrel makes capital
equipment used to process rubber and plastics.
   Apple Computer climbed 2 to 64 3/4, after trading as high
as 69, while Seagate Technology, a disk-drive maker, advanced
7/8 to 13 5/8, after reaching 14 7/8 earlier. Late Thursday,
both companies reported higher-than-expected earnings. Among
other disk-drive makers, Quantum rose 7/8 to 15 1/4,
Micropolis gained 1 1/4 to 11 1/4 and Maxtor added 5/8 to 9
1/4.
   Microsoft, however, swooned for the second consecutive day
with a 1 1/4-point fall to 126 1/2. After the market closed,
the huge software maker reported that net income for the
fiscal second quarter ended in December rose to 90 cents a
share from 61 cents a share a year earlier; analysts had
expected about 88 cents a share.
   Micrografx surged 5 to 24 after Donaldson, Lufkin &amp;
Jenrette analyst Scott Smith upgraded his investment rating
on the stock to "buy" from "moderately attractive," based on
new products he expects the software concern to soon unveil.
   Outback Steakhouse, which went public in June at $15 a
share, dropped 1 3/4 to 29 1/4 after the company offered an
additional 2.3 million shares at $29.50 apiece.
   State of the Art rose 3/4 to 12 3/4 after the company
reported that fourth-quarter net income rose to 20 cents a
share from 12 cents a share a year earlier.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
