ID: 273	RANK: 8	SCORE: 11.261815
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911021-0187
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911021-0187.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   OTC Focus
   ---
   When Small is Beautiful -- A Stock Investor's Guide:
   Why Small Stocks Belong in Your Portfolio
   ----
   By Jonathan Clements and Anne Newman
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
10/21/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C1
</SO>
<CO>
   AMGN MSFT
</CO>
<MS>
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
MEDICAL &amp; BIOTECHNOLOGY, GENETIC RESEARCH, PROSTHETICS (MTC)
STOCK INDEXES (NDX)
OTC GENERAL MARKET COMMENT (OTC)
SOFTWARE (SOF)
STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
U.S. STOCK MARKET STATISTICS (STT)
</IN>
<NS>
STOCK AND OTHER INDEXES (NDX)
STOCK &amp; OTHER MARKET NEWS (STK)
</NS>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
WASHINGTON (WA)
</RE>
<LP>
   {First of a Series}
                                                                                                       

</LP>
<TEXT>
   NEW YORK -- Why buy small stocks?
   With small-company stocks already up 38% this year, they
can hardly be deemed undiscovered. Yet many savvy investors
say we're only at the beginning of a prolonged small-stock
rally, one that might roll on for four or five more years,
reaping handsome gains for investors who venture into this
turbulent market.
   In making their case for small stocks -- companies with
stock market values of $500 million or less -- enthusiasts
aren't deterred by the long dry spell that plagued the shares
of smaller companies from mid-1983 to late 1990.
   Small stocks still offer "reasonable value relative to
their long-term growth prospects and relative to blue-chip
stocks," argues Gerald Perritt, editor of the Mutual Fund
Letter, a Chicago newsletter. "You look at them and say,
`Anything that's up 30% this year, I don't want to buy it.'
But you have to look at the longer-term picture."
   One reason it isn't too late to hop onto the small-stock
bandwagon: This year's rally has been dominated by large
over-the-counter stocks such as Microsoft (market value: $16
billion) and Amgen ($8 billion). But many smaller issues have
retreated after an initial run-up earlier this year.
   Fully 44% of the Nasdaq stocks quoted at $1 and above have
tumbled 30% or more from the highs they set earlier this
year, according to a recent study by Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
analyst George Constantine. Moreover, this year's dazzling
38.1% rise in the Russell 2000 index of small stocks doesn't
seem so precarious given last year's 19.5% drubbing.
   Why all the optimism about small stocks? For starters,
small stocks normally sparkle during economic recoveries.
Following the end of the past seven recessions, small stocks
outpaced larger companies' shares for at least 12 months,
notes Laurence Siegel, managing director of Chicago's
Ibbotson Associates.
   A major reason: Unlike large multinational corporations,
small companies typically make only one or two products,
which they sell almost exclusively to U.S. buyers. That
narrow focus has meant big trouble for small companies in the
current economic slump, but it also should mean fat earnings
gains as the U.S. economy picks up steam.
   Small stocks soared earlier this year, as investors
anticipated a quick end to the recession. But as the economy
stalled, so did stocks, both large and small. Mr. Siegel
figures that smaller shares should take off again once there
are sure signs that the recession is over.
   A small-stock rebound certainly seems overdue. Since 1926,
the earliest year for which Ibbotson Associates has data,
small stocks have returned an average 12% a year, including
reinvested dividends, compared with 10.3% for the
large-company stocks in the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock
index. But lately, small stocks have been miserable
performers. Since mid-1983, the S&amp;P 500 has returned 14.9% a
year, while small stocks have eked out annual gains of just
5.6% -- and that 5.6% includes this year's spectacular
results.
   At first glance, small stocks don't appear to be a
screaming bargain compared with large stocks, if you use the
familiar gauge of price-to-earnings ratios. At the end of the
third quarter, the Russell 2000 index -- based upon companies
with an average market value of $210 million -- was trading
at 19.9 times the per-share earnings of the index's component
companies for the previous 12 months. That compares with a
multiple of 16.8 times earnings for the 50 largest U.S.
stocks.
   But analysts say that corporate earnings nationwide are
depressed right now because of the recession and that, in any
case, small stocks have historically commanded higher
multiples than large companies. When small stocks last peaked
in mid-1983, the Russell 2000 traded at 1.5 times the
price-to-earnings ratio of the 50 biggest companies.
   Moreover, smaller shares still look relatively cheap by
other valuation yardsticks. Compared with big stocks, the
Russell 2000 companies are trading at far lower multiples of
both book value (assets minus liabilities) and sales.
   The small-stock revival hasn't gone unnoticed by small
investors, who have poured $4.6 billion into "aggressive
growth" stock mutual funds so far this year. But market seers
reckon the rebound will really start to hum when
deep-pocketed pension funds begin crowding into the
small-stock arena. With hopes of getting a big bang for small
bucks, a growing number of pension funds are scouring the
nation in search of small-stock managers.
   "When small stocks start outperforming S&amp;P 500 stocks,
they tend to do so for a number of years," claims Mr.
Perritt, the newsletter editor. "We don't know why. But I
have a theory: Institutional investors have a lot of power in
the marketplace, and they tend to behave like lemmings."
   If a lot of big investors weigh into small-company stocks,
they could have an especially notable effect on the smallest
of the small stocks. Mr. Perritt notes that, among Nasdaq and
exchange-listed stocks, there are 2,000 companies with stock
market values of $100 million or less. These companies have a
combined market value, or "capitalization," of $100 billion.
About a third of the shares are held by management, which
means there is only some $67 billion of stock available for
public purchase. "Put an extra couple of billion into the
small-cap market, and you can see why you'll have explosive
price increases," says Mr. Perritt.
   Small stocks aren't immune to normal market forces, of
course. Charles Clough, Merrill Lynch's chief investment
strategist, expects this year's overheated market to fall
further before it begins another upward move. "You can let
this market come to you," he says.
   Mr. Clough recommends a technique known as dollar-cost
averaging. This buying strategy calls for investing the same
amount of money each month over an extended period,
regardless of what is going on with the market.
   ---
   Friday's Market Activity
                                                                                                       

   Over-the-counter stocks rebounded as investors rushed to
catch the latest small-stock rally.
   The Nasdaq Composite Index rose 2.63 to 538.90, a 0.5%
gain. As the huge stocks in the Dow Jones Industrial Average
raced to a new high of 3077.15, smaller shares trailed the
all-time high they set Wednesday of 540.94. For the week,
however, the Nasdaq index jumped 3.8%, compared with a 3.1%
climb in the industrial average.
   Advancing OTC stocks outweighed decliners, 1,135 to 805,
as 179 stocks climbed to new highs and 30 fell to new lows.
Volume eased to 212.1 million shares from 226.8 million
Thursday.
   Two bellwether technology stocks helped push OTC shares
higher: Apple Computer advanced 2 5/8 to 55 and Microsoft
rose 3/4 to 90.
   Apple jumped after it reported late Thursday net income of
67 cents a share for the fourth quarter. That was in line
with expectations, although below year-earlier profit of 81
cents. Sales at the Cupertino, Calif., concern rose to $1.5
billion from $1.4 billion.
   Elsewhere, however, Amgen sank 1 7/8 to 60 1/4, although
the bellwether biotechnology company reported that
third-quarter earnings surged to 34 cents a share from 11
cents a year earlier. Analysts surveyed by First Call, a unit
of Thomson Financial Networks, had expected the concern to
earn about 31 cents in the latest quarter.
   MCI Communications eased 3/8 to 26 3/4 on heavy volume of
three million shares.
   International Business Machines said late Thursday that
it's exploring the sale of its $400 million in MCI preferred
stock.
   Read-Rite, which offered 4.4 million shares in an initial
public offering priced at $11.50 each, closed at 12 5/8 and
was the day's second-most active issue. The Milpitas, Calif.,
concern makes recording heads for computer disk drives.
   Among other active issues, NovaCare, which is moving to
the New York Stock Exchange, rose 1 to 23 3/4; Intergraph
fell 7/8 to 18 3/4; and FHP International sank 1 1/4 to 11
1/2.
   Intergraph slumped after several analysts trimmed their
fourth-quarter earnings estimates for the maker of computer
graphics systems. FHP continued a decline that began after
the health maintenance organization said Thursday that
earnings will be weak for the first fiscal quarter, ended in
September.
   Artisoft slipped 1 1/2 to 20 1/2 after the company
reported earnings of 15 cents a share for the first quarter,
ended Sept. 30, down from 16 cents a year earlier. Sales rose
to $14.5 million from $8.6 million.
   Immunex lost 1 3/4 to 40 3/4 after Soundview Financial
analyst Lawrence Bloom expressed concern about disappointing
sales of its Leukine drug, which stimulates production of
infection-fighting white blood cells. The analyst slashed his
estimate for Immunex's third-quarter profit to three cents a
share from 10 cents, Dow Jones Professional Investor Report
said.
   Giga-Tronics slipped 3/4 to 6 1/4 after the company
reported a loss of two cents a share for its second quarter,
ended Sept. 28, compared with year-earlier profit of 10
cents. It attributed the loss to expenses related to a
restructuring of its manufacturing operations.
   American Management Systems lost 2 1/2 to 21 after several
analysts trimmed their estimates for its 1991 earnings, Dow
Jones Professional Investor Report said. Analysts said they
were told by the company that it's comfortable with estimates
ranging from $1.09 to $1.14 a share. It previously cited a
range of $1.15 to $1.20. Thursday, the company reported that
third-quarter profit fell to 24 cents a share from 31 cents a
year earlier.
   Somatix Therapy advanced 1/2 to 7 3/4. Thursday, the
company said that it agreed to merge with Genesys
Therapeutic, a company that specializes in treatments for
diseases of the central nervous system and cancer. Genesys
holders will get shares equal to about a 29% fully diluted
stake in the new company.
   Laserscope added 7/8 to 8 1/8 after the company reported
an expected third-quarter loss of 37 cents a share, compared
with net income of 35 cents a year earlier. The latest
quarter included a charge of 20 cents a share related to a
reserve for high inventory levels.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
