ID: 273	RANK: 82	SCORE: 8.921303
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920102-0038
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920102-0038.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Nasdaq Posts a Blistering 56.8% Surge
   For 1991 as More Big Investors Pile On
   ---
   OTC Focus:
   OTC Index's Gain
   Breaks '80 Record
   ----
   By Anne Newman and Dave Pettit
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/02/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE 15
</SO>
<IN>
STOCK INDEXES (NDX)
OTC GENERAL MARKET COMMENT (OTC)
STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
U.S. STOCK MARKET STATISTICS (STT)
</IN>
<NS>
STOCK AND OTHER INDEXES (NDX)
STOCK &amp; OTHER MARKET NEWS (STK)
</NS>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- Over-the-counter stocks raced to a
breathtaking close as the Nasdaq composite index ended its
best year ever with a stunning 56.8% gain.
   The small-stock index's torrid pace for the year more than
doubled the 20.3% gain in the Dow Jones Industrial Average
and the 26.3% climb in Standard &amp; Poor's 500-big-stock index.
It also shattered the previous record set in 1980 for the
20-year-old Nasdaq composite index, when it soared 33.8%.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   On the last day of the year, investors continued to favor
smaller shares over larger ones. The Nasdaq composite index
set its fourth consecutive record with a 6.59-point climb to
586.34. OTC volume climbed to 257.5 million shares from 224.1
million Monday. Advancing stocks raced past decliners, 1,502
to 821, as 263 shares reached new highs and 32 fell to new
lows.
   Since Dec. 19, the day before the Federal Reserve Board
sliced its benchmark discount rate a full percentage point,
smaller shares eclipsed larger ones with a 9.7% surge in the
Nasdaq composite index, compared with an 8.7% gain in the Dow
Jones industrials.
   Last year's explosion in small stocks smashed a number of
records. Total shares traded on Nasdaq, the computerized OTC
trading system run by the National Association of Securities
Dealers, soared to 41.3 billion shares, breaking the record
37.9 billion traded in 1987. Volume was boosted by 311
initial public offerings on the OTC market. Nasdaq volume
exceeded total volume on the New York Stock Exchange in 60
trading sessions.
   It was the strongest year in more than a decade for
small-stock managers such as Jack Laporte, who runs the
granddaddy of emerging-growth funds, T. Rowe Price
Associates' $1.4-billion New Horizons Fund. The more-than-50%
gain in his fund last year was the best since 1980 and the
fourth-best in New Horizons' 31-year history.
   Smaller shares still look reasonably priced compared with
larger stocks, Mr. Laporte says: the New Horizons Fund is
trading at about 1.2 times the Standard &amp; Poor's
500-big-stock index. But all stocks are pricey, he believes.
"It makes me nervous about the first couple of trading days
of the year," he says.
   Longer term, however, Mr. Laporte expects the leaders of
the small-stock universe will continue to shine as
fast-growing health care, software and technology companies
report stronger earnings growth than larger companies hit
hard by the recession. Those issues soared last year:
Nasdaq's pharmaceutical group, which includes the sizzling
biotechnology group, rose 149% through Dec. 26, while health
services jumped 112% and computer stocks rose 97%. In
contrast, gold and silver shares fell 2% during the period
and oil and gas stocks lost 7.5%.
   Amgen was the most active issue, leaping 6 3/8 to a new
52-week high of 75 3/4 on 7.5 million shares. The stock, the
Nasdaq leader in one of the hottest industry groups of the
year, biotechnology, was added to Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock
index after the market close. Stocks typically gain before
they are added to that index because of buying by mutual
funds.
   U.S. Healthcare was also active, slumping 3 1/2 to 41 1/2.
The New York Insurance Department denied the health
maintenance organization's rate increase request in that
state. The company said it will attempt to have the decision
reversed. Oxford Health, though, jumped 2 7/8 to 21 1/2. Its
New York rate request was approved.
   Pyramid Technology slumped 3 3/4 to 12 1/2 after it said
it will report an operating loss for the first quarter, which
ended last Friday. Its net loss for the period will also
include a restructuring charge of $12 million to $15 million.
A year ago, Pyramid earned $4.7 million, or 40 cents a share.
   Hechinger's Class A shares jumped 1 1/2 to 12. Dean Witter
Reynolds analyst Donald I. Trott upgraded his rating on the
stock to "buy-hold" from "hold," Dow Jones Professional
Investor Report said.
   Biomedical Dynamics advanced 1 to 9. It signed a
definitive agreement to be acquired by Vital Signs through a
stock swap. The companies entered a letter of intent for the
transaction last month. Vital Signs added 1/2 to 28.
   Digital Systems dropped 1/2 to 12 3/4. The company will
discontinue its Voicelink Data Services unit and take a $7.3
million charge. Although it expects 1991 net from continuing
operations of $8.8 million to $9.2 million, it will have a
loss of $1 million to $1.4 million after taking into account
discontinued businesses.
   Gendex fell 3 3/4 to 32 3/4 after climbing 3 on Monday.
The company said Tuesday that it terminated its talks to
acquire closely held Transworld X-Ray Corp. of Charlotte,
N.C. Gendex had expected the purchase to increase its annual
revenue by about $15 million.
   Telxon lost 2 1/2 to 25 1/2 after Robinson Humphrey
analyst Robert Anastasi cut his rating on the issue to "hold"
from "buy," according to Dow Jones Professional Investor
Report.
   First Commercial Bancorp eased 1/4 to 6 1/4 after the
Sacramento, Calif., company said it will report a
fourth-quarter loss after recording a $3.1 million reserve
for loan losses. A year earlier, it posted net of $4.7
million, or 38 cents a share, after making a $680,000
reserve.
   Teva Pharmaceutical added 2 7/8 to 18 7/8. It received
Food and Drug Adminstration approval to market a generic
version of an anti-inflamatory ointment made by New York
Stock Exchange-listed Syntex Corp.
   (See related story: "Pensions Finding Small Is Beautiful"
-- WSJ Jan. 2, 1992)
</TEXT>
</DOC>
