ID: 273	RANK: 9	SCORE: 10.661726
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910311-0150
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910311-0150.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   OTC Focus:
   Small-Company
   Issues Still have
   Room to Grow
   ----
   By Anne Newman
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
03/11/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C1
</SO>
<CO>
   AMGN
</CO>
<IN>
U.S. STOCK MARKET STATISTICS (STT)
OTC GENERAL MARKET COMMENTARY (OTC)
STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
STOCK INDEXES (NDX)
MUTUAL AND MONEY-MARKET FUNDS (FND)
</IN>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- Are small-company stocks dangerously
overvalued after their breathtaking 40% jump since
mid-October? Not if past patterns hold true, stock market
veterans say.
   By some yardsticks, smaller stocks are cheaper now than a
dozen years ago, when they were in the early stages of a bull
cycle that soared to dangerous heights in 1983, then crashed
and left smaller shares struggling for seven years.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "They have a lot of room to grow," says Dennis Trittin, an
analyst with Frank Russell Co. in Tacoma, Wash. The recent
spurt in small-company stocks should broaden out into a
steady but slower gains, he adds.
   "There's no evidence yet that small stocks as a class are
overvalued," says Michael Sherman, investment strategist for
Shearson Lehman Brothers. "Some look overpriced, but by and
large, small-capitalization stocks will do better than large"
ones.
   The Russell 2000 index of small companies (those with
market values of $300 million or less) has surged nearly 40%
since mid-October. That compares with a roughly 24% gain in
the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index. Still, prices of stocks in
the Russell 2000 index now are cheaper than 12 years ago --
and cheaper than the S&amp;P 500 and 50 largest issues -- when
measured by three separate yardsticks: book value (assets
minus liabilities), dividend yields and sales.
   The case for smaller stocks goes like this: Lower interest
rates should help stocks in general by reducing the allure of
other investments such as money market funds. Meanwhile a
stronger dollar should curb the attraction of big companies
that depend heavily on foreign operations. And the small
stocks, crushed last year, are still a bargain by some
measures.
   Mr. Trittin focuses on how stock prices compare with book
value, a measure he says is more stable over time than
price/earnings multiples that can zigzag wildly with the
economy. By the price-to-book yardstick, the Russell 2000
Index is trading at 67% of the stocks in the S&amp;P 500,
compared with 83% at the end of 1978. The 50 largest stocks,
on the other hand, are selling at an average 1.2 times the
price-to-book ratios of the S&amp;P 500 issues.
   Although Mr. Trittin thinks smaller companies can go
higher because they were so depressed, he's skeptical of the
argument that they should command higher stock prices because
they will profit more quickly than large ones in an economic
rebound.
   "The proof of the pudding will be whether these companies
can improve their earnings," says Mr. Trittin. "I really
wouldn't bet on whether small companies as a class are going
to grow faster. I still think their growth prospects are up
in the air." Competition makes it difficult for many smaller
enterprises to sustain high profit levels, he says, and the
past five years were "extraordinarily tough" for the Russell
2000 companies.
   On average, pretax returns on assets among the companies
in the group were 70% of those in the S&amp;P 500. Returns on
equity were 60% of those in the broader market. Small-company
earnings are so uncertain, says Mr. Trittin, that he thinks
small stocks should trade at 80% to 90% of the price-to-book
value of the S&amp;P 500 stocks, but not at the same level.
   "If companies are more cylical and uncertain, they should
sell at a discount," he says. He adds that he would be
"flabbergasted" if small stocks soared to their June 1983
levels, when some companies were going public at 40 times
their expected earnings. Many crashed the following year and
earnings failed to measure up.
   At today's prices, though, small stocks may be attractive
acquisition targets. Many haven't yet zoomed ahead like
Amgen, the over-the-counter market's most stunning success,
which has more than quadrupled in the past year as a patent
victory recently secured the company's position as the U.S.
leader in biotechnology.
   The psychology of mutual fund managers also could help.
Many were left behind in recent years by funds that mimicked
large-stock indexes rather than picking individual stocks.
But if smaller issues continue to outperform, fund managers
will again look smart, and their new-found confidence could
further fuel small stocks.
   Mutual funds have reason to shop among small stocks, says
Charles Clough, investment strategist for Merrill Lynch. The
wide variety of small stocks with potentially high returns
may be a prime stock-picking area in the '90s, he says, "if
mutual funds turn out to be the important mechanism through
which savings go into the market."
   ---
   Friday's Market Activity
                                                                                                       

   Over-the-counter stocks fell modestly as investors locked
in their recent profits.
   The Nasdaq Composite Index fell 0.63, or 0.1%, to 475.11,
and fared slightly better than larger shares. The New York
Stock Exchange Composite Index fell 0.2% and the Dow Jones
Industrial Average slipped nearly 0.3%.
   OTC volume eased to 187.9 million shares from 191.9
million shares Thursday. Advancing issues, however, continued
to outpace decliners, 1,090 to 857, as 131 stocks climbed to
new highs and only 13 dropped to new lows.
   Among the day's most active stocks, Apple Computer slipped
2 1/4 to 65; Tele-Communications Class A shares eased 1/4 to
15 3/4; and Amgen fell 2 7/8 to 126 1/4. MCI Communications,
however, edged up 1/8 to 27 5/8.
   Newly public Pac Rim Holding was among the day's most
active issues. The California insurer offered 2,750,000
shares at $7.25 apiece in an underwriting led by Salomon
Brothers Inc. Pac Rim rose 1/2 to 7 3/4 on 1.5 million
shares.
   Microsoft fell 1 1/2 to 102 1/2 after this newspaper
described some of the problems that users have had with the
software company's popular Windows personal-computer
operating system. International Business Machines Corp. also
is planning a new effort to promote its OS/2 operating
software, at the risk of breaking relations with Microsoft,
its partner on the project.
   Carrington Laboratories fell 1/2 to 8 5/8. Dow Jones
Professional Investor Report said that a recent 10-K filing
by the company indicated that the sale of its Terry
Laboratories unit to STD Corp. was terminated. Dennis
Willson, Carrington's executive vice president, said that STD
failed to meet a deadline ensuring that it had arranged
financing for the proposed transaction. Mr. Willson, however,
said that Carrington is pursuing several other possible
buyers of the unit. The stock traded as high as 10 earlier in
the day.
   Richfood Holdings Class A shares shed 3/8 to 12 3/4. The
Richmond, Va., wholesale food distributor said that its net
income for fiscal 1991 ending in April will be reduced
between 13 cents and 16 cents a share because of the
company's switch to the last-in, first-out inventory
accounting method. In fiscal 1990, Richfood Holdings had
earnings from continuing operations of 35 cents a share.
   Merrill Corp. slid 1/4 to 16 1/2. The St. Paul, Minn.,
company said it may report a loss for the fourth quarter
ended Jan. 31 approaching the 11-cent-a-share loss reported a
year earlier. According to Zacks Investment Research Inc.,
analysts had expected net income of 11 cents to 15 cents a
share.
   Genzyme fell 1 3/4 to 37 1/4. The Cambridge, Mass.,
biotechnology company said that it expects to file with the
Securities and Exchange Commission for an offering of three
million common shares; Genzyme has about 16.2 million shares
outstanding.
   PictureTel Corp. dropped 1 to 21 1/4. The Peabody, Mass.,
company said that it will redeem all of its publicly traded
common-stock purchase warrants outstanding on April 12 at a
price of five cents each.
   Arkansas Freightways lost 3/4 to 25. An issue of 1,450,000
common shares was priced at $25.25 each late Thursday.
   Communication Cable skidded 7/8 to 10 1/4. The North
Carolina maker of specialty cable reported that net income
for the first quarter ended Jan. 31 fell to seven cents a
share from 21 cents a share a year earlier. The company
attributed the earnings decline largely to start-up costs at
its Saxton Division.
   ---
                  Small Still Is Beautiful
                                                                                                       

   Relative valuation statistics of the Russell 2000 and the
50 largest companies vs. the S&amp;P 500, in percent
                                                                                                       

 INDEX                   12/78*          6/83          2/91
                                                                                                       

 RUSSELL 2000
                                                                                                       

 Price/book                83%           120%           67%
 Dividend yield            75             52            55
 Price/sales               60            100            58
 P/E (ex. losses)          90            139           110
                                                                                                       

 LARGEST 50 COS.
                                                                                                       

 Price/Book               167%           107%          124%
 Dividend yield           104            110           103
 Price/sales              174            113           130
 P/E (ex. losses)         109             92           105
                                                                                                       

   *Russell 1000 used for valuation
                                                                                                       

   Source: Frank Russell Co.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
