ID: 273	RANK: 91	SCORE: 8.845394
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910207-0060
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910207-0060.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   OTC Focus:
   Stocks Continue Surge in Heavy Trading;
   Composite Index Finishes 1.63% Higher
   ----
   By Dave Pettit
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/07/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C6
</SO>
<IN>
OTC GENERAL MARKET COMMENTARY (OTC)
U.S. STOCK MARKET STATISTICS (STT)
STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
STOCK INDEXES (NDX)
</IN>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- Over-the-counter shares continued their rapid
ascent, gaining 1.63% on heavy volume.
   The Nasdaq Composite Index again defied expectations of a
correction -- or at least a pause in its climb -- to close up
7.04 to 439.24. The index rose more than 1.7% both Tuesday
and Monday, and since the start of the year has gained 65.4
points, or about 17.5%.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   National Market System volume totaled 186,522,000 shares,
the fifth highest daily level in history and the highest
since October 1989. Tuesday, volume totaled 179,651,000.
   Meanwhile, advancing Nasdaq issues overwhelmed decliners,
1,308 to 742.
   On the New York Stock Exchange, the New York Stock
Exchange Composite Index rose 3.49, or 1.82%, and the Dow
Jones Industrial Average jumped 42.57, or 1.53%.
   Robert O'Toole, head of OTC institutional sales at Lehman
Brothers, said the recent cuts in interest rates continue to
spur buying in the over-the-counter market. Investors "have
put (the war) on the back burner; interest rates are the
key," he said.
   Many investors are moving money into stocks as the lower
rates reduce returns from investments such as money market
accounts, Mr. O'Toole said.
   "There is so much strength in the market you have to
believe that (the recent advance) is not a rally within a
bear market; it's the start of a new bull market," said James
Tarantino, head of OTC trading at Hambrecht &amp; Quist in San
Francisco.
   He characterized trading yesterday as a "buying panic.
It's just incredible; there is a lot of money out there."
   Among big gainers were Microsoft, which added 4 1/2 to a
52-week high of 105 3/4, and Sun Microsystems, which rose 1
3/8 to 31. Goldman Sachs analysts made positive comments
about both companies.
   But traders said a correction is inevitable and added that
some investors have begun to take their profits.
   Lehman Brothers' Mr. O'Toole said that while he doesn't
expect any market pullback to be deep, he expects some easing
in the market by week's end. "I think it would be healthy if
we had a correction. You can't keep going straight up or you
end up coming straight down," he said.
   Alfred E. Goldman, director of market analysis at A.G.
Edwards &amp; Sons, said OTC shares have risen too far, too fast.
He recommends some investors take profits in the stocks that
have posted the biggest gains -- such as the technology- and
healthcare-related issues.
   A.G. Edwards' Mr. Goldman said a market correction "will
come in where it is least likely to happen, and any place
except where the majority is thinking" it will.
   While Mr. Goldman says "there is no way to call the top"
of the rally in the OTC market, he sees the advance
continuing among Big Board issues until the Dow Jones
Industrial Average reaches the area of its all-time high just
under 3000.
   Mr. Goldman said the "risk-to-reward ratio" for investing
in OTC stocks short term has turned negative, meaning there
is more risk in investing in shares at their current levels
than there are potential benefits from such investments.
   MIPS Computer added 1 1/8 to 14 1/4. After the market
closed Tuesday, MIPS reported a fourth-quarter loss of two
cents a share against year-ago net of 12 cents. The company
said that economic uncertainty and pressure on its gross
margin make it "very cautious" about its outlook for the 1991
first half. MIPS fell 2 Tuesday.
   Although the MIPS results were lower than expected, the
stock may have gotten a boost after Goldman Sachs analyst
Rick Sherlund said he expects Microsoft to announce shortly
that it will support MIPS's reduced instruction-set computing
microprocessor.
   Hamilton Oil rose 5 to 38 3/4. Broken Hill Proprietary
proposed the acquisition of the portion of Hamilton that it
doesn't already own. Broken Hill, which now owns 50.1% of
Hamilton, would buy the rest for cash or stock valued at $40
a share.
   MCI Communications fell 1/8 to 25. The company proposed
offering new rates for government telecommunications services
that would reduce agencies' costs from levels under existing
government contract rates.
   3Com Corp. jumped 1 3/8 to 9 1/8. Late Tuesday, First
Boston Corp. analyst Greg Francfort commented on the stock to
his firm's sales force, Dow Jones Professional Investor
Report said. Mr. Francfort rates 3Com a strong buy.
   Insituform Mid-America rose 1 1/4 to 8 3/4 after posting
first-quarter net of 20 cents a share, up from three cents
last year.
   Valid Logic Systems slid 1/8 to 2 1/8. Its fourth-quarter
net dropped to one cent a share from 13 cents in the year-ago
period.
   Health Management Associates closed at 19 1/8 on 1.1
million shares. Late Tuesday, an initial public offering of
2,550,000 Class A common shares was priced at $16 a share.
The concern operates acute-care and psychiatric hospitals.
   Dell Computer gained 5/8 to 26 5/8 after introducing five
new products, including two notebook-size computers. The
company also trimmed the prices on its line of personal
computers.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
