ID: 305	RANK: 28	SCORE: 7.420092
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910628-0063
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910628-0063.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Highlights of the 1990-1991 Supreme Court Term:
   High Court Uses Term to Reduce
   Rights of Accused People
   ----
   By Stephen Wermiel
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
06/28/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8
</SO>
<IN>
LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)
</IN>
<NS>
LAW &amp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)
</NS>
<GV>
SUPREME COURT (SUP)
</GV>
<RE>
MICHIGAN (MI)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
TENNESSEE (TN)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- More than any other issue, getting tough
with criminals dominated the Supreme Court term that ended
yesterday.
   Throughout the term, the high court attempted to reverse
what its new conservative majority believes was excessive
expansion of the rights of accused people during the 1960s.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The pronounced law-and-order turn of the court culminated
yesterday with the justices' 6-3 ruling overturning a 1987
precedent and allowing use of information about victims'
families in death-penalty sentencing. The justices also
ruled, 5-4, that the Constitution doesn't bar mandatory life
imprisonment for a first drug offense.
   "We are really seeing a solid conservative majority emerge
in the criminal-law area, almost across the board," says Alan
Slobodin, a lawyer with the conservative Washington Legal
Foundation. Some say the court has run roughshod over civil
liberties.
   This month marked anniversaries of two of the most
important rulings ever for the rights of defendants. In June
1961, the Supreme Court applied the exclusionary rule to the
states, ruling that evidence obtained in violation of the
Fourth Amendment's protection from improper searches couldn't
be used in a criminal trial. And in 1966, the court issued
the Miranda decision, which said the Fifth Amendment
protection against self-incrimination requires police to warn
suspects of their rights before taking them into custody and
interrogating them.
   This term, the court's concerns ran largely in the other
direction. The justices made it easier for police with no
warrants to search buses for drugs or to open and examine
suitcases or paper bags they find in the trunks of cars. The
court also allowed prosecutors to use some coerced
confessions as evidence against defendants, and it authorized
the jailing of individuals for up to 48 hours without a court
hearing, during which time police could work to see if there
is probable cause for the arrest.
   Yesterday's decision to allow the use of so-called victim
impact information in death-penalty cases culminated a
conservative effort that began almost as soon as the 1987
ruling banning use of such information in capital cases was
announced. The earlier decision was by a 5-4 vote. With
subsequent changes in the makeup of the court, that slim
majority disappeared, but the conservative justices were
unable to muster enough votes in two previous attempts to
overrule the 1987 decision.
   Yesterday, however, in an opinion written by Chief Justice
William Rehnquist, the votes were there and the earlier
decision was cast aside, with Justice David Souter joining
the majority. Justices Thurgood Marshall, Harry Blackmun and
John Stevens dissented. (Payne vs. Tennessee)
   In yesterday's other ruling, the justices substantially
weakened a 1983 decision that said the Eighth Amendment
prohibition of "cruel and unusual punishment" requires that a
criminal sentence be proportionate to the crime. In an
opinion written by Justice Antonin Scalia, the court said a
Michigan law that required a life sentence for possession of
672 grams of cocaine, may be "unusual," but isn't "cruel" and
isn't unconstitutional. (Harmelin vs. Michigan)
   The tough turn in the high court's approach was
foreshadowed 23 years ago, when Richard Nixon campaigned for
president vowing to appoint justices who would show more
support for victims and the police. But even though Mr. Nixon
named four justices, his law-and-order court never fully
materialized. The court of the 1970s tinkered quite a bit,
but fundamentally altered relatively little.
   All that has changed. "The conservative court has the
votes and it's off and running," says Yale Kamisar, a
professor at the University of Michigan Law School. "There
are virtually no constraints on them," says Louis Michael
Seidman, a Georgetown University Law School professor.
   Nowhere has this been more apparent than in death-penalty
cases.
   First, in two major decisions this year, the high court
cut back sharply on the availability to death row inmates of
federal habeas corpus -- a civil lawsuit filed most often by
a convicted prisoner whose appeals have been denied and who
claims that his arrest or trial was unconstitutional. In the
1960s, the Supreme Court vastly expanded federal court review
of state criminal convictions.
   Chief Justice Rehnquist has long argued that the system is
abused by prisoners who file one habeas corpus petition after
another, causing their executions to be deferred for years.
Rather than wait for Congress to curtail the alleged abuses,
the high court took matters in its own hands.
   The justices set tougher standards for inmates who file
second habeas petitions to prove that their claims couldn't
have been raised in their first petition. The justices also
ruled that federal courts shouldn't consider first habeas
petitions if those petitions didn't comply with state court
procedural rules.
   "They've really almost done away with habeas corpus," says
Professor Kamisar.
   The track record isn't all one-sided. The court threw out
a few death sentences and, perhaps in honor of the Miranda
decision's 25th anniversary, ruled that once a suspect has
asked to consult a lawyer, police can't resume questioning
unless the lawyer is present.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
