ID: 305	RANK: 39	SCORE: 6.778259
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910417-0179
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910417-0179.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   What's News --
   World-Wide
</HL>
<DATE>
04/17/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<LP>
   BUSH SAID the U.S. and its allies would establish refugee
camps in northern Iraq.
   The president announced that U.S. troops would help create
the encampments in an effort to hasten humanitarian
assistance to tens of thousands of Kurdish refugees. Bush
said the Kurds would be encouraged to move to the protected
camps from remote mountainous areas along Iraq's borders with
Turkey and Iran. He stressed that the action was "an interim
measure designed to meet an immediate, penetrating
humanitarian need," and that the U.S. hadn't any intention of
intervening militarily in Iraq's internal affairs.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   U.N. Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar said he would
instruct international legal authorities to consider an EC
proposal to try Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein for war crimes.
   ---
   THE SUPREME COURT MADE it tougher for death-row inmates to
appeal.
   The high court, by a 6-3 vote, narrowed the rights of
convicted criminals, especially those on death row, to file
repeated challenges to the constitutionality of their
convictions. The justices ruled that a Georgia inmate abused
the legal process known as habeas corpus by filing a second
round of legal challenges to his 1978 murder conviction.
Conservatives have complained that prisoners drag out death
sentences by filing habeas corpus petitions rehashing old
issues or raising new ones that could have been raised
earlier.
   The dissenters, Marshall, Blackmun and Stevens, accused
the court of substituting its own rules for those of Congress
with regard to defendants' rights without acknowledging the
change.
   ---
   Israel flouted Baker's call for Mideast
"confidence-building gestures," allowing Jewish settlers to
establish a community in the occupied West Bank. In
Washington, the White House said the settlement at Revava was
"an obstacle to peace." Baker is due in Jerusalem tomorrow
for a third round of shuttle diplomacy.
                                                                                                       

   Shamir pressed his Soviet counterpart, Pavlov, for the
restoration of diplomatic ties as a necessary prelude to a
regional peace conference. The Israeli and Soviet prime
ministers were in London for the inauguration of the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
   ---
   Gorbachev and Kaifu held talks and agreed to tackle their
longstanding dispute over four islands off Japan's northern
coast. Gorbachev, making the first visit by a Soviet leader
to Japan, is hoping to improve relations between the two
countries and gain pledges of economic assistance from the
Japanese.
                                                                                                       

   The Soviet Parliament gave initial approval to a bill
proposed by Gorbachev that would ban political strikes.
Separately, the president of Georgia ordered the southern
republic's government agencies to support strikes and civil
disobedience as part of its campaign to secure independence.
   ---
   South Africa banned "dangerous weapons" at public
gatherings in a bid to curb black factional violence, but
officials didn't bow to demands by the opposition African
National Congress for a law against traditional tribal arms.
Separately, the ANC disclosed plans for paramilitary
self-defense units, a move condemned by the police.
   ---
   About 700,000 workers staged a strike at textile, metal
and leather factories throughout Serbia, Yugoslavia's largest
republic, in a walkout termed the biggest since the former
communist party won free elections in December. Many of the
workers are demanding wages they haven't received for months
because of an economic crisis.
   ---
   A report on estrogen found that women who took estrogen
pills for 15 years were 30% more likely to develop breast
cancer. The review of 16 earlier clinical studies shows the
cancer risk is lower than some earlier studies suggested, but
the report doesn't make clear whether the risk outweighs the
benefits.
   ---
   Nicaragua needs more U.S. aid as it faces the "almost
impossible" task of building a democracy from the ruins of
civil war and economic collapse, President Chamorro told
Congress. But House Speaker Foley said lawmakers instead are
likely to urge the White House to expedite aid dollars
already allocated but not yet disbursed.
   ---
   Chilean health authorities reported a case of cholera in
that country, indicating the epidemic that already has killed
1,000 people in Peru has spread to a fourth nation in South
America.
   ---
   Died: David Lean, 83, British director of large-scale film
epics who won Academy Awards for "Bridge on the River Kwai"
and "Lawrence of Arabia," in London.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
