ID: 305	RANK: 49	SCORE: 6.304308
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880915-0118 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-15-88 1320EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a PM-Hurricane-US 5thLd-Writethru a0618 09-15 1114</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Hurricane-US, 5th Ld - Writethru, a0618,1143</SECOND>
<HEAD>Gulf of Mexico Coast Braces For Hurricane Gilbert</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: LEADS with six grafs with sandbags, shelters, schools closed,
cellular phones loaned. PICKS UP 5th graf pvs, `Early today ...'</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos NU1,NU2</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By JOEL WILLIAMS</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>CORPUS CHRISTI, Texas (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Thousands from southern Texas to
Louisiana's bayous shuttered homes and shops, packed up livestock
and fled to higher ground today as Hurricane Gilbert roared across
the Gulf of Mexico toward the U.S. coast.
   ``This is a killer storm,'' said Gordon Guthrie, director of the
Florida Division of Emergency of Management. ``I feel sorry for
anybody wherever this hits.''
   Grocery stores ran low on bottled water, batteries, canned tuna
and bread as residents laid in supplies. Homeowners covered windows
and doors with plywood and shatter-proofing hurricane tape.
Offshore oil workers headed inland.
   Classes were canceled or cut short today in some communities.
Southwestern Bell Co., bracing for downed phone lines, loaned
cellular phones to Corpus Christi and other cities. Authorities set
up shelters and stockpiled sandbags.
   The military began flying aircraft inland from coastal bases in
Mississippi and Texas to wait out the storm at Midland
International Airport.
   ``It sounds facetious, but people can stay as long as we can
fingerprint them so we can identify them later,'' said Bob
Pinkerton Jr., mayor in the coastal resort of South Padre Island,
where 1,000 residents were told to evacuate.
   Early today, Gilbert appeared headed for Texas, possibly hitting
land by Friday afternoon. The National Weather Service issued a
hurricane warning this morning for the southern half of the
370-mile Texas coast from Brownsville to Port O'Connor, a stretch
that includes Corpus Christi. Mexico's northern coast also had a
hurricane warning.
   At noon EDT, the storm cneter was about 410 miles southeast of
Brownsville, moving west-northwest at about 15 mph, the weather
service said.
   A hurricane watch remained in effect for the remainder of the
Texas coast, from Port O'Connor north to Port Arthur.
   ``The highest probabilities that we have are in the Brownsville,
Texas, area as far as the center is concerned,'' Robert Sheets,
director of the National Hurricane Center in Miami, said on CBS's
``This Morning.'' ``If it takes the north turn, it could actually
rake a good portion of the Texas coast.''
   ``Those major destructive winds are going to be in there fairly
tight close to the center. But the impacts are going to be felt
over most of the Texas area.''
   The giant hurricane, considered one of the strongest ever, was
blamed for dozens of deaths in the Caribbean and left 500,000
Jamaicans homeless before it struck Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula on
Wednesday, forcing thousands to evacuate.
   It weakened somewhat as it passed over the peninsula, falling
from a Category 5 _ the strongest rank _ to a Category 3 as top
sustained winds eased to 120 mph from 175 mph. But forecasters said
they expected it to go back up to a Category 4 now that it was back
over the gulf, with winds of at least 130 mph.
   The 1,600 students and about 200 patients at the University of
Texas Medical Branch on Galveston Island were being evacuated, said
spokeswoman Leann Teymour.
   In Louisiana, 10,000 people had orders today to leave homes
along the bayous on the state's flood-prone coastline. Grand Isle,
a barrier island resort where 2,100 people live, was evacuated
Wednesday, as were many of Plaquemines Parish's 15,000 residents.
   ``I'm scared to death,'' said Pam Quigley, who recalled the
devastation by Hurricane Celia in 1970. ``If you could have seen
Corpus Christi after Celia, you wouldn't have believed it. It was
just demolished.''
   NASA delayed announcement of a launch date for space shuttle
Discovery because the hurricane could disrupt operations at the
control center in Houston.
   Texas Gov. Bill Clements issued an emergency proclamation
allowing local authorities to suspend laws ``to preserve the
health, safety and welfare of the public,'' including such things
as the direction of highways.
   On the Bolivar Peninsula outside Galveston Bay, most beachgoers
and about 3,000 residents left by sundown Wednesday, packing the
Bolivar Ferry to Galveston all day long, said Police Chief Farris
Collier of Crystal Beach.
   ``Some of them are being stubborn and are saying they're staying
no matter what,'' he said. ``But if it hits here, they won't be
here any more.''
   ``If I wasn't the city manager, I'd evacuate myself, but I'm
required to stay,'' Galveston's Doug Matthews said today on ABC's
``Good Morning America.'' ``We've never seen anything like this
type of hurricane in the gulf. ... It's going to kill.''
   Galveston Mayor Jan Coggeshall said on CBS that her greatest
fear was that people would decide to stay and wait out the storm.
   Two Galveston residents were arrested for trying to sell plywood
for windows and doorways at an inflated price just hours after the
City Council passed an emergency ordinance designed to stem price
gouging by merchants.
   Hurricane frenzy also was apparent in Cameron Parish, La., a
thin layer of lush marsh just above sea level that has been a
frequent front door for hurricanes over the years.
   The parish of 10,000 residents boasts about 5,000 head of cattle.
   ``We'll be working all night to get them out,'' Francis Bride, a
Lake Charles physician, said as he helped shove the rumps of balky
steers into a packed trailer.
   The impact of the 450-mile-wide storm was felt even in areas not
expected to be hit by Gilbert.
   State emergency officials in Montgomery, Ala., began making
preparations to receive thousands of people who could take refuge
there from the storm.
   ``We did a survey of hotels from Montgomery to Mobile and found
that people from Mississippi and Louisiana were making hotel
reservations in large, large numbers,'' said J. Danny Cooper,
director of the Alabama Emergency Management Agency.
   Florida's Gov. Bob Martinez canceled a trade mission to France
because of the storm.
   ``Once it gets in the gulf there's only one way out _ to have a
landfall,'' said Martinez. ``It's that kind of storm where you
don't sit around and have a hurricane party.''
   In Texas, Clements late Wednesday suspended elections planned
for Harris and Brazoria counties.
   In Corpus Christi, where Hurricane Allen killed two people in
1980, all five school districts called off class for today and
Friday, even though it wasn't known where or when Gilbert would
strike.
   ``We decided to close the schools in order to allow people who
want to evacuate the area time to do so,'' said Charles Benson,
school superintendent.
   Many grocery stores in Corpus Christi had run out of bottled
water, and supplies of batteries, canned tuna and bread were
running low Wednesday afternoon.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
