ID: 305	RANK: 6	SCORE: 10.295810
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910422-0168
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910422-0168.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Law -- Washington Docket:
   Supreme Court Conservatives Play Role
   Of Legislators on Death Penalty Issue
   ----
   By Stephen Wermiel
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
04/22/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B5A
</SO>
<IN>
LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)
</IN>
<NS>
LAW &amp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)
</NS>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)
SUPREME COURT (SUP)
</GV>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- It has long been a hallmark of Supreme Court
conservatives to complain that their liberal colleagues are
acting more like legislators passing laws than justices
interpreting them.
   Last week, the roles were reversed. Apparently impatient
with the slow pace of congressional efforts to truncate the
system of appeals in death-penalty cases, the court's
conservative majority decided not to wait any longer and did
it themselves.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   This departure from the traditional conservative approach
was vividly highlighted when the Senate Judiciary Committee,
just two days after the court's ruling, held its first
hearing of the year on proposed crime legislation. Among the
proposals by the Bush administration is one that would do
what the court in effect has already donelimit the number of
death-penalty appeals.
   The controversy is over the centuries-old system of
federal habeas corpus, a civil lawsuit generally filed by a
prison inmate who has been convicted and who has had his
conviction upheld on appeal. A state prisoner files a habeas
corpus petition first in state court and then federal court
to argue that his constitutional rights were violated by
police or prosecutors or trial judges.
   Conservatives, led by Chief Justice Rehnquist on the court
and by state and federal law-enforcement officials elsewhere,
have long maintained that in deathpenalty cases, the habeas
corpus system has been badly abused by prisoners and their
lawyers who file one petition after another, raising new and
old legal issues, and delaying executions for years.
   "The resulting lack of finality undermines public
confidence in our criminal justice system," said the 1989
report of a task force appointed by Chief Justice Rehnquist
and headed by retired Justice Lewis Powell.
   The Powell report recommended time limits on filing habeas
corpus petitions and would have made it difficult to file
more than once. It formed the basis for legislation proposed
by the Bush administration and its allies in the last
Congress. Indeed, Chief Justice Rehnquist caused a stir by
sending the Powell report to Congress before the Judicial
Conference, the policy-making arm of the federal courts, had
a chance to vote on it.
   But liberals, while acknowledging the need to clear up
post-conviction appeals, opposed the Powell recommendations
as far too restrictive of habeas corpus, which is virtually
the only way a convicted prisoner has to protect against
law-enforcement abuses. The result was that the House and
Senate passed different versions of habeas corpus
legislation. Both were dropped from the final bill last year,
and action was put over for the new Congress this year.
   The Supreme Court, however, chose not to wait. By a 6-3
vote, the justices adopted a new legal standard for reviewing
second and subsequent habeas corpus petitions that will
virtually eliminate them, except in the most extraordinary
cases.
   "This is an attempt to do through court decision what they
haven't been able to do through legislative action," said
John Boger, a University of North Carolina law professor and
experienced appellate lawyer in capital cases. Mr. Boger
represented Warren McCleskey, the Georgia prisoner in the
Supreme Court case.
   The new legal standard puts the burden on the prisoner to
prove that there is good reason the habeas corpus claim in a
second petition wasn't raised in the first petition. Even
then, the prisoner must show that the trial was prejudiced by
the allegedly improper action by police and prosecutors that
is the basis of the petition.
   It is a very tough standard to meet and goes beyond what
Georgia prosecutors sought in their brief in the McCleskey
case.
   The Bush administration apparently doesn't think it goes
far enough, however. President Bush's new crime bill proposes
a new standard for first-time federal habeas corpus petitions
in death cases that an American Bar Association briefing
paper says "would virtually eliminate the federal courts'
authority" to rule once the issues have been considered in
state court.
   Ironically, this proposal goes too far even for Chief
Justice Rehnquist. Although he helped ignite the present
furor for limits on habeas corpus, last May he criticized the
approach that is now at the heart of the president's crime
bill.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
