ID: 305	RANK: 64	SCORE: 5.973367
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910510-0078
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910510-0078.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Desperately Seeking
   Bubba: Beer Swiller,
   TV Fan and Boar
   ---
   After Pampering the Piglet,
   Owners Fear the Worst:
   The Pet May Be Schnitzel
   ----
   By Robert Tomsho
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
05/10/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<LP>
   CORPUS CHRISTI, Texas -- With his oversized head, spiked
hair and scrawny legs, some might think Bubba ugly. His
behavior too could be seen as crude -- as a teen-ager he
chugged beer and wet the bed.
   But none of these little flaws stop Buddy and Patsy Thorne
from missing him so badly they keep his photo enshrined in
their living room. Five years after his disappearance, they
still spend almost every scrap of their free time
crisscrossing the Rio Grande Valley in search of him,
sometimes armed with his favorite chocolate bars, which they
sprinkle enticingly near alleged "Bubba sightings."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Actually, it's a quest that for a time caught up much of
Bubba's home town of Corpus Christi. Bumper stickers
plastered the fenders of pickup trucks asking, "Where's
Bubba?" Billboards pleaded, "Bubba, Call Home." After a local
columnist wrote about Bubba, concerned citizens marched on
city hall and local radio stations began blaring "The Ballad
of Bubba." A local bar held a "Bubba Aid" concert.
   But for Patsy Thorne, a former coffee shop waitress who
now works in the office of a small oil company, talking about
the adopted little one whom state authorities took from her
back in 1986 is almost too painful. "I just get all choked
up," she says, referring all questions to her husband. As the
Thornes' silver pickup truck rumbles down an isolated ranch
road on yet another search, she simply whispers, "I'll never
forget him."
   It would indeed be hard to forget Bubba, who, despite his
almost-human attributes, is -- or perhaps was -- actually a
wild boar-like creature known in these parts as a javelina.
Belittled as "musk hogs" and "cactus pigs," the normally
funky-smelling javelinas (Bubba had had his musk glands
removed) don't get much respect in their native Southwest.
Their fearsome tusks have spawned a host of tall tales,
although in truth, javelinas are more likely to run at
someone out of nearsightedness than fury. Ranch hands use
them for target practice, hunters stalk them for trophies and
some determined cooks even turn them into schnitzel.
   To the Thornes, however, Bubba was family. Found by Mr.
Thorne as a piglet during a rattlesnake hunt, the eventually
90-pound porker lived with the Thornes for a decade. They say
the experience transformed him into what sounds like a Texas
Good Ole Boy. While the typical javelina dines on cactus
roots, Bubba developed a taste for scrambled eggs, spaghetti
and barbecued chicken. He could be finicky, refusing to eat
vegetables unless they were divided into neat little piles on
his plate.
   Bubba's leisure-time activities were likewise unusual for
the breed. He watched cartoons in the living room, snoozed in
Buddy's easy chair and attended the Thornes' annual New
Year's Eve bash -- suitably attired in a party hat. "He would
drink so much beer and then he would quit," says a respectful
Buddy Thorne, a former rodeo cowboy turned construction
engineer. "He knew his limits."
   Most of his drinking was social. On evenings when Mr.
Thorne was out of town, Bubba used to sip cold beer with Mrs.
Thorne and listen to all of her problems. "She would sit
there and talk with him as if he was me," says Mr. Thorne.
   The Thornes' daughters brushed his tusks regularly -- "He
had his own toothbrush," Mr. Thorne explains. He even slept
with them. Mr. Thorne still recalls the night one of his
girls woke up screaming after Bubba wet the bed. "That rascal
acted just like he knew what she was hollering about," Mr.
Thorne says. "He jumped right out of that bed, ran all the
way upstairs and got into a dry bed."
   But what Bubba apparently didn't know for quite some time
was that he was a javelina. He didn't take the news well.
After the Thornes held a mirror up to him one day, his neck
hair bristled and he scurried off, apparently in shock.
   His own shock, however, was nothing compared to that of a
new neighbor, a Yankee just moved in from St. Louis, who had
a similarly hair-raising reaction when she peered over the
Thornes' back fence one day five years ago. By the time the
Thornes got home, the game wardens were there with
tranquilizer guns. Over the Thornes' protests, the
authorities loaded Bubba into their trunk and dropped him,
still groggy, beside a back road 35 miles south of town. The
location was kept secret from the family.
   Buddy Thorne was cleared of misdemeanor charges of keeping
a wild animal without a permit. He subsequently lost a civil
suit against the game wardens accusing them of illegally
entering his home and causing his family mental anguish by
denying it Bubba's companionship. But a sympathetic judge
ordered the wardens to reveal where they'd dropped Bubba.
   Unfortunately, by then the trail was three months cold,
and Bubba was nowhere to be found.
   Driven by their devotion, the Thornes have kept searching
ever since. They've pushed the odometer on Buddy's truck up
to 97,000 miles and estimate that they've spent nearly
$12,000 on legal fees and travel on his behalf.
   With upwards of 150,000 javelinas roaming the Lone Star
State, the Thornes' chances of finding the one and only Bubba
are slimmer than he ever was. They're not even sure he could
survive in the wilderness. Pampered since piglethood, Bubba
wouldn't touch warmed-over roast beef much less the uncooked
fare available to most of his kind. And while javelinas have
lived for up to 24 years in captivity, at 16, Bubba would be
pushing the envelope for one in the wild.
   Against the odds, the Thornes keep looking, sometimes
pursuing what turn out to be only javelina-shaped rocks and
shadows. Along the way, they have endured many indignities,
from an awkward breakfast recently at a roadside cafe
decorated with stuffed heads of Bubba's kin, to the
occasional insensitive "wild hog tamale" joke.
   The couple's spirits were boosted in December when they
received snapshots from some Houston bowhunters who'd
befriended a sociable javelina on a ranch about 110 miles
west of Corpus Christi. Despite having several arrows shot
over his head, the animal ambled into camp, let the men
scratch his snout and posed for pictures.
   The Thornes say the elderly animal was the spitting image
of their Bubba. "It looked so close it was unreal," says
Buddy. "It was the expression on his face, you know? He had
that gentle look about him."
   But despite several three-hour treks to the ranch, they
have yet to find the familiar set of tusks among the scrubby
stretches of mesquite and prickly pear.
   Hard though the truth is to face, the Thornes have begun
to realize that they may be running out of time. And so they
have taken the necessary steps to give Bubba a decent end,
purchasing a grave site for him at the Corpus Christi Humane
Society's pet cemetery.
   Bubba's resting place will be beside the grave of Kirby,
the 200-pound sheep who shared the Thorne's back yard and was
Bubba's bosom buddy. Kirby died two years after Bubba was
taken, and Buddy recalls, "When we lost Bubba, he sulked so
bad it was just like his life was gone." But then, Kirby is a
whole other story.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
