ID: 305	RANK: 87	SCORE: 5.569751

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-32866 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drlat031_r_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-LAT-94-031 </AU>
Document Type:Daily Report 
<DATE1>  15 Feb 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Peru </F>
<H3> <TI>   Reportage, Comment on La Cantuta Case, Events </TI></H3>
<H4>   * Military Probe Criticized </H4>
<F P=102> 94SM0202A Lima EL COMERCIO in Spanish 27 Dec 93 p A2 </F>
<F P=103> 94SM0202A </F>
<F P=104>  Lima EL COMERCIO </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Luis Miro Quesada G.: "Cover-Up Also a Crime"] </F>
  [Text] A reading of the well-documented report written by 
Ernesto de la Jara Basombrio and published by IDEELE magazine, 
on events that began on the fateful morning of 18 July 1992, 
when nine students and a professor at La Cantuta University were 
kidnapped, and later murdered, cannot but leave the reader 
stricken as deeply by the savagery of the murders and treatment 
of the remains as by the significance of the ensuing acts of 
suppression, of dilatory judicial proceedings, of obstructive 
tactics, and finally, even of cover-up of such a despicable 
crime, at the military, judicial, and political levels. The 
following is based on information taken from the IDEELE article. 
  The events having taken place as they did, it was obvious, 
as 
the CCD [Democratic Constituent Congress] Committee's report 
later indicated, that the raid had been of a paramilitary 
nature. The university campus was guarded by the military and 
was under curfew at the time. And the raid itself--the type of 
weapons used, the silencers, the subordination of the military 
personnel stationed there, the secrecy of identities, the 
existence of a previously prepared list, etc.--all indicated 
this to be the case. Instead of launching an investigation, the 
military authorities limited themselves to denying the 
detentions. For months, while the victims' families fought to no 
avail in the courts--in a quest for justice, as we will see 
further on--the military command took no action in the matter 
until April 1993 when, as a result of an anonymous document 
received by Congressman Pease and read by him on the floor of 
the Congress, it agreed to appoint an investigating committee. 
  According to the anonymous document, Vladimiro Montesino is 
said to have coordinated the carrying out of the raid designated 
"Kidnap," with the participation of the chief of the 
Intelligence Directorate and the chief of the Special Forces 
Division, both of whom, in turn, allegedly coordinated the 
operation with the commanding officer of the siege of La 
Cantuta, and with the commanding officer of Headquarters 
Battalion 19. The document alleges that the Army Commander in 
Chief was informed, and that he ordered that no mistakes be 
made. "The document certainly did not constitute proof of 
anything, but it definitely pointed to allegations requiring 
investigation." In view of this, the Investigating Committee 
summoned General Nicolas de Bari Hermoza to testify on the 
subject. The high military official twice postponed his 
testimony, and during the intervening days, in consideration of 
two disclosures on his part, a judicial proceeding was 
instituted within the military jurisdiction, that thus far, nine 
months later, has served more to stifle justice than to shed 
light on the facts. 
  The chief of the Joint Chiefs of Staff declined to testify 
before the Committee because the case was before the Supreme 
Council of Military Justice and, according to this Council, "no 
authority may take over cases pending before the mentioned 
military jurisdictional body, nor interfere in the exercise of 
its functions." As is public knowledge, General Hermoza Rios 
stated that it was all a political maneuver by left-wing members 
of Congress to slander the Army. Then, in a move ostensibly 
aimed at intimidation, he ordered the tanks out into the 
streets, as high-ranking military officials read a supporting 
statement, characterizing Congress's action as "A base attempt 
to implicate the Peruvian Army in an alleged violation of human 
rights, maliciously using for that purpose spurious documents 
forged by a small group of opposition congressmen...." 
  Thus, naively or maliciously, an investigative proceeding 
was 
transformed into an incrimination of the Armed Forces; and a 
parliamentary investigation was thwarted. 
  On 29 April, General Robles, a political refugee in the 
United States Embassy, issued a public statement in which he 
indicated that the La Cantuta crime had been perpetrated by a 
special detail of the SIN [National Intelligence Service], in 
collaboration with the SIE [Army Intelligence Service], and with 
the Intelligence Directorate of the EMGE [Army General Staff]. 
General Robles detailed the names of officers and subordinates 
who had participated; and stated that the mentioned special 
detail operated under the orders of Vladimiro Montesino with the 
knowledge of the chief of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. 
  Serious though the accusation is, equally serious are the 
actions that have been taken to silence it. According to 
Robles's public statement, when he learned of these occurrences 
of utmost gravity, he requested a talk with General Jose Picon 
Alcalde, president of the Military Tribunal, informed him of 
what he had learned, and urged that the Tribunal proceed 
accordingly. The answer was: "Look, friend, the General 
Inspectorate of the Army has concluded that neither the Army nor 
any of its members had anything to do with this case.... 
Therefore, I am going to drag it out until the people forget 
about the matter." The allegation is a grave one indeed, 
implicating as it does the very president of the Military 
Tribunal, but a conversation between two persons is the word of 
one against that of the other. 
  What makes the account credible in this case is the fact 
that, the day after, Robles was summoned by General Hermoza 
Rios, to receive the Supreme Decision signed that day 
transferring him to the IADB [Inter-American Defense Board] to 
which post he was to travel most urgently. In this ugly story, 
which is seemingly on the verge of being substantiated, there 
is, concerning the La Cantuta affair, an accusation and an 
attempt at silencing. 
  With the discovery of the graves at Cieneguilla and 
Huachipa, 
the affair acquired so much notoriety that the chief of the 16th 
Provincial Office of the Public Prosecutor, Doctor Victor Cubas 
Villanueva, finally instituted proceedings against those whose 
names appear in the cited incriminatory documents, and, having 
requested arraignment of the detained officers, summoned them to 
appear in court. They have not appeared, in contempt of the 
writ, and the Supreme Council of Military Justice has instituted 
a conflict of jurisdiction proceeding, that if settled in its 
favor would make it very difficult, in view of the history of 
this case thus far, to arrive at a total clarification of the 
events, and full punishment of those responsible. 
  The intent to not investigate has been no less evident at 
the 
judicial level. The writ of Habeas Corpus filed by the president 
of La Cantuta University at the end of July, was declared 
contrary to law for lack of substantiating evidence. The Habeas 
Corpus filed by the mother of one of the victims, after being 
bounced back and forth, was declared contrary to law, with the 
incredible argument that "the material kidnapping of the 10 
persons was not proven." Finally, the 6th Criminal Branch of the 
Court confirmed the ruling denying the Habeas Corpus, with the 
equally incredible argument that "neither has the physical 
existence of the citizens been verified." 
  The Public Prosecutor's Office, because of the university 
president's report, knew of the case as of 1 August, but there 
as well, action to investigate and prefer charges was delayed. 
And in the end, that office instituted no proceedings whatever, 
opting for disqualifying itself and forwarding the matter to the 
Superior Council of Military Justice, notwithstanding the 
existence of a record that the 8th District Public Prosecutor's 
Office had reported to the nation's Attorney General that it was 
clear that the high command of the Peruvian Army "are 
concealing" the said information. 
  And procrastinations and postponements continue. Instead of 
ruling on the question of the courts' jurisdictions submitted to 
him by Judge Flores Chacon, Public Prosecutor Cubas Villanueva 
is contending that he cannot rule until the question of that 
judge's recusation is resolved; as if judicial rulings on the 
jurisdictions of the courts depended upon this or that person. 
  At the political level, in government circles, the same line 
of conduct has been followed for many months: that of acting not 
to clarify the facts, but on the contrary to impede their 
clarification. The best proof of this is that, in the face of 
determined pressure by the CCD's Investigating Committee to 
obtain the testimony of the implicated military personnel, the 
CCD opted to approve, by majority vote, the opposing motion, 
which provided that the military personnel summoned by the 
Committee not be present in person, but be represented by their 
chiefs. 
  Clumsily wrought, this device implemented a policy if not of 
cover-up, certainly one of not uncovering the truth. Statements 
by the ministers of state and by the president himself have been 
purely rhetorical, platitudinous utterances of principle but, de 
facto, neither reproving nor intending to correct such an 
obvious process of cover-up. A process reaching such extremes as 
the contention by Congressmen Sigra and Freundt, in their 
minority report as members of the Investigating Committee, that: 
"Voluntary disappearance is probable, considering that, from the 
information at the disposal of the Committee, it is clear that 
there are many cases of persons reported as disappeared who, 
later, have been located in other places, to which they have 
moved so as not to be identified, and thus engage in terrorist 
activities." The remains at Cieneguilla and Huachipa are 
accusatory attestations to the contrary. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
