ID: 305	RANK: 97	SCORE: 5.388114
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891107-0012 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-11-07-89 0122EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r w PM-DrugPlaneProblems Bjt   11-07 1133</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Drug Plane Problems, Bjt,1100</SECOND>
<HEAD>Anti-Drug Radar Plane Plagued by Electronics Problems, Documents
Say</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto WX15</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By LARRY MARGASAK</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   A costly Customs Service radar plane
envisioned as a key weapon in the war against drugs is plagued by
electronics problems and can't reliably guide interceptors to
drug-smuggling aircraft, agency documents say.
   ``Next month marks one year that we have been flying'' the first
P-3 airborne early warning (AEW) aircraft, a Customs memo said on
May 4, adding computer errors ``still make air intercept control a
difficult task.''
   In September, the plane's manufacturer, Lockheed Aeronautical
Systems Co., said it would commit additional resources to
``upgrade'' the plane's computerized tracker. The equipment
automatically plots the course and speed of other planes, and its
inaccurate readings have been largely responsible for difficulties
in intercepting planes suspected of smuggling drugs, according to
the documents.
   ``You can't use the system for interception, and that's what all
this magic is about,'' said a Customs source, adding that the P-3's
computerized altitude, course and speed readings are so inaccurate
that radar specialists worry they could direct their interceptors
into a collision with a drug plane. The source spoke on condition
of anonymity.
   John McGinnis, director of Lockheed's airborne early warning
program, said in an interview the firm is making improvements in
the tracker because of ``anomalous behavior that we could not
prevent. The plane is functioning but there are problems with it
and we are correcting it.
   ``The airplane and the tracker are very capable and doing their
job,'' he said, adding the firm hopes to have the difficulties
fixed by ``the first of the year.''
   Other difficulties mentioned in the documents relate to the
computer system that locates targets, faulty on-board
communications for the crew, and problems with a spinning metal
radar dome atop the plane.
   Difficulties aside, sources speaking on condition of anonymity
said reports critical of the plane's performance were ordered
rewritten by an agency supervisor after one early test.
   The P-3 AEW's are designed to play a major role in drug
interdiction from their Customs Service base in Corpus Christi,
Texas. The government's multi-agency El Paso Intelligence Center
reports 51 percent of the 112,000 kilograms of cocaine seized
during 1988 arrived by air _ 45 percent in private planes.
   Despite the shortcomings detailed in the documents, Peter
Kendig, acting director of Customs' Corpus Christi surveillance
center, called the aircraft ``a cost-effective piece of equipment,
giving taxpayers one of best bangs for the buck in government
today. It works and it works great.''
   He said the system for tracking smugglers has a ``few glitches''
that can be solved.
   The first P-3 AEW aircraft has experienced both electronic and
mechanical difficulties since the $27 million plane arrived at the
Customs Surveillance Support Center in Corpus Christi in June 1988,
according to the documents.
   The documents show some of the problems afflicted a second P-3
that arrived in April at a cost of $30.6 million. Congress already
has approved $35 million for a third P-3.
   The P-3 Orion has been used for years as a Navy anti-submarine
detection plane, but the Customs Service plane contains specially
designed electronics for the drug war.
   Identification of the authors of most of the documents was
obscured by sources who made the material available to The
Associated Press. The majority of documents were written by P-3
crew members, the AP was told.
   The difficulties diminish one of the most important features of
the four-engine turboprops: the ability to use the multi-colored
computer displays, with their impressive interchangeable graphics,
to direct Customs Service planes intercepting and pursuing the
flying smugglers.
   Kendig said the two P-3 AEW's were mainly responsible for
detections leading to 36 arrests from Jan. 1 to Aug. 10 this year.
Seizures included 37,000 pounds of marijuana, 8,300 pounds of
cocaine, 17 vessels and vehicles and three aircraft, he said.
   John Berezonsky, project manager for the AEW program at
Lockheed, said in an interview the plane's problems ``haven't
prevented the aircraft from doing a hell of a job'' and result from
``trying to put so much information on display to the operator so
quickly. We can track a greater number of targets simultaneously
than anyone operating an AEW aircraft now. That's the key.''
   Yet the documents, and interviews with those knowledgeable with
the program, said the mission has been hampered in a number of ways:
   _Planes that were possibly 300 miles away appeared as nearby
targets. Single targets were displayed as multiple images. Targets
were lost when the P-3's on-board computer system ``crashed.''
Ships appeared at altitudes of 15,000 feet.
   _The spinning radar dome atop the plane, similar to that on an
Air Force AWACS, stopped working when the plane's speed reached 270
knots.
   _Agency officials accepted the first plane without the test
flights designed by experts to create what a memo called ``real
world'' conditions. The test plan, included in the documents, would
have evaluated the radar equipment over every possible terrain,
trying to see how well it detected other Customs aircraft playing
the role of drug-smuggler planes. The evaluation was flown months
after Customs accepted the aircraft.
   _The P-3's experienced numerous communications problems. Radar
specialists in the back of the plane were unable to monitor pilots'
transmissions, a handicap that would _ according to a memo _
``hinder safety of flight, and impede crew coordination.'' A memo
warned of the potential for a ``NORAD (no radio) situation,'' a
total communications failure.
   _Two crewmen at Corpus Christi were ordered to water down their
highly critical reports of the first P-3's performance during a
then-top secret mission in late July-early August 1988 to detect
drug planes leaving Colombia. One of the initial reports of the
plane's first operational test said, ``The (tracking) program is so
inaccurate'' the radar specialists ``had to develop alternate
procedures to detect and track targets.''
   The aircraft tracker problem was an important part of the
evaluation of Operation Barrier, the mission to detect Colombian
drug planes completed in early August 1988. There are at least four
reports: two highly critical, and more favorable versions of the
originals. A Customs Service source speaking on condition of
anonymity said both original versions were ordered rewritten by a
supervisor in Corpus Christi.
   One of the originals, dated Aug. 2, 1988, said the computer
``crashed'' at ``irregular intervals'' and communications
improvements were needed ``so the next three aircraft will not be
`communications cripples.''' It added that ``deficiencies in the
tracking program'' required use of antiquated ``raw radar'' to
``verify the validity'' of the computer displays and to ``provide
accurate intercept data.''
   After the rewrite was ordered, the same author wrote on Aug. 17,
1988, the operation was ``a complete success'' in which ``systems
reliability was superb.'' He concluded, ``the potential of this
asset is unlimited.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
