ID: 227	RANK: 29	SCORE: 26.539970
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910517-0058
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910517-0058.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Retailing:
   Wal-Mart's Store of the Future Blends
   Discount Prices, Department-Store Feel
   ----
   By Kevin Helliker
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
05/17/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   VCRT WMT
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)
BROADLINE RETAILERS, DEPARTMENT STORES (RTB)
</IN>
<RE>
ARKANSAS (AR)
ILLINOIS (IL)
WYOMING (WY)
</RE>
<LP>
   ROGERS, Ark. -- When Sam Walton opened the first Wal-Mart
discount store here in 1962, the retail industry didn't
notice. Twenty-nine years later, Wal-Mart Stores Inc. hopes
its new store here will likewise escape attention.
   Never mind that Wal-Mart, newly anointed as the nation's
largest retailer, with fiscal 1991 sales of $33 billion, can
scarcely sell a pair of slacks these days without drawing a
curious crowd. Citing competitive concerns, the company
declines to discuss its new store, which features innovations
and strategies that could revolutionize discount retailing.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But it seems clear from the design and innovations built
into the prototype that Wal-Mart thinks its customers of the
future will be as concerned about service as about low
prices. Upon entering the store, customers expecting the
usual warehouse ambiance of discount stores will be shocked.
With wide aisles and classy displays, it looks more like an
upscale department store than a spartan discounter. And one
of the biggest distinctions between discount and department
stores -- self-service vs. full service -- is blurred at this
store; new technology provides information about products and
helps customers locate them, though there appear to be a few
bugs in the system. The new store even has some designer
names typically found only at upscale department stores, such
as Estee Lauder and Calvin Klein.
   Unlike department stores, however, the Wal-Mart store has
the same bargain-basement prices found in all its outlets.
   "It's an outstanding store," says David Poneman, a
retailing analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Co., adding that
it only heightens "the long-term trend of the discount store
nipping away at the edge of the department-store franchise."
   Though upscale department stores aren't exactly
preoccupied with goings-on in Rogers (population 24,000),
they aren't dismissing Wal-Mart's experimental prototype as
inconsequential -- especially since the company plans to
expand aggressively into big-city markets with stores of one
kind or another.
   Trying out unproven devices such as shopping carts with
video screens may seem odd for a retailer dedicated to low
costs. But it's in keeping with a corporate tradition of
disdain for the conventional -- which extends back to when
Mr. Walton, against the advice of virtually everyone, began
opening discount stores in towns thought too small to support
them.
   Indeed, says Mr. Poneman, the corporate culture at
Wal-Mart still encourages ideas that might seem downright
"wacky," he says, "and a few might work."
   Wal-Mart, long a leader in computerizing the distribution
side of retailing, is putting technology in the hands of
customers at this store. Consumerscan, found throughout the
store, gives customers their own bar-code scanners to check
prices. Though prices are marked on shelves, customers
sometimes "forget the price once they put it in their cart,"
says a Wal-Mart associate stationed near a Consumerscan.
   The Wal-Mart Arts Report has a TV screen to let customers
preview movies and music videos. Shoppers also can use the
device to order titles that aren't in stock. A few feet away
is Wal-Mart Sound Associates, which provides information
about audio products.
   The Arts Report and Sound Associates could represent
breakthroughs, analysts say. "Self-service stores have always
been hard for customers to find information in, and Wal-Mart
is becoming a leader in providing improved consumer
information through technology," says Sid Doolittle, a
Chicago retail consultant and former Montgomery Ward &amp; Co.
executive.
   The most popular gadget in the store is VideOcart, an
information technology becoming available in supermarkets but
until now not used elsewhere, according to the company that
provides it. As customers progress through the store,
information about the department at hand flashes on the video
screen attached to their carts. A pass through men's apparel,
for instance, elicits news of a sale on Fruit-of-the-Loom
T-shirts. "I love it," says Kim Woodfin, who says she changed
her mind about a plastic swimming pool after VideOcart
directed her to a less expensive model.
   VideOcart also helps customers find their way. It lists
hundreds of product categories by department, along with a
department-by-department map of the store. "I've used that to
find a lot of stuff," says Sherree Oyler, shopping with her
two children.
   Wal-Mart officials won't comment on their experience with
VideOcart. But VideOcart Inc., the Chicago company that sells
it, says the carts have increased sales by $1 a visit at
supermarkets. VideOcart predicts that its technology will
prompt discount-store shoppers -- who typically use carts
less often than grocery customers -- to increase their use of
carts, possibly resulting in greater sales.
   It's far from certain that the prototype store here will
become the Wal-Mart of the future. At about 125,000 square
feet, it is the largest Wal-Mart store (50% bigger than
most), and much of that space is devoted to wider aisles,
less cramped displays and sitting areas for customers --
features that could increase expenses and squeeze profit
margins.
   Moreover, technology isn't necessarily a satisfactory
substitute for knowledgeable sales clerks. When customer Jean
Moore, trying to find Super Glue, checked her VideOcart, it
directed her to the stationery department, where most
household glues are located. But Super Glue, for heavy-duty
uses, is in hardware.
   And on a recent day, a customer trying to use Wal-Mart
Sound Associates, the audio products guide, found its screen
blank and dark -- because, hours after the store had opened,
no one had plugged it in.
   Finally, it isn't clear how many designer-name products
Wal-Mart will be able to offer at other stores. In fact, it
isn't even clear how they managed to offer Estee Lauder and
Calvin Klein fragrances here in Arkansas. Officials of those
companies say they don't and won't sell their product to
discounters such as Wal-Mart. "We don't know where they got"
the fragrances being sold in Rogers, says a Calvin Klein
spokeswoman, because "we only sell to upscale department
stores and specialty stores."
   Wal-Mart officials decline to comment.
   Despite the uncertainty, the new Wal-Mart store gets good
reviews. Customers like the more spacious design. "In the
store that this one replaced, two carts could barely pass in
the aisle without crashing," Ms. Oyler says.
   And retail specialists praise the displays, which organize
related products -- such as shower curtains, towels and
ceramic bathroom accessories -- into visual "vignettes." "The
displays are as good as an upscale department store," says
Betty Martin Musham, a New York apparel designer touring the
store after a recent visit to Wal-Mart's nearby headquarters.
She predicts that the cost of added display space will be
more than recouped through sales of "multiples," or related
products.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
