ID: 227	RANK: 94	SCORE: 22.416254
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911202-0058
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911202-0058.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Wal-Mart Set
   To Eliminate
   Reps, Brokers
   ----
   By Karen Blumenthal
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
12/02/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3
</SO>
<CO>
   FHT H.VTK PA WMT
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
FINANCIAL (FIN)
</MS>
<IN>
ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)
DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, CREDIT INSTITUTIONS (FIS)
SPECIALTY RETAILERS OF LIMITED PRODUCT LINES (OTS)
BROADLINE RETAILERS, DEPARTMENT STORES (RTB)
ALL SPECIALTY RETAILERS (RTS)
</IN>
<RE>
ARKANSAS (AR)
MINNESOTA (MN)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Wal-Mart Stores Inc., flexing its enormous marketplace
muscle, is trying to squeeze the independent sales
representative out of the product buying process.
   In a Nov. 6 letter to manufacturers, David D. Glass,
Wal-Mart's chairman and chief executive officer, said the
discount retailer has decided it should deal only with
"principals," or employees of its suppliers. People who
represent more than one company, like a broker or
manufacturer's representative, won't qualify, he said.
Wal-Mart buyers have told some manufacturers and
representatives that reps and brokers won't be welcome at
Wal-Mart's Bentonville, Ark., headquarters beginning today.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Wal-Mart's distaste for sales representatives isn't new;
some brokers already have lost some lines they used to sell
to the retail chain. But that was comparable to losing "a
finger or a toe," says Jack Springer, executive director of a
trade group for general merchandise reps. Now, he says,
"they're going for the jugular."
   The installation of an advanced computer system that
allows manufacturers to peek into Wal-Mart's store and
warehouse inventories has given Wal-Mart a new reason for the
renewed assault on manufacturers' representatives. In his
letter, Mr. Glass cited the system, along with the need for
"improved communication and increased reaction time," as the
rationale for eliminating third parties.
   Some industry participants see this as an attempt by
Wal-Mart to eliminate a layer of costs, a logical desire for
a retailer that brags about its everyday low prices. But
manufacturers are forbidden by federal antitrust laws from
offering discounts in place of commissions or brokerage fees.
And some manufacturers aren't overjoyed at the big retailer's
attempt to influence the way they do business.
   The brokers and manufacturers' reps stand to lose most.
Because Wal-Mart can easily account for half of a rep firm's
commissions, some could be forced out of business. "They are
coercing the manufacturers to fire brokers," says one large
Southwestern broker, who says he already has lost one sizable
account because of the move. Like many independent sales
representatives and manufacturers interviewed, he asked not
to be identified for fear of angering the nation's largest
retailer; Wal-Mart accounts for about 16% of his company's
approximately $600 million in sales volume.
   With so much at stake, some rep firms have decided to
fight back by raising money for a public relations campaign
to spotlight Wal-Mart's actions. Others are vowing to sue if
Wal-Mart forces a manufacturer to cut them off.
   A Wal-Mart spokesman declined to comment on the issue.
   Other retailers and large buyers, like electronics makers
and even health maintenance organizations, have tried from
time to time to cut out the use of independent sales
representatives, who usually sell several manufacturers'
products to buyers in a particular region for a commission. A
spokeswoman for Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co., for instance, says that
"with few exceptions, we deal directly with manufacturers to
keep our costs and selling practices competitive."
   But manufacturers and representatives say Wal-Mart has
been most aggressive within the industry in trying to
eliminate the independents. In the mid-1980s, for example, it
began asking manufacturers to send only their executives on
sales calls. Some reps and manufacturers insisted the company
wanted price cuts from manufacturers equal to the brokers'
commissions of 2% to 3% for an account of Wal-Mart's size.
   The retailer's new computer system has given it more
leverage in the battle. While Wal-Mart already places many of
its orders directly with factories through computers, its
newest system lets vendors analyze their own sales, track
inventories at Wal-Mart stores and warehouses and check
invoices. But Wal-Mart insists that manufacturers keep the
data confidential from its brokers and reps.
   Some manufacturers argue that using sales reps is more
economical than hiring a direct sales force. "Our entire
sales force is a broker sales force," says one snack-food
manufacturer, whose Southwestern food broker is
electronically linked to Wal-Mart. The executive says he
relies on the broker to sell promotions as well as new
products to Wal-Mart, to visit stores and resolve problems.
With margins thin already, he says his company couldn't
replace the brokers with employees. Besides, he says, "We're
really not keen on people telling us how to run our
business." But he says his company hasn't decided how it will
respond to Wal-Mart's request.
   Jack Hirsch, president of Video Technology Inc., said the
maker of electronic educational toys sends a company official
along with reps on calls to major accounts, but relies on the
reps to handle each account's day-to-day needs, like telling
retailers what is selling well and what isn't. While Video
Technology gets orders directly from Wal-Mart, store managers
also order through its rep's 800 number.
   While he says he hasn't received Mr. Glass's letter, the
request "does present a predicament for any manufacturer,"
says Mr. Hirsch, a director of Toy Manufacturers of America
Inc., a trade association. "Nobody wants to risk not granting
a request from one of the top accounts. On the other hand, we
have obligations to the people who represent us." Toy makers
plan to discuss the issue at a meeting this week.
   Wal-Mart has won some converts. Borden Inc., which once
sold almost exclusively through reps, now says its own
employees sell products like Elmer's glue to Wal-Mart, or an
executive accompanies brokers on calls. A beauty-aids maker
says in recent years it agreed to assign a national manager
to handle Wal-Mart's account while its representatives call
on all other retail accounts. Because Wal-Mart is large and
complex, "we feel they need special treatment," a company
executive said, though he insists that the treatment doesn't
include preferential pricing.
   If the reps do sue, at least one recent case would seem to
favor their position. Earlier this year, Fingerhut Cos., a
catalog retailer, agreed to settle a 1988 lawsuit, filed in
Minnesota state court, charging Fingerhut with interfering
with contracts between manufacturers and reps by asking the
manufacturers to sell directly to it. The lawyer for the two
reps who filed the suit said Fingerhut agreed to pay an
undisclosed sum and to send a letter to manufacturers
welcoming their reps back.
   A Fingerhut spokeswoman said that terms of the settlement
prohibit the company from commenting on it.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
