ID: 138	RANK: 93	SCORE: 10.708688
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911029-0102
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911029-0102.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Business World:
   Forbes 400 Are Paupers When It Comes to Public Policy
   ----
   By Tim W. Ferguson
</HL>
<DATE>
10/29/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A23
</SO>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   The superrich are like the rest of Americans in one
respect, based on Forbes magazine's description of the top
400 fortunes in the U.S. They show no more interest in public
affairs than does the average Joe.
   They devote much time and money to the arts and have the
resources to pursue man's brightest achievements. Yet in the
arena where philosophy -- a classical pastime -- is put into
practice, most of them couldn't seem to care less. Political
governance (or freedom from it) is something, instead, for
the professional class to worry about.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Too harsh an indictment? Run down the list. You'll find
exceptions, sure. Richard DeVos and Jay Van Andel (founders
of Amway) are big backers of groups such as the Heritage
Foundation, as is Shelby Cullom Davis. Charles and David Koch
(Koch Industries) and the Hoiles family (Freedom Newspapers)
have bankrolled libertarian concerns such as the Cato
Institute and the Institute for Humane Studies. William Simon
and Richard Mellon Scaife fund the right. (Other Mellon heirs
do the opposite.) Ted Turner, the commodore of cable
television, stakes left-wing activities, as does Joan Kroc,
widow of the McDonald's hamburger popularizer. Lew Wasserman
(MCA) and other Hollywood heavies are in that camp, too, and
Robert Haas (Levi Strauss) leans that way.
   That leaves about 390 pairs of deep pockets. Who picks
them? The museums are great at it. They throw swell parties
and name wings after their benefactors. They also preserve
our cultural heritage. If only that alone could anchor the
present culture, which in many ways seems dangerously adrift.
Collections are rather subtle transmitters of secular values.
Even libraries won't help many who don't know where to look
or even how to read.
   Yet the rich can't resist tangibility. The Getty mint, to
cite a prominent example, occasionally dribbles out to a
think tank, but primarily keeps the art elite in canvas and
concrete. A spokesman for Gordon Getty didn't return a call
seeking out his priorities.
   Hospitals and medical care (but no urban emergency rooms)
are treated well by the financially flush. Schools and the
great universities reap a bounty. Members of the Bass clan
alone have coughed up more than $100 million for Yale and
Stanford since last year. Yet, apart from scientific
advances, it's debatable whether such institutions have been
a net plus lately. Moreover, UCLA economist Armen Alchian has
a notion that endowments are corrosive; colleges should have
to earn their keep regularly to stay more attuned to the
society around them.
   Guys with bucks love to buy media outlets, but especially
sports franchises. The pro-team owners charge the rest of us
a king's ransom to watch. Businesses pay the price and deduct
it against their taxes. We all play along with the game.
   Other diversions are often the spouse's choice. George
Gilder, who wrote an introductory essay to this year's Forbes
list, finds businessmen get lost around home: "They all have
these upper-class wives. It's incredible how few of them are
conservatives." A favored cause: Planned Parenthood. Other
hobbies are more benign. The wife of Roy Hampton Park, the
Duncan Hines founder now nourished by Florida oranges, raises
peacocks.
   Effeteness is usually associated with successor-generation
wealth. What about the self-made billionaires -- the Kluges,
the Gateses, the Buffetts? Where is the latterday Robert
Brookings, contributing to "civitas"? Perhaps he's acting
quietly. It's not widely known, for instance, that Sam Walton
has given "substantially" to the national drive to limit
legislative terms, according to a key organizer.
   Christopher DeMuth, who heads the American Enterprise
Institute and therefore knows a little about those with a
lot, says many "have a low opinion of politics." Their
careers are built on efficiency, good organization and
businesslike behavior -- and "all those things aren't highly
esteemed" in the public arena. Especially to engineers,
public policy-making is messy and unseemly.
   Most business executives get involved inasmuch as it
affects their bottom line, but that's just lobbying. (Roger
Milliken used to bankroll libertarians; now, pressured by
textile imports, he backs protectionism.) Likewise, the
Forbes list has many who donate to political parties or
politicians, but that, too, signifies little other than a
taste for ambassadorships and inaugural balls. Some run for
office themselves, but typically for no reason except ego.
J.R. Simplot, the Idaho potato king, flies a big U.S. flag
over his house.
   Mr. DeMuth kindly finds "CEOs of major corporations to be
astoundingly well read," given tight schedules. One New York
idea monger, however, bemoans the uninterest of the Wall
Street and real-estate contingents in town. The Big Apple's
bureaucracy may bridle them, but they're "one big goose egg"
in donations to change the local political debate.
   Alexander Cockburn, the leftist scribe and scourge of
capitalism -- who married rich -- says inactivity is a mark
of satisfaction. "They think political affairs have done very
well for them," he offers. "Once you've made your PAC
contribution and natural gas has been decontrolled, what more
is there left to do?"
   George Gilder thinks it takes concentrated effort to
resist the intellectual fashions of the day, and that most
entrepreneurial rich are simply too busy. "When I talk to
them, I'm amazed by how left they are. Not left in
interesting ways -- they laugh at Dan Quayle and think Reagan
was stupid, an actor. It's the facile stuff they encounter in
their social circles." But the closer an issue comes to their
own business, the more conservative they get.
   John Von Kannon, a development official of the Heritage
Foundation, says donors care about the effectiveness of their
charity, even one as relatively safe as the zoo. And, for
most people, "it's easier to believe in a cause that's not
controversial, especially when the liberal culture defines
what is controversial."
   Even Michael Milken, the supposedly protean capitalist,
expended precious little of his billions on systematic
defenses of market processes. Some went to narrower
intellectual promotion of "junk" financing, and gobs to
social programs run by people prone to bemoan the Greed
Decade.
   Edward Crane, the Cato Institute's president, says
philanthropists are pressured "to deal with symptoms of
problems," such as poverty, rather than the policies that
bring about the ill. In that respect, their responses are
indeed the sort of nonideological humanitarianism you'd
expect from Americans in general.
   The fact is that any great shift toward public policy by
the wealthy or their trusts would be double-edged. The Joyce
Foundation of Chicago (lumber money) espouses that course and
funds activists on several fronts. When its executive
director Craig Kennedy laments, "For some donors, daycare
centers have more appeal than daycare policy," the right can
be excused a nervous twitch.
   In the democratic bazaar, the fabulous fortunes might end
up just buying us all trouble, so maybe criticisms on this
score should be muted. Surely, the lords of the hoards can
still do good while leaving the laws to others. As Ed Crane
allows, "Children's wings in hospitals aren't a bad thing."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
