ID: 310	RANK: 64	SCORE: 24.084990
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP901214-0206 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NY-12-14-90 0040EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r f PM-BusinessHighlights     12-14 0678</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Business Highlights,0835</SECOND>
<DATELINE>LOS ANGELES (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Walt Disney Co. and Jim Henson Productions
broke off talks after failing to reach an agreement on Disney's
plans to acquire rights to Kermit the Frog, Miss Piggy and the
other Muppet characters.
   The proposed deal to acquire Henson Associates Inc. was valued
at $100 million to $150 million. Disney had sought an exclusive
production agreement with Jim Henson Productions in the talks,
which began in August 1989 and continued after the puppeteer's
death in May.
   Disney officials did not cite reasons for the deal's collapse
Thursday.
   ---
   VIENNA, Austria (AP) - OPEC ministers pledged to keep their oil
taps wide open during the eersian Gulf crisis - and turn them down
once it ends.
   The agreement Thursday by the 13-nation Organization of
Petroleum Exporting Countries caused little stir in the oil
markets, which have been skittish for months over tensions in the
oil-rich gulf.
   ---
   WASHINGTON (AP) - Retail sales declined 0.1 percent last month,
the government said in a report analysts said pointed to a bleak
holiday shopping season.
   Sales totaled a seasonally adjusted $151.6 billion, down from
$151.8 billion in October and the first decline since a 0.1 percent
drop in May, the Commerce Department reported Thursday.
   ---
   DETROIT (AP) - Early-December sales of North American-made
vehicles rose 22.3 percent, but the increase came against a weak
period last year and doesn't reflect the true softness in the
market, automakers and analysts said.
   The 10 major companies making cars and light trucks in North
America said Thursday that sales during the Dec. 1-10 period this
year averaged 27,624 a day, compared with an average of 22,589
during the same time last year.
   Car sales were up 27.8 percent and truck sales rose 14.3 percent
from last year, the weakest selling period of 1989.
   ---
   WASHINGTON (AP) - Despite the government's crash program to shut
down failed savings and loans, losses at the surviving solvent
institutions more than doubled in the July-September quarter,
regulators said.
   Thrifts lost $631 million in the third quarter, compared with a
revised $302 million in the second quarter and $373 million in the
first. the Office of Thrift Supervision said Thursday. The second
quarter loss had originally been reported as $196 million.
   The decline was blamed on the real estate slump afflicting many
regions and said the industry's performance likely will not improve
until those markets improve.
   ---
   NEW YORK (AP) - Gannett Co., publisher of USA Today, said a
slump in advertising will mean its revenue and possibly its
earnings will be lower in 1990 than a year ago.
   The declines would be the first such year-to-year drops at
Gannett since the company went public 22 years ago and reflect what
experts say has been the slowest annual growth in overall ad
spending since 1975.
   Gannett was among a half-dozen major media companies that
described for securities analysts Thursday the toll that the weak
advertising environment is taking on their earnings expectations.
   ---
   NEW YORK (AP) - Dow Jones &amp; Co. employees rejected a move to
affiliate with a big communications workers' union, despite recent
cutbacks and uncertainty at the publisher of The Wall Street
Journal, results showed.
   Reporters, technicians, clerical workers and other personnel
voted 61 percent to 39 percent against affiliating with the
Communications Workers of America, which staged four strikes last
year. The results were announced Thursday.
   ---
   NEW YORK (AP) - Federal regulators charged 10 brokers with
bilking investors of about $1.4 million through fraudulent penny
stock sales, in a case that names only the securities salesmen and
not their firms.
   A civil lawsuit filed Thursday in federal court said the brokers
conducted illegal trading at several firms using techniques that
included pressuring investors to buy stock, refusing to let them
sell and promising prices to rise.
   The complaint was filed by the Securities and Exchange
Commission.
   ---
   BERLIN (AP) - General Motors Corp. subsidary Opel signed an
agreement to invest $675 million in an auto plant in former East
Germany. The German government hailed the company for helping to
develop the region.
   Opel, a wholly owned subsidiary of General Motors Corp., said
Thursday it build a plant in Eisenach to make 150,000 Corsa and
Kadett models annually. It will create 2,600 new jobs, Opel said,
with the first cars to come off the assembly line in late 1992.
   ---
</TEXT>
<BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   The stock market drifted through a mixed session Thursday as
traders sorted through the latest data on the state of the consumer
economy. The Dow Jones average of 30 industrials dropped 7.92 to
2,614.36.
   The dollar firmed slightly against major foreign currencies.
   Bond prices fell.
   Grain and soybean futures prices fell; silver was lower while
gold advanced; livestock and pork futures retreated; and energy
prices gained.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
