ID: 310	RANK: 74	SCORE: 21.877712
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920221-0016
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920221-0016.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Class Act:
   `Sesame Street,' at 23,
   Still Teaches Children
   While Amusing Them
   ---
   Now, It Is Hoping to Train
   Child-Care Workers How
   To Use Its TV Programs
   ---
   Show on Divorce Flunks Test
   ----
   By Cynthia Crossen
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/21/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
BROADCASTING (BRD)
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)
</IN>
<NS>
EDUCATION ISSUES (EDU)
CORPORATE PROFILES (PRO)
</NS>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- "Feathers for Caroll]" yells the director.
That means Caroll Spinney should struggle into his 14-pound
Big Bird costume and get to work taping "Sesame Street" show
No. 3003.
   The show is a special on elections that will be broadcast
in May and October. The puppets and their human friends have
$3 to spend, and they learn about voting by deciding whether
to buy crayons or juice.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   ROSITA: You count the people who want crayons. Then you
count the people who want juice. If more people want juice,
it's juice for everyone. If more people want crayons, it's
crayons.
   TELLY: Sounds crazy but it might just work]
   That is pretty much what the founders of Children's
Television Workshop, which produces "Sesame Street," thought
23 years ago when they began making a show for
two-to-five-year-olds that would be both educational and
entertaining. Although the typical young child watched
several hours of television a day, TV had never been used as
a teaching tool. Education taught; television amused. They
were Hatfields and McCoys.
   "Sesame Street" became one of the most popular TV shows in
history, and Children's Television Workshop an international
empire operating in more than 80 countries. The nonprofit
CTW, whose operating revenue topped $90 million last year,
has evolved into a sophisticated publishing, licensing and
TV-production conglomerate that knows its customers --
toddlers and their parents -- better than almost anybody.
Competing with a smorgasbord of television choices and
knowing that children have the smallest vote in the house,
"Sesame Street" manages to entertain adults while
spoon-feeding children their ABCs.
   Despite many trappings of a large corporation, Children's
Television Workshop clings to its do-gooder heritage. Its
latest project: tracking down and training the people now
raising America's children: babysitters. The "Sesame Street"
Preschool Educational Program, which began as a pilot program
in Dallas in 1990, brings together day-care operators,
babysitters, grannies -- the whole cottage industry of child
care -- and teaches them how to use the show as an
educational tool. In Dallas, some 13,000 children are being
served by the project, and training has begun in 18 other
cities.
   "All this costs us is $30 to $50 per year per kid," says
Ralph B. Rogers, chairman of Texas Industries Inc. and the
grandfather of the project. "We don't have to ask Congress
for anything. We can raise that from the public."
   What makes "Sesame Street" an enduring player in a faddish
industry is its determination not to exploit its popularity
with children to make a quick buck. "Parents have real
expectations that we're not going to make fools out of them,
we're not going to knowingly do stuff that isn't wholesome
and useful," says David V.B. Britt, CTW's president. "That
rules out guns and candy." He pauses. "Well, candy probably
isn't bad, but it's not us."
   Because of that caution, many segments of the TV show are
rigorously tested to assure that they're educational,
entertaining and upbeat. For April, "Sesame Street" had,
after hundreds of hours consulting with experts, prepared a
show on divorce. In it, the parents of Snuffleupagus, the shy
elephant, and his younger sister, Alice, were to split up
because they no longer loved each other.
   The show was tested on 60 children, who were asked
questions ranging from the broad to the specific: What did
they remember? What happened to Snuffy? Does Snuffy's mom
still love him? After hearing the answers, "Sesame Street"
researchers decided some of the children believed that an
argument can lead to divorce and that Snuffy's parents might
not love their children anymore. The program was yanked off
the schedule.
   "We're starting over," says Valeria Lovelace, assistant
vice president for research. "We're committed to doing
something on divorce, but we're experimental, and when it
doesn't work, we have to think about the children."
   Like the TV program, all of "Sesame Street's" projects,
from its theme parks to its computer software, are
fastidiously researched and molded according to the results.
"It's a risk-averse environment," says Anne Kreamer, a CTW
alumna who now is senior vice president at Nickelodeon, a
cable channel for children. "They applied the same approach
to every project. It was always curriculum-based and
curriculum-driven."
   For the publishing and licensing arms, CTW takes extreme
care with how the "Sesame Street" name is used. CTW started
licensing merchandise in the early 1970s, when it realized
that its original funding sources -- government and
foundations -- wouldn't underwrite the program forever.
Although some people criticized CTW for joining the growing
pack of businesses trying to sell children's products, Joan
Ganz Cooney, the show's main founder, says it was "making a
deal with the angel, since otherwise we would now be
history."
   The show's Muppet characters -- created by the late
puppeteer Jim Henson specifically for "Sesame Street" -- were
crucial to CTW's merchandising efforts. "The most fortunate
single thing that happened to us was when Jim Henson walked
through the door," Ms. Cooney says. "His Muppets made us
viable in the marketplace."
   In fact, "Sesame Street" isn't merely viable; it is a
powerful force. Last year, revenue from its magazines for
parents and children exceeded $40 million, and its
product-licensing fees $28 million. Only about 10% to 20% of
its total revenue still comes from grants.
   CTW could do far more licensing if it relaxed its rules
about use of the "Sesame Street" name. Its licensed products,
for example, can't be advertised on TV shows whose audience
is more than 10% preschoolers. The products must meet strict
quality and safety standards. "Sesame Street" characters
themselves can't be used to sell. When a company approached
CTW about the possibility of "Sesame Street" food, CTW hired
its own panel of nutritionists. "We say, `Come talk to us,
but we'll be a real pain in the neck about nutrition and
health,'" Mr. Britt says. The food company withdrew, and no
food licenses are currently pending.
   Denison Hatch, who publishes a directmail newsletter in
Stamford, Conn., called Who's Mailing What], recently wrote a
mailing for Western Publishing Co.'s Sesame Street Book Club.
"They are absolutely bears in terms of what kinds of promises
you can make," Mr. Hatch says. "I had pictures of kids lying
down reading the books, with balloons exclaiming how much
they loved learning to read. They said, `No, we can't promise
the books will teach them to read, and we don't want the
children to act as salesmen.' With most clients, you can
twist their arms, but not with `Sesame Street.'"
   That attitude holds down growth. "If I sell Ninja Turtles
to the lunch-box guy, I want him to advertise it," says Allen
Bohbot, president of Bohbot Communications Inc., a marketing
company. "With `Sesame Street,' you can only advertise to
adults. Now, that isn't going to work. It's unlikely that I'm
going to convince Mom to buy a `Sesame Street' lunch box for
a kid who's being bombarded with Ninja Turtles."
   Using TV characters to sell merchandise is stirring up a
lot of debate; some companies have begun to design shows
around snack-food characters such as Frito-Lay's Chester
Cheetah. But "Sesame Street" clings to the notion that its
show came first, then the merchandise.
   "Licensing is perfectly OK," says Peggy Charren, who was
head of Action for Children's Television, a now-defunct
nonprofit group in Boston. "Raggedy Ann and Andy were
licenses. The Dionne quintuplets had lollipops. That's
capitalism. I bought my own kid a Jetsons' lunch box. The
difference between `Sesame Street' and something like the
`G.I. Joe' program is `Sesame Street' didn't start to sell
and it doesn't exist to sell."
   "Sesame Street" actually started as a cure for a problem
high on the national agenda in the late 1960s: Inner-city
children were starting school badly unprepared. The Carnegie
Foundation asked Ms. Cooney, then a TV producer, to study
using television in preschool education. As she watched
children watch TV, she noticed how they reacted to
advertising. "Kids were singing beer commercials," she says.
"Obviously, they were learning from television. I thought we
should have a program interrupted by noncommercials that
would teach letters and numbers."
   The show, first broadcast in 1969, was an instant success,
praised by TV critics and educators alike. A few complained
that it was exacerbating a national epidemic -- children
glued to the tube -- but most parents felt the show's
educational aspects outweighed that. Some complained the show
was too fast-paced, too loud, too preoccupied with single,
right answers and too repetitive. And some worried that it
would increase the disparity between middle-class and
lower-income children because better-educated parents would
more persistently encourage their children to watch it. In
fact, the data show the disparity has neither widened nor
narrowed.
   Looked at today, the early shows seem moderately paced,
and their approach more obviously pedagogic. Their curriculum
concentrated on reading and counting -- one to 10. Today,
with the increased understanding of how much little children
are capable of learning, the show teaches numbers up to 40
and mixes in far more emotional and social issues, including
love, adoption, birth and death. "The instructional goals
used to be seven or eight pages," says Gerald Lesser, a
Harvard professor and a "Sesame Street" founder. "Now the
curriculum goal statement covers about 100 pages."
   Ms. Cooney didn't want to allow the show to be held
hostage to one star, such as Mr. Rogers or Captain Kangaroo;
so, it would have three or four human hosts in addition to
the puppets. Because the show was targeted for inner-city
children, the planners decided the male host, Gordon, should
be a strong role model, who taught science, and his wife,
Susan, should keep house. Susan even sang the song, "I Enjoy
Being a Girl," which includes such lyrics as "I flip when a
fella sends me flowers, I drool over dresses made of lace."
   "Down on our heads came the entire women's movement," Ms.
Cooney says. "They threatened to boycott the show. I never
saw so much angry mail." The second season, Susan got a
nursing job.
   Feminists have also complained that most of the female
characters, both Muppet and human, seem bland compared with
the males. Ellen Goodman wrote, "The females that do live on
"Sesame Street" can be divided into three groups: teacher,
simp and mother (which more often than not is a combination
of teacher and simp). Oh, yes, a cow."
   With increasing competition in the children's TV market --
mostly from cable and Fox -- CTW is looking for growth in two
directions: overseas and new shows. Next fall, a new CTW
series for seven-to-10-year-olds will begin on public
broadcasting stations. Called "Ghostwriter," it will consist
of mystery stories featuring a ghost who can communicate with
the team of young detectives only by writing.
   Overseas, the show already is a hit in Norway (Sesam
Stasjon), Germany (Sesamstrasse) and Spain (Barrio Sesamo),
among other countries. CTW co-produces the show with local
broadcasters, partly to escape accusations of American
colonization of children. Many countries have an oversized
puppet like Big Bird and a grouch like Oscar. In Latin
America, they are a seven-foot parrot named Montoya and a
grouch named Bodoque. In Israel, they are a porcupine named
Kippy and a grouch named Moishe Oofnick. CTW owns these
characters and licenses them to the foreign productions.
During the Gulf War, CTW permitted Israel to use Kippy to
demonstrate how to put on a gas mask.
   Meanwhile, back at "Sesame Street," the vote has been
tabulated, and it is crayons for everyone. But there is a
little change, which buys juice and seven straws -- a happy
ending. "Yes, we're averse to risking hurting children," Ms.
Cooney says. "We have to be like the medical profession. The
first rule is, do no harm."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
