ID: 181	RANK: 18	SCORE: 6.335810
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910829-0146
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910829-0146.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- The Gallery:
   Art in Service of Revolution
   ----
   By David Littlejohn
</HL>
<DATE>
08/29/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10
</SO>
<LP>
   San Francisco -- "Chicano Art: Resistance and Affirmation,
1965-1985" began its three-year national tour at the Wight
Art Gallery at UCLA almost a year ago. After stops at Denver
and Albuquerque, it spent most of this summer (to Aug. 25) at
San Francisco's Museum of Modern Art. Next, these 130-plus
works by 90-plus artists will go to the Fresno Art Museum in
Fresno, Calif. (Sept. 21-Nov. 24); Tucson, Ariz.; the
National Museum of American Art in Washington, D.C. (summer
1992); the Bronx Museum of the Arts in New York (spring
1993); and San Antonio, Texas.
   A Chicano manifesto of 1969 insisted that "we must ensure
that our writers, poets, musicians and artists produce
literature and art that is appealing to our people and
relates to our revolutionary cause." One essay in the
projected catalog virtually defies the non-Chicano critic to
understand what is going on here. The author claims that the
artists who have participated in "El Movimento" since 1965
have been and continue to be aggressively political, even
propagandistic, uninterested in such outdated
European-modernist concerns as "universality" or the supposed
intrinsic worth of unique works of art. "Someone who is not
an expert in the field may impose notions of quality that are
inappropriate to the work under consideration."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Well, I've been warned.
   Like many big touring art shows these days, this one tells
you what to think, every step of the way. We begin in a sort
of consciousness-raising chamber, in which world history has
been rewritten, on a series of large placards, from a
Chicanoactivist perspective.
   From this re-educational experience, we are led through a
series of eight thematic subsections ("La Causa," "Cultural
Icons," "Reclaiming the Past," "Feminist Visions," etc.). At
the entrance to each section, another placard informs us of
the importance of this particular aspect of the Chicanos'
struggle for justice and identity in the U.S., beginning with
the Delano farm-workers' strike of 1962, and its several
artistic offshoots -- notably poster art and Luis Valdez's El
Teatro Campesino. The show focuses on Aztlan, the
southwestern swath of the U.S. (roughly Texas through
California) ceded by Mexico in 1848. In 1969, some radical
utopians in El Movimento demanded that all this land -- which
they regarded as the historic homeland of the Aztecs -- be
given "back" to U.S. Chicanos, so they could use it to set up
an independent nation.
   Alongside about half the works on display, additional
placards tell us (a) what the artist intended, (b) how to
interpret the work, and (c) how we are to respond to it,
emotionally and politically. This is all very helpful, but I
tend to resist such directives and reconstruct exhibitions
according to more personal reactions.
   The three all-Chicano committees that oversaw the
selection process probably guaranteed that a great many
artists (including six committee members) would end up being
chosen. If the work of a few participants appears to rise
above the norm, it may be because it comes closest to meeting
those outdated, European-formalist standards. The vivid
silk-screen prints of Malaquias Montoya and Rupert Garcia
belong in any history of modern poster design. Carlos
Santistevan's "Holy Infant of Atocha," made out of old car
parts, fits an international modern sensibility, as does
Patssi Valdez's huge handcolored photo collage of "Downtown
Los Angeles," on loan from a private collection in Vienna.
   Some degree of identity confusion is likely among artists
and activists who speak Spanish and have Spanish names, but
tend to identify with the indigenous peoples the Spanish
colonized -- or, more confusing still, with a genetic mixture
of the two. They may derive emotional benefit from the
symbols and rituals of a religion many have rejected; feel no
profound connection to a "homeland" their families have only
recently left; seek a new identity in the flashy artifacts of
their current and unloved economic masters; and have to break
laws to get their paintings and signatures up on other
people's walls.
   Some of the most interesting art on display bears witness
to this cultural dissonance. I was struck by iconoclastic
works like Rudy Martinez's "A Juanderful Piece" and Teddy
Sandoval's "Chile Chaps," which mock half a dozen Anglo
stereotypes of Mexicans at once. Amalia Mesa -- Bains's
lavish mirrored vanity -- altar to Dolores del Rio (the pile
of dried rose petals at its base suffused a whole room with
its scent) was a far wittier statement than the humorless
label-writers seemed to realize -- as were a number of other
religion-twisting versions of Mexican altars or niches, laden
with "milagros", snapshots, toys, lace, death's heads and
dime-store junk. Larry Yanez's "Hey Zeus" placed a
Christ-in-Agony chromo inside a pear-crate frame adorned with
crude "turista" artifacts. David Avalos's fine blue "Donkey
Cart Altar" -- a protest against border-patrol brutality,
among other things -- combined a number of warring and bitter
ideas.
   The Virgin of Guadalupe, La Patrona de la Raza (whether
all the artists believed in her or not, the curators inform
us she did appear in 1531) is recycled into a number of
contemporary Chicano visions. Yolanda Lopez's versions of
herself, her mother, and her grandmother as the Virgin are
popular, powerful feminist illustrations. Rupert Garcia's "La
Virgen y Yo" (himself an agnostic black shape hanging upside
down, confronting the blurred sacred image) implies more by
saying less.
   A few artists -- notably wall muralists and poster makers
-- have been able to do powerful things with Aztec motifs,
ancient geometric patterns, heroic images of muscled
warrior-gods and serpentine monsters. More recent cultural
icons include the Mexican painter Frida Kahlo -- already
being transformed into a kind of suffering feminist saint --
and Mexican rebel heroes like Emiliano Zapata and Pancho
Villa.
   Some Chicano artists have tried to legendize the less
heroic "pachucos" and "cholos" -- members of urban street
gangs of the '40s and today -- along with their ritual
costumes and customized cars, their defiant girls and
graffiti. Luis Valdez pulled this off in his play (and film)
"Zoot Suit," and a few 1970s images of the scene are still
potent. But there seems something a little decadent today in
celebrating these (I quote the wall) "symbols of Chicano
cultural resistance and affirmation" without even the hint of
a question. A few Chicano "graffiti artists" have made the
leap from defacing buildings with flair and daring to a kind
of inspired calligraphy on canvas, sanctioned by gallery
shows. Careful social-realist images of barrio life, whether
photographed (Joe Ramos, Ricardo Valverde) or drawn (Santos
Martinez), can inform the uninformed by virtue of their
craft.
   Of specifically, univocally political art -- "Viva la
Huelga]" posters, border patrolmen as the devil -- the more
explicit the message, the less satisfying the art. The
complex ethics and politics of immigration and deportation
across the Rio Grande cannot be explained or resolved by
images of Mexican corpses impaled on the spikes of the Statue
of Liberty's crown.
   This is an exhibition of art on behalf of a
cultural-political cause, and (barring the pushy wall
placards) about as good as such an exhibit can be.
Traditional art collectors and gallery-goers in the U.S. seem
more than willing to go into liberal-aesthetic raptures over
the agitprop art of Russian revolutionaries, Picasso in his
Marxist mode, Polish poster-makers fighting their Soviet
masters -- all of them safely distant and past. Such people
might do well to expose themselves to many-layered, vibrant,
provocative art that reveals at least some of the faces of a
growing and justifiably angry portion of this country's
population.
   ---
   Mr. Littlejohn is a novelist, critic and professor of
journalism at the University of California, Berkeley.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
