ID: 181	RANK: 65	SCORE: 4.934563
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911031-0072
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911031-0072.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- The Gallery:
   Art From All Over in the Time of Columbus
   ----
   By Jack Flam
</HL>
<DATE>
10/31/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A20
</SO>
<LP>
   Washington, D.C. -- In the current hail of attacks on
European civilization, it has seldom been observed that the
modish current antidote to Eurocentrism -- multiculturalism
-- is itself a modern European notion that dates to the Age
of Exploration. As the philosopher Leszek Kolakowski has
pointed out, modern European culture developed a
self-critical faculty that is generally lacking in other
societies, and it is this self-critical faculty that impels
us to take a sympathetic interest in the cultures of others.
   This same spirit is the guiding force in the National
Gallery of Art's huge and splendid exhibition, "Circa 1492:
Art in the Age of Exploration." Although one might have
expected such a show to focus on images of exploration in
general, and on the discovery of America in particular, it in
fact presents an overview of art from all around the world at
a particularly rich time for world art. So it is less focused
than its title implies, but much more challenging and
stimulating. Its narrow chronological limits do not prevent
it from offering a remarkably wide sampling of masterpieces
or from paying complex tribute to the astonishing richness of
human thought and expression.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Like the early European explorers, the exhibition starts
in Mediterranean Europe and eventually covers much of the
world, radiating out to the Near East, Africa, Asia and the
Americas, in that order. The European section is further
broken down into a number of thematic subsections, which
explore the contrasts between spiritual and secular power and
give particular attention to crucial areas of scientific
inquiry, such as measurement and map making, linear
perspective, and anatomically accurate representations of the
human figure.
   There is an immense variety of artistic expression from
all regions, but the pictures and objects have been chosen
for their very high quality as much as for the intellectual
points they make. This is an encyclopedic undertaking, but a
staggering number of the entries are also among the greatest
masterpieces of each of the many cultures.
   Some of the greatest artists of all time were alive during
this period, and a number of them are represented here in
considerable strength. The Europe section, for example,
includes a gallery filled with drawings, prints and paintings
by the quintessential artist-scientists Albrecht Durer and
Leonardo da Vinci. They alone would make this a memorable
exhibition.
   Leonardo's exquisite and haunting "Lady With an Ermine"
dominates this masterpiece-filled room. It is a mysterious
early portrait from the Czartoryski Museum in Krakow, which
is being shown for the first time in this country.
   The European section also includes works by Hieronymus
Bosch, Michelangelo, Donatello, Botticelli and Piero della
Francesca -- every one of them worth serious time and
attention. The visitor is advised to plan a whole day for
this show, with a lunch break between Europe and the rest of
the world.
   So, having made a morning of the European Renaissance at
its most energetic (with some crucial nods made to the
Ottoman Empire), one enters the Japanese section. From a
world in its intellectual adolescence, one encounters a
mature culture. The centerpiece here is the work of Sesshu
Toyo, one of the greatest Japanese painters. His landscape
scrolls of the four seasons combine an extraordinary mixture
of lyrical subtlety and electric force.
   The section on Ming China includes an excellent selection
of works by Shen Zhou, whose richly articulated landscapes
are among the high points of Chinese painting.
   Nor does the level of quality decline in the sections
devoted to cultures whose major artists have remained
anonymous. The African gallery contains some of the most
celebrated masterpieces of Benin sculpture, such as the
famous "Hornblower" from the British Museum. The majestic
Hispano-Moresque "Admiral" heraldic carpet is arguably the
finest of its kind. And among the American works is the
powerful life-size basalt sculpture of the seated god
Xochipilli, one of the great masterpieces of Aztec sculpture.
It literally stops you dead in your tracks.
   The exhibition also contains an impressive number of less
well-known works of equally high quality. Notable among these
is the beautifully detailed and moving "Panel of the Infante"
from the Altarpiece of the Veneration of Saint Vincent by the
Portuguese painter Nuno Goncales. It is one of the unexpected
highlights of the show. Another little-known treasure is the
large multi-figured polychromed sculpture of a "Lamentation"
by the San Pablo de la Moraleja Master, whose lyrical
Northern European realism is tempered by a grave Spanish
austerity. There are also stunning examples of Chinese and
Japanese calligraphy, some beautiful Korean ceramics with
luminous, lunar glazes, and a number of fine small sculptures
and gold ornaments from the Caribbean and Central America.
All of it is very handsomely installed in settings that
discreetly evoke the architectural ambiance appropriate to
the art.
   The exhibition is even more than simply a collection of
well-displayed masterpieces. It also includes a number of
manuscripts, maps and functional objects that evoke the ways
in which human knowledge was evolving at this time. The very
first thing you see is a Catalan atlas by Abraham Cresques,
which in its quaint combination of geographical and cultural
facts and fancies gives a nice sense of how the human mind,
when pressed for information that it doesn't have, has a
strong tendency just to make things up.
   In fact, preconceived images frequently resist actual
knowledge. When Durer did his famous woodcut of a rhinoceros,
he had never seen one and so he rendered the beast with an
extra horn and armor-plated skin. So powerful was this
imaginary image that centuries later even artists who had
seen real rhinoceroses continued to represent them as Durer
had.
   The exhibition is full of interesting insights about how
knowledge is represented and conveyed. In some cases, you
also have to read between the lines and ponder what is
absent. There are, for example, very few Islamic or Chinese
works that directly represent the technological advances that
so interested the Europeans. But this is not simply another
example of Western technological superiority. As it happens,
Islamic and Chinese science were so far in advance of the
West at this time that science was no longer of direct
interest to artists from those cultures. By 1492, they were
preoccupied with other things.
   In the last analysis, though, the most impressive thing
about this exhibition is the rich sense it conveys of the
amazing variety and depth of human expression. As I wandered
up and back through this intriguing show, I kept thinking of
Hamlet's words to Rosencrantz and Guildenstern: "What a piece
of work is a man] How noble in reason] How infinite in
faculties] In form and moving how express and admirable] In
action how like an angel] In apprehension how like a god] The
beauty of the world, the paragon of animals." But the prince,
as you will remember, was in a pessimistic mood, and
concluded, "And yet to me what is this quintessence of dust?"
   While I was pondering this contradiction, I stopped before
a portrait of the Chinese master Shen Zhou, who in his old
age had inscribed the following poem on the painting: "Is it
like or not like, true or not true? From bottom to top it
only reflects the exterior man. Death and life are both a
dream, And heaven and earth are entirely dust."
   The exhibition, which is up until Jan. 12 and will not
travel, is accompanied by an appropriately grand and
informative catalog, edited by Jay A. Levenson, the managing
curator of the exhibition. It is sponsored by a multinational
consortium, which includes Ameritech, Nomura Securities
Co./Mitsui Taiyo Kobe Bank and Republic National Bank of New
York. Additional support came from Banco Exterior de Espana
(Grupo CBE), Fiat S.p.A. and the Rockefeller Foundation.
Advance passes are available at the National Gallery and
nationwide through Ticketmaster and Hecht stores.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
