ID: 181	RANK: 67	SCORE: 4.927304
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920225-0009
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920225-0009.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   `Outsider Art' Is
   Suddenly the Rage
   Among Art Insiders
   ---
   Creations of the Mentally Ill
   Are Finding New Asylum;
   Using Tobacco Spit as Ink
   ----
   By Ken Wells
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/25/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)
</IN>
<RE>
EUROPE (EU)
SWITZERLAND (SZ)
WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)
</RE>
<LP>
   LAUSANNE, Switzerland -- Vincent van Gogh was an artist
who went crazy, cutting off an ear. Adolf Wolfli was a crazy
Swiss woodcutter confined for life to an asylum. Cut off from
the world, he became an artist.
   After 20 years of rage-induced solitary confinement, Mr.
Wolfli emerged with music in his head. He began to compose,
illustrating his musical works with colorful surreal images
that seem more Aztec than alpine. No one could decipher Mr.
Wolfli's scores, but his paintings have developed a
following. Pablo Picasso bought a few.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Most of Mr. Wolfli's works hang here in one of the world's
oddest art museums, the Museum of Art Brut -- French for "raw
art." The collection is 50 years old, and the museum was once
derided as a gallery for rogues and eccentrics. Mr. Wolfli
was a pedophile; another of its artists painted 10,000
miniatures -- in tobacco spit.
   These days, however, the museum is considered something of
a shrine. Critics have rechristened art brut "visionary" or
"outsider" art, and are hailing it as a major art trend of
the 1990s.
   "Currently, this is the most exciting thing in the entire
art world. Nothing else can touch it," says John Maizels, a
British artist and critic who publishes Raw Vision, a
magazine on the subject. The genre is showing up in galleries
and collections in Britain, France, Germany, the Netherlands,
Australia and Japan. A museum will soon open in America.
Sotheby's, the auction house, included works of outsider
artists in recent art sales.
   Art critics say the surge in interest partly reflects a
yearning for a return to artistic innocence. "There is the
glory of the individual, someone driven to art for reasons
that have nothing to do with commercial success or
fashionable trends," says Raw Vision's Mr. Maizels.
   Compared to other art forms, art brut isn't wildly
expensive. That has added to its allure. "Some see this art
as a cheap way of covering a wall with quite interesting
pieces," says Roger Cardinal, a Kent, England, art professor
credited with coining the term outsider art. (At a Sotheby's
New York sale two years ago, the top-selling work went for
$20,000, and most went for much less.)
   What defines art brut are the solitary visions of its
artists and their penchant to invent their own methods. Many
even deny what they do is art. An example is Francis Palanc,
a 63-year-old French pastry cook, whose works are featured
prominently in the Lausanne museum. He eschews a brush in
favor of a rolling pin to spread mixtures of crushed egg
shells, gum and Jujubes into strikingly angular patterns
representing an alphabet of his own invention.
   Mr. Palanc insists his works aren't paintings but prose
meant to reveal the primordial essence of things. Though he
has done scores of them, few now exist, says Michel Thevoz,
the museum's curator. In moments of rage or discouragement,
Mr. Palanc destroys his works. (Mr. Palanc doesn't grant
interviews.)
   "This is art that is so much more alive than anything else
currently," says Rebecca Hoffberger, a Baltimore visionary
art patron who is heading a $4.6 million fund-raising project
to build America's first art brut museum in Baltimore.
Groundbreaking for the facility, to be called the American
Visionary Art Museum, is planned for this summer. There is
currently a major visionary art exhibit in Los Angeles, and
southern visionary artists will be featured in an exhibition
at the New Orleans Museum of Art next year.
   Collectors are similarly moved. Kurt Gitter, a New Orleans
surgeon and owner of a museum-quality collection of Japanese
art, had all but given up collecting when he discovered the
works of Sister Gertrude Morgan. A New Orleans eccentric who
founded a religious sect, Sister Gertrude claimed to paint
under command from God. Dr. Gitter spotted her paintings in a
gallery, stacked in piles labeled $15, $20 and $25. But what
struck him, he says, were the images. "They reminded me of
fine German impressionism. . . . I bought the whole lot," he
says.
   A small core of art brut superstars has emerged. One is
Mr. Wolfli, whose paintings fetch up to $30,000. Another is
Martin Ramirez, a Mexican immigrant who died in 1930 after
spending most of his life in a U.S. mental hospital
obsessively drawing on paper bags and cups. A Ramirez sold
recently for $180,000. Fortune came too late for these
artists; both died in 1930.
   But some living artists of the genre are benefiting. One
is Gerald Hawkes, who, homeless on the streets of New York 18
years ago, began picking up discarded matches from the
sidewalks and fashioning them into elaborate sculptures of
trees, airplanes and people.
   Though he has spent much of his life homeless and was
violently mugged seven years ago, the 48-year-old Baltimore
resident often crafts sculptures inspired by the heroism of
others. During the Gulf War, for example, newspapers reported
that violinist Isaac Stern played through an Israeli concert
during an Iraqi Scud missile attack. Mr. Hawkes, deciding
that Mr. Stern's feat was a historic milestone in "beauty
conquering fear," created a lifesize matchstick sculpture of
Mr. Stern -- using no more than Elmer's glue and his
imagination. With Ms. Hoffberger's help, a show of Mr.
Hawkes's works not long ago racked up $18,000 in sales.
   Mr. Hawkes was just the kind of artist that the late Jean
Dubuffet had in mind when in 1945 he began the collection
that would eventually constitute the Museum of Art Brut here.
A trained sculptor and painter, Mr. Dubuffet had become
disenchanted with the commercialization and derivative nature
of much modern art.
   With the help of colleagues, he began searching asylums,
prisons, slums and the backwaters of European villages for
art free of such trappings. This turned out to be the art not
just of rogues like Mr. Wolfli but of innocents as well: of
hermits, mystics, religious visionaries, tramps, the outcast
elderly, eccentrics of all stripes.
   Indeed, the museum specifically excludes the works of
anyone with formal art training or commercial aspirations;
nor is this folk or primitive art, whose artists use
traditional techniques to produce works reflecting their
cultures. Kept for years in a Paris warehouse, the collection
came to its current location, a mansion donated by a local
government agency, in 1972.
   The collection continues to grow, with Mr. Thevoz adding a
few new works each year, using an established network of
sympathetic doctors, social workers and art collectors to
discover new artists. Acquiring such art is another matter.
Some refuse to part with it; others won't take money -- one
mental patient would only swap his drawings for an accordion.
   As a walk through the Lausanne museum demonstrates, art
brut derives some of its power from the fact that behind
every picture is an astonishing story. Consider Gaston
Teuscher, a retired Swiss laborer who, in his late 70s,
suddenly took up drawing and in a two-year period did 10,000
intricate miniatures -- using empty cigarette packages for
canvas and tobacco spit for ink.
   Consider, too, the astonishing determination of the late
Clement Fraisse, a French shepherd who was confined to an
asylum for the criminally insane in 1925 after attempting to
burn down his family home with his family inside. Locked up
in a cell with crude wooden walls, he began to use his dinner
spoon to turn the walls into a collection of intricately
carved flowers and figures. When the spoon was confiscated,
Mr. Fraisse broke off the handle of his chamber pot and
continued to work. His carving seemed to cure his rage -- he
was eventually released.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
