ID: 268	RANK: 5	SCORE: 7.522236
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890424-0260 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-04-24-89 0809EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r f PM-Consumers-Bush     04-24 0822</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Consumers-Bush,0850</SECOND>
<HEAD>Consumer Groups: Bush Moving with Speed of a `Glacier' on Issues</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By GUY DARST</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Three months into the Bush administration,
consumer groups are still uncertain about what to expect, with one
advocate saying the administration is moving ``with all the speed
of a glacier.''
   Some say the pendulum is swinging back to more activity in
consumer protection. Others say the signals are still confused.
   Consumer advocates were thrown on the defensive by the Reagan
administration's anti-government, anti-regulation stance.
   David Stockman, Reagan's first budget director, once wrote that
consumer groups had ``created this whole facade of consumer
protection in order to seize power in our society. I think part of
the mission of this administration is to unmask and discredit that
false ideology.''
   Consumer groups have not forgotten that George Bush's first
assignment from Ronald Reagan was head of a task force charged with
reducing regulatory burdens.
   Joan Claybrook, head of Public Citizen, the umbrella advocacy
group founded by Ralph Nader, said, ``As vice president, George
Bush was one of the most anti-consumer, anti-health and safety
public officials we've ever had.''
   Mark Silbergeld, director of the Washington office of Consumers
Union, said that Bush's record was one of ``relieving business of
its health, safety and consumer protection obligations.'' But
Silbergeld refused to read that record as a prediction.
   ``New offices often bring new obligations,'' he said. But
there's no sign yet what Bush's new office will mean for consumers,
Silbergeld said.
   ``The administration is preparing to deal with consumer issues
with all the speed of a glacier,'' he said.
   Miss Claybrook would agree with that: ``The Consumer Product
Safety Commission is twisting slowly in the wind,'' unable to act
because the current two commissioners do not even make up a quorum,
she said.
   ``We are being neglected and that's a bad sign,'' said Pamela
Gilbert, a lawyer with the Public Interest Research Group, another
Nader-influenced outfit sharing office space with Public Citizen.
   She said she is not worried that Bush will attack government
regulations again. ``What we fear is business as usual,'' with
consumer protection agencies languishing under small budgets and
unfilled appointments.
   Robert Abrams, attorney general of New York State and president
of the National Association of Attorneys General, said, ``There is
concern that no new name has surfaced as the new chairman of the
Federal Trade Commission. ... One understands that it takes a while
for a new administration to get organized, but I think we're now at
the point where there begins to be some scratching of the head
whether there has been undue delay.''
   Daniel Oliver's term has expired as chairman of the Federal
Trade Commission and he is serving in a holdover status.
   Abrams said he was uncertain what direction the administration's
consumer policies would take, but ``There's no question that we in
the states look forward to the federal watchdog agencies returning
to their traditional role where they have the resources and the
authorities to move effectively.''
   But the administration has not decided whether to support,
oppose or stand indifferent to a bill renewing the legislative
authority of the Consumer Product Safety Commission.
   Anne Graham, acting chairman of the two-member commission, is
taking no position on the bill, which incorporates what critics
call micromanagement through many directives.
   She supports a provision that would permit two members to be a
quorum when the commission has only three members.
   Ms. Graham looks for a lowering of the voices and less
confrontation. ``You have Jim Florio (a Democratic member of the
House from New Jersey who chairs the consumer protection
subcommittee of the Energy and Commerce Committee) and Joe Barton
(a conservative Texas Republican) on the bill'' as sponsors. ``We
couldn't have had that three or four years ago.''
   It's impossible to tell, though, where the commission is headed
without knowing who will be the third member. ``If I had to guess,
I'd say we'd be a little more active,'' she said.
   ``President Bush has made it clear he cares about children and
this agency concentrates a great deal on children,'' spending half
its budget on them, she said.
   Bruce Silverglade, legal director of the Center for Science in
the Public Interest, is encouraged by January's FTC action accusing
Campbell Soup Co. of false advertising for failing to disclose high
sodium concentrations in its soups.
   Under Oliver, the commission almost gave up on filing false
advertising cases against national advertisers and pursued smaller
health-food marketers instead.
   ``I think we'll see the pendulum swing back andstay there for
awhile,'' Silverglade said.
   Not everybody agrees. Silbergeld was asked, Is the pendulum
swinging back? He replied, ``No, other than in the environmental
area.''
   Silverglade, said Silbergeld, sees the soup case ``as a
harbinger of a kind because that is his area. I'd like to see more,
and I would like to see them go up and ask for the budgets to do
the job.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
