ID: 268	RANK: 59	SCORE: 4.515038
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890522-0285 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-05-22-89 1408EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>s a BC-APN--JohnsHopkins Adv04-1stAdd   05-22 0984</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-APN--Johns Hopkins, Adv 04-1st Add,1009</SECOND>
<HEAD>$Adv04</HEAD>
<HEAD>AGENCIES AND RADIO OUT</HEAD>
<HEAD>For Release Sunday, June 4</HEAD>
<HEAD>BALTIMORE: first class.</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   The medical curriculum Hopkins provided was marked not so much
by innovation, as by combination of features that had appeared in
Europe and scattered American schools.
   It started with ``a clean slate and a bunch of good ideas and
good examples,'' said medical historian King. Of all the American
schools that were trying to improve medical education, ``Hopkins
went about it with the greatest enthusiasm and effectiveness.''
   It was an ambitious enterprise, even apart from requiring a
college degree for entry. Few other schools provided well-equipped
laboratories in basic science for teachers and students. Hopkins
aimed to stress medical research rather than just the passing on of
existing knowledge.
   The idea was ``to give the world men who can not only sail by
the old charts, but who can make new and better ones for the use of
others,'' said John Shaw Billings, a Civil War battlefield surgeon
who became a key architect of the medical school curriculum.
   Hopkins also made a policy of learning by doing, both in the
laboratory and in the hospital. With Osler as their mentor at the
bedside, students took medical histories of patients, performed
physical examinations, conducted routine laboratory tests and
followed their patients' course.
   As Osler put it, ``the student began with the patient, continued
with the patient, ended his studies with the patient, using books
and lectures as tools, means to an end.''
   The school made full-time jobs out of teaching basic science,
rather than using local physicians to teach part time, as most
other schools did. The full-time idea, later extended to
instructors of medical practice, allowed Hopkins to go outside the
local community to lure top-notch faculty members.
   Eventually, the school also offered lengthy training in medical
specialties to its students who had finished the four years of the
regular curriculum.
   The result of all this was such that in 1901, Harvard's Eliot
congratulated Hopkins University president Daniel Gilman on a
``prodigious advancement of medical teaching.''
   Among all the changes in the nation of the previous 25 years,
Eliot continued, ``there is none greater than that wrought in the
development of medical teaching and research, and these men whom
you, sir, summoned here have led the way.''
   Who were those men? Most attention nowadays goes to the Big Four.
   One was Osler, who had come from Philadelphia to become
professor of medicine at the school and physician-in-chief at the
hospital. The author of a classic medical text, Osler became one of
the nation's most highly regarded physicians.
   Joining him was William Halsted, a shy and excrutiatingly
meticulous surgeon. He became well-known for such innovations as
the radical mastectomy for breast cancer, and his training of other
surgeons.
   Then there was William Welch, a genial, rotund pathology
professor who became a power behind reforms in medical education
and stimulated interest in medical philanthropy.
   Finally there was Howard Kelly, the gynecological surgeon, who
developed and improved that art. He ``took pleasure in quick,
flashy operating,'' one student wrote later. ``He'd be in and out
of the abdomen almost before you knew it, all the time talking and
illustrating what he was doing or about to do.''
   Today, Kelly's operating table serves as a library table, its
thick glass top chipped around the edges.
   Of the 17 original hospital buildings, only three remain, hemmed
in by the modern boxy homes of the modern hospital and medical
school. The old sitting room where Osler wrote his famous textbook
is now split into cubicles by blue room dividers, part of an
administrative office.
   The scene today at Hopkins would astonish the Big Four.
   Faint rock music nudges the quiet of a white-walled laboratory
as Bert Vogelstein, 39, holds up a dark gray sheet of X-ray film.
It shows several series of smudged black lines.
   During the days of the Big Four, physicians were just beginning
to understand cancer as a disease of abnormal cells. Now, the
smudged lines on Vogelstein's film are helping to explain those
abnormalities. They represent an analysis of colon cancer tissue,
suggesting that the tumors arose after normal cells lost protection
from a gene that suppresses cancer.
   In a room crammed with computer display terminals, Elliot
Fishman, 36, narrates a series of ghostly images. A skull tumbles
end over end, revealing its inner detail. A hip bone sways in its
pelvic socket like a pendulum. A dark blue liver rotates to reveal
patches of cancer that look like popcorn.
   Halsted needed a scalpel to peer within patients like this;
radiologist Fishman uses sophisticated scanning machines and
computer power. The result is three-dimensional images of the
body's interior that can be rotated or manipulated, helping
surgeons plan operations well in advance.
   Victor McKusick, 67, arose shortly after 5 a.m. one recent day
at his Baltimore home. He drank some coffee, read the paper, picked
up a medical journal article and began to dictate into a small tape
recorder. It was time to catalog a new human gene.
   When the Hopkins medical school was founded, the idea of genes
was not yet generally accepted, for the work of Austrian monk
Gregor Mendel in the 1860s was not yet widely known. Today,
McKusick maintains a list of human genes, accessible by computer
around the world. The entry he dictated before breakfast that
morning was number 4,584.
   But while medicine has advanced greatly since Hopkins began,
some things stay the same, notes Hopkins medical historian A.
McGehee Harvey.
   A committee that reviewed the Hopkins medical curriculum
recently endorsed the ideas of learning by doing, and of not only
teaching medicine but also emphasizing the importance of creating
new knowledge, Harvey said.
   ``It's a process of rediscovery,'' he said with a smile. ``They
rediscovered all the principles that were here when the place
started.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Sunday, June 4</NOTE>
</DOC>
