ID: 268	RANK: 89	SCORE: 4.153790
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890111-0235 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-01-11-89 1541EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>s w BC-Reagan'sEra Adv15-2ndAdd   01-11 0887</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-Reagan's Era, Adv 15-2nd Add,0918</SECOND>
<HEAD>$Adv15</HEAD>
<HEAD>For Release Sunday, Jan. 15, and Thereafter</HEAD>
<BYLINE>WASHINGTON: said Lawn.    ___</BYLINE>
<HEAD>The Courts: One Place Reagan's Legacy May Linger</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   As a candidate in 1980, Reagan decried what he called a
half-century of judicial activism. He promised to appoint judges who
would not view themselves as social engineers.
   As Reagan leaves the presidency, a more conservative federal
judiciary is ``one of his more enduring legacies,'' says Vicki
Marani of the conservative Washington Legal Foundation.
   In eight years, Reagan filled about half of all current federal
judgeships. According to the Administrative Office of the U.S.
Courts, he appointed 291 of 575 federal trial judges, and 89 of 168
appeals court judges. He also appointed three of the Supreme Court's
nine members.
   Compared to his most recent predecessors, Reagan appointed a
smaller percentage of women and minorities to the federal bench.
   ``His appointees generally have been white, pro-business, with
little respect for individual rights,'' says Nan Aron of the liberal
Alliance for Justice.
   Her organization, which has tracked Reagan's judicial selections,
says 2.1 percent of his appointments to the federal bench are black
and 3.4 percent are Hispanic. Women comprise 8.2 percent of the
Reagan judicial appointees.
   Among the 264 judges appointed by Jimmy Carter in his four-year
presidency, 14.3 percent were black, 6.2 percent were Hispanic and
15.5 percent were women.
   Reagan's appellate court appointments have been more closely
scrutinized by liberals and conservatives alike because the
administration wields more power in making those selections.
Traditionally, members of the Senate play the largest role in the
selection of federal trial judges.
   ``There's never been an administration in which the attorney
general (first William French Smith and then Edwin Meese III) took
such a personal interest in the selection of appellate judges,''
Aron says. ``There was always the singular objective of creating a
more conservative federal appellate bench, and a stringent
ideological test was applied.''
   Those who participated in the Reagan administration's judicial
selection process deny applying any such ideological test.
   But a recently completed study of each of the 12 federal
appellate courts throughout the nation by the American Lawyer
newspapers said, ``The president has transformed the circuit courts
by appointing a new breed of conservative judges _ mostly young,
rigorously intellectual and, critics charge, overly ideological _
who have exerted a dynamic influence on the appellate bench.''
   Aron, among those who concur in the ``overly ideological''
allegations, also agrees with the rest of the assessment.
   Marani says, ``I am aware of several studies, conducted by
liberals, showing a more conservative-leaning judiciary. The fact
that liberals are unhappy would give us cause for great
celebration.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>_By Richard Carelli</NOTE>
<HEAD>Deregulation: The Pendulum May Be Swinging the Other Way</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   When Reagan took the oath of office eight years ago, he promised
government would no longer ``ride on our back.'' But experts,
including his former top economic adviser, say he made few inroads
against the spread of government regulation.
   Reagan is leaving office with pressures mounting for new health,
safety and environmental regulations to address environmental
worries and the growing numbers of Americans with no health
insurance.
   ``I forecast that we're in the early stages of a new wave of
government intervention in the economy,'' said Murray Weidenbaum,
chairman of Reagan's Council of Economic Advisers in 1981-82.
   The Federal Communications Commission has scaled back regulation
of radio and television broadcasting, including an end to the
``fairness doctrine.''
   The sweeping government deregulation of the airline industry
predated the Reagan administration, as did looser regulations of the
financial markets. The breakup of AT&amp;T was ordered by a federal
judge, not executive fiat. The trucking and rail industries remain
subject to extensive regulation.
   ``A lot of this stuff was really done before Reagan came in,''
said Clifford Winston, a senior fellow in economics at the Brookings
Institution. ``Actually, there's probably been a growth of the
environmental safety regulation during his time.''
   Jeffrey Eisenach, a Heritage Foundation fellow, said, ``The
Reagan administration's battle against excessive government
regulation proved ... even more difficult than expected.''
   ``The early Reagan deregulators ... could not have imagined some
of the obstacles that would be thrown into their path by Congress
and the courts,'' Eisenach wrote in Heritage's ``Mandate for
Leadership III'' study.
   Weidenbaum said the new Reagan administration rolled back some
``midnight rules issued by Carter,'' imposed benefit-cost reviews of
new regulations and strengthened the regulatory reform machinery at
the Office of Management and Budget.
   Bush, as vice president, headed a task force on regulatory reform
that prided itself on cutting red tape.
   But ``the effort lost steam,'' said Weidenbaum, a Washington
University professor and scholar at the Center for Strategic and
International Studies, as top Reagan officials opted to concentrate
on cutting the budget and taxes, not deregulation.
   ``The two most notorious people in the administration identified
with regulation were Jim Watt (former Interior secretary) and Anne
Gorsuch Burford (former EPA director),'' said Weidenbaum. ``They
stirred up such a firestorm, it put us all on the defensive. The
second term was spent mending fences that were broken in the first
term.''
   But while the deregulatory drive may have lost some momentum,
Winston said, ``We're not going to set up the CAB (Civil Aeronautics
Board) again to decide what air fares are going to be.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>_By Christopher Connell</NOTE>
<NOTE>MORE</NOTE>
</DOC>
