ID: 279	RANK: 19	SCORE: 9.686138
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900811-0136 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-08-11-90 2303EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-YosemiteFires 3rdLd-Writethru a0620 08-11 1011</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Yosemite Fires, 3rd Ld-Writethru, a0620,1036</SECOND>
<HEAD>Yosemite Closed to Tourists; Blazes Continue Elsewhere in West</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: SUBS 8th graf, `About 8,200 ...' to UPDATE with higher
acreage and firefighters involved; SUBS 10th graf, `The two ...' to
UPDATE with two fires 10 percent contained; SUBS 16th graf `The
flames of ...' to UPDATE with more structures burned.</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos XYOS4, MOD1</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By MARY McGRATH</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>YOSEMITE NATIONAL PARK, Calif. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Yosemite National Park's
spectacular sights, normally enjoyed by up to 25,000 visitors on
summer weekends, were clouded by smoke Saturday as 14,000 acres
burned on the park's west side.
   ``There's next to nobody here,'' Don Fox of the U.S. Park
Service said at Yosemite Valley, location of the El Capitan and
Half Dome rock masses and other much-photographed attractions.
   Yosemite was closed Friday after the first summertime evacuation
in its 100-year history.
   ``It sounded like jet engines,'' said Debbie Brossman, a
bartender who evacuated her home Friday in nearby El Portal when
the fire was within yards of her house. ``This raging wind was
blowing down the hill. The sky turned dark with smoke and ash.''
   ``It's darkness at noon,'' said Dennis Scotty, Brossman's
neighbor. Their houses in El Portal were saved when the wind
shifted, allowing firefighters to set ``backfires'' that met the
oncoming flames.
   All told, more than 175,000 acres were burning in northern
California, with 14 fires classified as major and hundreds of
smaller ones being watched.
   More than 116,000 acres of forest land have burned in Oregon in
recent days, and more than 90,000 acres burned in Idaho. Fires have
also hit Utah and Washington.
   About 11,000 firefighters were working on the California lines,
mostly in pine forests. The largest fire, in Tehama County, had
burned 106,000 acres by Saturday afternoon, the California
Department of Forestry reported.
   The U.S. Forest Service requested help from the military on
Saturday and was told that three Army battalions would be made
available after undergoing three days of special training in
firefighting.
   Firefighters had contained about 10 percent of each Yosemite
blaze, one 9,200 acres, and the other 5,000 acres. The fires were
both about 10 miles west of Yosemite Valley, the park's most
heavily visited area and site of the famous Bridalveil Falls,
Halfdome and El Capitan. The valley was closed although officials
said there was little smoke there Saturday.
   ``For a lot of tourists, one of their lifelong ambitions was to
see Yosemite. Some barely got there and were turned out,'' said
Denise LeDuc, a service station operator in Mariposa, 30 miles west
of the park.
   More than 10,000 visitors were sent out of the park Friday. The
valley's sleeping facilities, including campgrounds, for 8,000 were
virtually unused overnight.
   ``We are sad, very much, because for us, in France, we don't see
sequoia trees,'' said Maite Letertri, a member of a French tour
group.
   Most of the California fires were started by lightning,
officials said; some 23,490 lightning strikes were counted in the
state by electronic detection equipment between Aug. 3 and Friday.
A fourth straight year of drought has increased the risk of fires
almost throughout the state.
   ``The good news today is that there were no lightning strikes
overnight, and there shouldn't be any for several days now,'' Lisa
Boyd of the California Department of Forestry said.
   The flames of the California fires destroyed 77 structures _
from outbuildings to homes _ including 66 in the town of Foresta
along the Merced River Canyon near Yosemite.
   A National Guard helicopter crashed Friday evening while
scooping up water out of a Tehema County pond. Staff Sgt. Milo
Laguna, the crew chief, suffered minor injuries, but the pilot and
co-pilot escaped unharmed. The crash's cause was not immediately
determined.
   Firefighters were spread thin in many spots. An 18-person crew
was fighting a 2,500-acre wildfire in the King Mountain Range, a
federal wilderness area on the northern California coast that
includes habitat of the endangered spotted owl.
   Two crews were overrun by fire Friday, one in Yosemite and
another in the Sequoia National Forest, but all escaped serious
injury by scrambling into heat-resistant tents.
   In eastern Oregon, firefighters held their own Saturday in
efforts to corral forest and range fires burning across more than
116,000 acres.
   Lightning storms continued, with 2,600 strikes reported
overnight. But fire spokesman Doug Decker said the threat from
lightning was abating after five straight nights of 2,000 or more
strikes.
   The lightning started more than 100 fires each day, but most
were controlled.
   More than 6,500 firefighters were on the lines in Oregon
Saturday. Crews from at least 16 states in the South and East
helped out.
   Decker said the state's most troublesome fire was along the
southern side of the Strawberry Mountain Wilderness southeast of
John Day in the Malheur National Forest. The fire burned actively
through the night, growing from 9,000 acres to nearly 11,000 acres,
Decker said.
   In Idaho, hundreds of firefighters labored to dig containment
lines around forest and range fires, but thunderstorms crackling
overhead in the central mountains promised yet another round of
blazes.
   Temperatures dropped below earlier highs over 100 in southern
Idaho and some heavy rain even fell Friday night in the Payette
National Forest north of Boise, although 19 new lightning-caused
blazes began.
   Some 160 firefighters and air retardant tankers worked together
Friday to rein in the state's biggest blaze, a 66,000-acre range
fire about 35 miles north of Twin Falls. Officials hoped to contain
it Saturday night, although wind gusts accompanying the storms
could change matters drastically.
   Crews in eastern Washington labored Saturday in 90-degree heat
to fight dozens of small forest fires started by lightning strikes
overnight.
   ``Things are pretty hectic today,'' said Paul Hart, spokesman
for the Wenatchee National Forest where lightning strikes started
up to 40 new fires.
   In Utah, fire bosses called in reinforcements to battle several
brush fires, but at least one fire, a 200-acre blaze near the
Uninta and Ouragy Indian Reservation, has been allowed to burn
unchecked because other blazes in the West have taken precedence.

</TEXT>
</DOC>
