ID: 279	RANK: 20	SCORE: 9.662262
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880831-0227 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-08-31-88 2315EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-ForestFiresRdp 1stLd-Writethru a0731 08-31 1153</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Forest Fires Rdp, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0731,1179</SECOND>
<HEAD>Fires Close Yellowstone Road; Montana Ranchers Move Belongings</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: SUBS 10th-13th grafs, `In Yellowstone ...,' with 8 grafs to
add forest lands also put off limits in Oregon, update Yellowstone
acreages, info on North Fork blaze, plans to reopen all gates;
INSERTS 3 grafs after 22nd graf, `But two ...,' with more on
California fire, fires in Oregon.</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto covering</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By JOHN DONNELLY</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Montana ranchers nervously hosed down their roofs and moved out
belongings Wednesday as forest fires roared to within a few miles
of their homes. To the south, in Yellowstone National Park,
wildfires driven by strong wind threatened to close more roads.
   In eastern Idaho, shifting winds pushed flames through control
lines and toward ranches and grain fields. Firefighters also
battled blazes blackening forests and fields in Washington,
California and Utah.
   But there was a glimmer of hope amid the continuing struggles to
contain the wildfires: U.S. Forest Service officials said they have
filled hundreds of temporary firefighting positions and had to turn
away volunteers. Only Wyoming now needs more help, they said.
   ``We really appreciate the public concern and willingness to
help in this firefighting effort,'' said Tom Quinn, Rocky Mountain
regional director of fire management. ``Response was positive and
rapid.''
   In Montana, 300 firefighters outside the Scapegoat Wilderness
area tried to keep flames that spread out from the reserve from
burning more private property.
   ``It's not something you can turn your back on because it's
right there,'' said Barbara Krause, whose ranch is only a couple of
miles from the fire.
   Gov. Ted Schwinden on Wednesday urged Montanans to stay out of
the forests during the Labor Day weekend. The state Fish and Game
Commission voted to delay for two weeks the opening of the 1988
hunting season.
   ``We simply don't need any more fires at this point,'' Schwinden
told reporters at a hastily called news conference. ``It's not just
simply a matter of the cost of putting out the fires; it is that we
are pushing our manpower and equipment resources to the limit.''
   He said 5,000 firefighters are battling blazes on 208,000 acres
in Montana. An additional 173,000 acres were burned in earlier
fires.
   The Oregon Department of Forestry also put forest lands off
limits Wednesday, announcing that 3.8 million acres in the eastern
part of the state will be closed to the public for the Labor Day
weekend and until further notice due to the extreme fire danger and
limited resources to fight new fires.
   In Yellowstone, 4,000 men and women are fighting fires that have
scorched nearly 524,000 acres, about 23 percent of the park's 2.2
million acres, according to the park's chief naturalist George
Robinson.
   Windy conditions that ended several days of calm weather played
havoc with efforts to control the 231,000-acre Clover-Mist fire,
burning in Yellowstone and neighboring Shoshone National Forest.
   ``It's an emotional roller coaster,'' said Steve Fuller, an
employee of a park concessionaire. ``One minute the fire lays down
and looks harmless and then the next day, it gets up and comes at
us.''
   The park's south entrance remained closed Wednesday, and
officials closed a road between North Junction and Canyon, two park
villages. They hope to reopen the south entrance Thursday for the
first time in about two weeks, meaning all five gates will be open.
   Another blaze, the North Fork fire, burned within two miles of
West Yellowstone, Mont., but fire officials assured nervous
residents that the flames would not reach the town. About 1,000
firefighters constructed lines and removed vegetation and other
burnable material from the edge of the town, said fire information
officer Bill Pidanick.
   ``The conditions are a heck of a lot better than they were
yesterday,'' he said. ``We don't have the wind.''
   Driven by high winds, the 92,600-acre fire burst out of control
Tuesday afternoon, jumping the Madison River and the main road from
the park's west entrance to Madison Junction. A flareup Wednesday
closed Yellowstone's west entrance for several hours in the
afternoon.
   In Idaho, a pair of strike crews and four bulldozers Wednesday
protected the Star Valley area of eastern Idaho from the raging
Trail Creek fire. National Guard jets surveyed fires.
   ``The majority of the ranches are on alert,'' said Dan Pugmire,
spokesman for Caribou National Forest in eastern Idaho. ``But we
didn't have to alert them. They were all standing outside watching
it.''
   Pugmire said winds shifted with amazing speed.
   ``The winds were going one direction and we had a blowout on the
northeastern flank,'' he said. ``Then the wind shifted 180 degrees
and the fire turned back on its self and began running east. ...
There's going to be some spots that are going to grow on us before
we get a handle on it.''
   The Trail Creek fire southwest of Palisades Reservoir was the
most threatening of 17 major blazes raging across Idaho and up into
the Panhandle National Forest. More than 2,500 firefighters backed
up by National Guard personnel and equipment battled the worst of
the blazes that have burned more than 70,000 acres of forest and
range lands in Idaho.
   California firefighters got a break Wednesday from Mother Nature.
   There were only 243 lightning strikes Tuesday night, compared
with nearly 9,500 the day before, said Karen Terrill, a spokeswoman
for the California Forestry Department.
   By Wednesday morning, firefighters contained most of the more
than 100 brush and timber fires started by lightning Monday and
early Tuesday, officials said.
   But two new fires flared in the Sierra National Forest, one
called the Garnet Fire, over about 100 acres in the Kings River
Canyon in the southern Sierra, and another near Mariposa just
outside Yosemite National Park.
   The Mariposa blaze, which was sparked by children playing with
matches, destroyed at least one home and forced the evacuation of
17 people as it grew to 250 acres, said state Forestry spokeswoman
Kary Weaver.
   In Oregon, firefighters adopted a fall-back strategy against the
Tepee Butte fire, which has burned 35,775 acres of grass and timber
on the Wallowa-Whitman National Forest and the Hell's Canyon
National Recreation Area.
   The blaze will grow to 59,000 acres before it reaches fire lines
being built by 679 firefighters, spokesman Ron DeHart said. ``We
cannot safely put crews up close to this fire'' because of the
extremely rugged terrain and flash fuels, he said.
   Utah firefighters controlled a 525-acre fire near northern
Utah's Pineview Reservoir and a 100-acre brush fire in Butterfield
Canyon, and expect to control a 60-acre blaze in eastern Utah by
Thursday night.
   In eastern Washington state, a brief respite from hot and dry
weather allowed firefighters to gain ground on major fires burning
in more than 23,000 acres of trees and brush.
   But a warming trend is expected over the next few days. ``That's
not good,'' said Ron DeHart, a spokesman for the multiagency fire
coordinating center in Portland, Ore.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
