ID: 279	RANK: 23	SCORE: 9.175886
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880811-0221 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-08-11-88 2331EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a AM-WildfiresRdp 1stLd-Writethru a0738 08-11 0778</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Wildfires Rdp, 1st Ld - Writethru, a0738,0791</SECOND>
<HEAD>Team Specializing in Unruly Wildfires Called in to Control
Yellowstone Blaze</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: UPDATES throughout with fire in Utah, Yellowstone road
closed, Montana fire increased to 2,500 acres, new fire in Sequoia
National Park and arrest in Morongo Valley fire. No pickup.
^By The Associated Press</NOTE>
<TEXT>
   A team trained in handling unruly wildfires was brought in
Thursday to battle a nearly 37,000-acre fire burning in Wyoming's
Yellowstone National Park, while Oregon firefighters finally
contained the state's largest blaze of the year.
   Fires also burned in Idaho, Montana, Nevada, Utah and California.
   In Wyoming, Yellowstone's 36,910-acre North Fork fire burned 1{
miles south of a campground and a new finger of flame made a run
east into the backcountry, said park spokeswoman Joan Anzelmo.
   Park officials closed a road leading to the Old Faithful geyser
because of fire and smoke from the blaze. Old Faithful could still
be reached from the south, she said.
   Anzelmo said Thursday the presence of the high-level fire
management team was not an indication that officials were worried
that the fire, which had remained stable for several days, could
get out of hand again.
   ``Different strategies are used for different fires and
different types of crews are used for those strategies,'' she said.
   More crews were to be brought in later Thursday to supplement
the 600 firefighters battling the North Fork blaze, the most active
of a number of fires burning on about 196,000 acres of Yellowstone.
   Crews in Idaho mopped up hotspots on two contained wildfires as
fire bosses braced for a new assault of thunderstorms and lightning
that could ignite another round of backcountry fires.
   Prospects for containment by day's end of the stubborn
1,500-acre Spring Canyon II fire on the Targhee National Forest
near the Wyoming border improved as the 10-mile containment line
held despite gusting winds. Crews and equipment were being
demobilized from the 1,000-acre Ruby Rapids fire in the Nez Perce
National Forest near Riggins after the blaze was contained late
Wednesday.
   In the Challis National Forest in central Idaho, crews continued
carving a break line between the month-old 13,000-acre Battleaxe
wilderness fire and a guard station and private airstrip about a
mile south. The area was closed Wednesday as firefighters kept the
flames from jumping a creek and threatening the structure and
airstrip.
   Oregon firefighters got the upper hand of the week-old Paulina
fire that has blackened an estimated 13,000 acres of the Deshutes
National Forest.
   The fire, about 25 miles southeast of Bend, had threatened two
small resorts in the Newberry Crater area before being contained.
Some 400 of the 1,400 firefighters and support personnel assigned
to the blaze were sent home Thursday, said Forest Service
spokeswoman Carol Tocco.
   Storms that brought high winds but little rain drove the Warm
Springs Creek fire in southwestern Montana into steeper terrain and
denser timber overnight, tripling its size to 2,500 acres of the
Helena National Forest.
   A 1,800-acre brush fire in the western hills of Carson City,
Nevada's capital, was contained Thursday, one day after it was
fanned into a 50-foot-high wall of flame near many homes. About 200
people were briefly evacuated, and no structures were damaged.
   Elsewhere in the state, a 700-acre brush fire burning in a
remote area of northwestern Elko County was declared 60 percent
contained. A prairie fire north of Scottsbluff burned at least 18
square miles of pasture and grassland in the Panhandle on Thursday
before it was brought under control.
   In California, a wildfire pushed by strong, erratic winds was
burning out of control Thursday in the Sequoia National Forest,
blackening 2,000 acres, destroying two cabins and threatening
others, authorities said.
   More than 350 firefighters were sent to battle the blaze in the
steep, mountainous region, 35 miles northeast of Bakersfield. At
least 1,000 more firefighters would be sent during the night,
authorities said.
   Elsewhere in California, the U.S. Forest Service had no
estimated containment time for a fire in the Susanville area that
has charred an estimated 2,000 acres of rough terrain in the
Shelton National Refuge.
   The fire is the largest of 41 lightning-caused blazes that broke
out Wednesday when more than 840 strikes hit the ground, said
forest service spokesman Dave Reider.
   A 200-acre brush fire roared out of control Thursday afternoon
and damaged two homes in Morongo Valley, about 60 miles east of Los
Angeles. A fire investigator made an arson arrest, but details were
not available.
   In Park City, Utah, firefighters contained a 300- to 400-acre
canyon brush fire which started Thursday afternoon when a burning
auto pulled off a road and ignited dry grass, a fire spokeswoman
said.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
