ID: 279	RANK: 25	SCORE: 8.972461
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880901-0124 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-01-88 1301EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a PM-FiresRdp 2ndLd-Writethru a0507 09-01 0933</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Fires Rdp, 2nd Ld - Writethru, a0507,0958</SECOND>
<HEAD>States Urge Residents To Stay Out Of Woods To Limit Fire Danger</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: LEADS with 3 grafs to specify 6.6 million acres closed in
Oregon, ADD that south gate in Yellowstone opened today. PICKS UP
3rd graf pvs, `About 180,000 ...'; ADDS one graf on Utah fire
jumping lines.</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By BART ZIEGLER</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   With Labor Day nearing, Oregon officials barred the public from
6.6 million acres of woodland and Montana's governor urged
residents to ``find asphalt'' to limit the number of new wildfires
as flames threatened homes in two states.
   In Wyoming, Yellowstone National Park's south gate opened this
morning for the first time in almost two weeks. All five gates and
public roads within the park are now open despite fires that have
charred more than a half-million acres.
   Fire also blackened forest and brush Wednesday in Washington,
California, Idaho and Utah.
   About 180,000 more acres burned during the past week as new
blazes ignited in eastern Oregon and Washington, Northern
California and northern Idaho, a federal drought advisory issued
this week said.
   It said the northern Rockies and northern Plains remained very
dry, contributing to the worsening forest fires, and little relief
was expected soon.
   Oregon's Department of Forestry announced Wednesday that 3.8
million acres of private, state and other forest in eastern Oregon
will be closed indefinitely due to extreme fire danger and scarce
resources to fight new blazes. Already closed are 2.8 million acres
in western Oregon.
   ``The state needs to limit the risk of wildfire and this has
proven to be an effective way to do that,'' said State Forester
James Brown.
   Dry grass, timber and rugged terrain also made it too dangerous
to directly attack Oregon's biggest forest fire, the 36,000-acre
Tepee Butte blaze, so it will be allowed to burn to fire lines.
   The blaze in the Wallowa-Whitman National Forest and Hell's
Canyon National Recreation Area on the Idaho line will grow to
59,000 acres before it reaches the lines, U.S. Forest Service
spokesman Ron DeHart said.
   ``We cannot safely put crews up close to this fire,'' he said.
   The Forest Service on Wednesday also began training the first of
350 backup firefighters from Oregon to relieve weary crews around
the nation.
   Montana Gov. Ted Schwinden appealed to the public Wednesday to
avoid outdoor recreation during Labor Day weekend and said
restrictions may be imposed if the fire hazard doesn't ease.
   His advice to Labor Day recreationists: ``Find some asphalt.''
   The governor said 5,000 firefighters were battling blazes on
208,000 acres in Montana, and 173,000 acres burned in earlier
fires. He put the cost at $15 million.
   ``We simply don't need any more fires at this point,'' Schwinden
said.
   The Montana Fish and Game Commission reluctantly bowed Wednesday
to a request from Schwinden and postponed the start of all hunting
seasons until Sept. 16 because of fire danger. Sheep and mountain
goat seasons were to open today, and several other seasons were to
open Saturday.
   Some woodland in Washington, where fires have burned more than
23,000 acres, also was put off-limits Wednesday due to fire danger.
A forest products company closed 400,000 acres to the public and
the U.S. Forest Service banned campfires outside designated
campgrounds in the Wenatchee National Forest.
   Along western Montana's Rocky Mountain Front, bulldozers cut a
fire line Wednesday to protect two ranches from a 51,000-acre blaze
that spread Monday from the Scapegoat Wilderness to private land.
Crews also hosed down a cabin as a precaution.
   ``We've had lots of calls from people all over the area offering
(bulldozers) and whatever they got,'' said John Krause, whose ranch
is a mile and a half from the fire.
   At West Yellowstone, Mont., on the western border of Yellowstone
National Park, officials assured nervous residents that flames from
the 109,000-acre North Fork blaze two miles away in the park would
not reach town.
   About 1,000 firefighters dug 12-foot-wide lines with bulldozers
and removed vegetation from the edge of the community. An
evacuation plan is ready as a precaution.
   In the Absaroka-Beartooth Wilderness north of Yellowstone, two
fires consumed more than 83,000 acres by Wednesday and firefighters
fought to keep flames from advancing farther south.
   In nearby Livingston, Mont., some residents covered their faces
Wednesday with bandanas, surgeon's masks or gas masks.
   ``The smoke's been really bad,'' said Dain Kovash, a motel
clerk. ``It makes smoking cigarettes seem healthy.''
   Yellowstone's chief naturalist said Wednesday that nothing but
winter weather will snub wildfires that have blackened more than 20
percent of the park's 2.2 million acres.
   ``We are still anticipating that these fires will keep burning
until the first heavy winter snows,'' said naturalist George
Robinson.
   In eastern Idaho, crews and bulldozers protected ranches in
Caribou National Forest from the raging, 6,800-acre Trail Creek
fire a mile away.
   ``The majority of the ranches are on alert,'' said forest
spokesman Dan Pugmire. ``But we didn't have to alert them. They
were all standing outside watching it.''
   The fire was the most threatening of 17 major blazes in Idaho
that have burned more than 70,000 acres.
   In California, crews fought two fast-moving fires in the central
Sierra Nevada. One, sparked by children playing with matches,
destroyed at least one home, forced the evacuation of 17 people
near Mariposa and burned 250 acres. The second consumed 1,800 acres
west of Kings Canyon National Park.
   Anticipating you'd want a 100-word bit on Utah fires for the rdp:
   Fanned by overnight winds, a once-controlled blaze near northern
Utah's Pineview Reservoir jumped fire lines and more than doubled
to 1,200 acres.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
