ID: 279	RANK: 30	SCORE: 8.418215
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880904-0086 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-04-88 2317EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-ForestFires 3rdLd-Writethru a0821 09-04 1032</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Forest Fires, 3rd Ld - Writethru, a0821,1059</SECOND>
<HEAD>Evacuations Ordered Near Yellowstone Park</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos CKCX3, NY13</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: INSERTS 5 grafs after 12th pvs, ``Mother Nature...' to UPDATE
with criticism from firefighters, picking up 13th graf pvs `In
Silver Gate.' ADDS 7 grafs at end to UPDATE with southern
California and Utah fires; edits throughout to tighten.</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By DAVID FOSTER</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>SILVER GATE, Mont. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Residents outside the northeastern
entrance to Yellowstone National Park were told to evacuate Sunday
as hundreds of firefighters mounted a ``last-ditch effort to save
this town,'' and a spokeswoman said the situation within the park
was deteriorating.
   ``It's going to be a siege for the next 48 hours,'' said Pat
Kaunert, a fire information officer.
   More than 50 fire engines stood by to protect homes in Silver
Gate and nearby Cooke City as the 57,000-acre fire approached from
the west. Park County disaster coordinator Bob Fry said about 150
people were being evacuated.
   ``We were threatened with evacuation two weeks ago, so I packed
then,'' Ellen Gesensway said in the doorway of her rented cabin.
``I've been packed ever since.''
   Bulldozers carved a 65-foot-wide fire line through forest just
west of here, and nearly 500 firefighters helped dig the line by
hand. Crews planned to set a ``backfire'' to cut off the main
fire's fuel source.
   ``We're creating a massive buffer in a last-ditch effort to save
this town,'' Kaunert said. ``We need two miles of buffer in front
of the fire to hold it. Two miles of black.''
   The blazes now cover some 910,000 acres of the greater
Yellowstone area, including 611,000 acres within the park itself,
or more than one-fourth of Yellowstone's 2.2 million total acreage.
   Within Yellowstone itself, firefighters Sunday tried to save
wooden foot bridges and protect a campground.
   ``This situation is growing increasingly more serious day by
day,'' said Yellowstone National Park spokeswoman Joan Anzelmo.
``It is a magnitude that no one in their wildest imagination or
scientific predictions could have suggested.''
   Anzelmo added that without help from the weather, no amount of
money spent by the National Park Service or the U.S. Forest Service
will help douse the blazes. Winds were relatively calm Sunday, but
forecasts called for variable winds up to 30 mph later in the week.
   ``Mother Nature is making the decisions here,'' said Anzelmo.
   Some U.S. Forest Service firefighters criticized the National
Park Service for allowing fires to burn uncontrolled earlier this
summer despite dry conditions. Officials said at the time that it
was their policy not to fight lightning-caused fires in the
wilderness, which they consider a natural part of forest
re-generation.
   Amy Vanderbilt, another park spokeswoman, said the firefighters
don't understand the problem.
   ``What these firefighters who are coming in (from other states)
may not realize is that firefighters were on that (North Fork) fire
within 15 minutes after it started,'' she said in a telephone
interview from park headquarters at Mammoth Hot Springs, Wyo.
   ``Because of the extremely dry conditions, that fire grew
amazingly fast and beyond anyone's expectations,'' she said.
   Elsewhere Sunday, Washington state's most serious forest fires
ballooned to more than 12,500 acres, sending smoke and ash over the
town of Republic but posing no immediate threat.
   In Silver Gate, a sheriff's department vehicle drove down the
street at 8 a.m., its siren blaring. Authorities knocked on doors
and phoned people, asking them to leave. Under Montana law,
officials cannot force anyone to evacuate.
   Wayne Johnson watched the firefighters march by and said he was
staying. ``There's no real reason to leave,'' he said. ``I don't
think the town's going to burn.''
   Inside the Log Cabin Cafe, the owners dashed around, preparing
to close up and get out.
   ``I'm angry,'' said co-owner Cecile King. ``We have been
battling with the Park Service since the first of July (to do
more), and now the fires are threatening every town around the
park.''
   The lightning-sparked fire threatening Silver Gate has been
burning June 14. Under Forest Service policy for naturally
occurring fires, the blaze was allowed to burn as long as it
remained within certain boundaries.
   But in mid-August, wind gusting to 70 mph blew the fire across
several miles in a matter of hours, and a human-caused fire to the
west also gained ground.
   That fire now stands at nearly 54,000 acres, and officials
expect the two blazes to merge. As of Sunday, they were two miles
apart.
   Elsewhere, in northeastern Montana, firefighters battling a
9,100-acre fire northeast of Libby ``had a pretty quiet night'' but
still had no deadline for containment, said Kootenai National
Forest spokesman Dick Guth.
   Guth said 1,600 firefighters were stymied by ``unbelievably hot,
dry conditions. It is hard to say when we'll be able to get a line
that will hold.''
   Hot, dry weather and a smoky haze that covered much of Idaho
continued to hamper efforts to contain four major fires that have
blackened more than 80,000 acres of forest and grassland. Crews and
pumper trucks were stationed around several ranches as firefighters
expected the largest of the fires to jump the boundaries of the
Frank Church-River of No Return Wilderness and move onto private
property.
   In southern California, wildfires blackened nearly 3,000 acres
of brush and timber and damaged at least 21 structures as searing,
dry weather and Santa Ana winds harried firefighters and ignited
new flames.
   Temperatures neared 110 degrees throughout the region, humidity
was low, and gusty northeasterly desert winds rolled through
canyons and hills.
   In San Diego County, firefighters mopped up hot spots from a
600-acre blaze whose sparks scorched the roofs of at least 20
hilltop homes.
   Arcing power lines caused a fire about 15 miles northeast of San
Diego.
   A total of 21 homes were damaged by that blaze, which forced the
evacuation of 150 people from a mobile home park, authorities said.
   In Utah, firefighters received a break from calm winds to help
keep a raging, 4,000-acre brush fire away from more than 70 canyon
homes east of Salt Lake City, authorities said.
   Lt. Gov. Val Oveson urged residents to avoid spending Labor Day
in the mountains to reduce the risk of starting additional fires in
dry forests.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
