ID: 279	RANK: 44	SCORE: 7.436545
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880404-0027 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-04-04-88 0347EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a PM-Obit-Caniff     04-04 0807</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Obit-Caniff,0832</SECOND>
<HEAD>Milton A. Caniff, Creator of `Terry and the Pirates' and `Steve
Canyon'</HEAD>
<DATELINE>NEW YORK (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Milton A. Caniff, who for half a century took
Americans on daring adventures through the comic pages with ``Terry
and the Pirates'' and ``Steve Canyon,'' has died of lung cancer. He
was 81.
   Caniff, who had entered Beth Israel Hospital on Feb. 29, died
Sunday at his home, according to a spokesman for King Features,
which syndicated the strips.
   Caniff set a standard for realistic drawing and quickly
enthralled Depression-era readers with tales of danger in the Far
East in ``Terry and the Pirates,'' which debuted in 1934 in the
Daily News.
   He left the paper to join Marshall Field and the Chicago Sun
Syndicate in 1946 with a new hero, ``Steve Canyon,'' a fictional
Air Force colonel who proved so popular he was eventually given his
own file at the Pentagon.
   Always attuned to what sells newspapers, Caniff liked to quote
his high school art teacher in Dayton, Ohio: ``Unless a piece of
art inspired the viewer to part with cash money to acquire it, then
the drawing was not worth a hoot.''
   But his technique was among the very best, and he was honored as
the ``Rembrandt of comic strips'' at an exhibition at the Museum of
Cartoon Art in 1985. He said he belonged to the ``every wrinkle
must show'' school of art.
   At the Dayton Daily News, Pulitzer Prize-winning cartoonist Mike
Peters described Caniff as ``the grandaddy of cartoonists.''
   ``He was in the inner circle with Rube Goldberg, Al Capp, Walt
Kelly and those guys,'' Peters said. ``He was revered by all of us.
He had some of the best drafted strips ever done.''
   Ted Hannah, a spokesman for King Features, said Caniff continued
to work until very near his death, with his longtime assistant,
Shel Dorf of California. Hannah said a decision on the future of
``Steve Canyon'' would be made this week.
   Caniff's cartooning career began with ``Dickie Dare'' and ``The
Gay Thirties'' for The Associated Press.
   He was soon approached by Capt. Joseph M. Patterson, publisher
of the News, who asked for an adventure strip packed with comedy,
romance and adventure and set in the Orient, which Patterson
regarded as the last outpost of adventure.
   By 1946, ``Terry and the Pirates'' was in more than 300
newspapers and Caniff was making $75,000 per year. But he wanted to
own a cartoon, and he developed ``Steve Canyon,'' for which he was
paid $2,000 a week and owned the rights.
   Despite occasional complaints about violence, ``Steve Canyon''
kept flying and fighting, and early this year it was in more than
500 newspapers around the world, according to King Features.
   Caniff was awarded the Air Force Exceptional Service Award, its
highest civilian honor.
   Caniff was a meticulous researcher, and some of the plots in
``Terry and the Pirates'' anticipated actual events in World War
II, such as the Japanese attack on the United States. One of his
memorable creations was the Dragon Lady, who was inspired by Joan
Crawford.
   When a ``Terry'' character named Raven Sherman was killed in
1941, Caniff received thousands of cards, letters and flowers, and
he recalled that an elevator operator called him a murderer.
   ``Terry and the Pirates'' was continued by George Wunder until
the strip ended in 1973. Wunder died last December.
   Caniff was born Feb. 28, 1907, in Hillsboro, Ohio, and by
kindergarten was drawing recognizable human figures on scrap paper
brought home by his father, a printer.
   His first job was drawing cartoons for the Boy Scout page in the
Dayton Journal Herald when he was 13. He also worked for the
Columbus Dispatch while at Ohio State University, where he earned a
fine arts degree.
   Phlebitis prevented Caniff from joining the military.
   ``It was something I always wanted to do. It was like a small
boy who dreams of catching the game-winning touchdown or rescuing
the heroine from the villain. Fortunately, the strips have allowed
me to have a close association with the military,'' Caniff once
said.
   Many of his strips had touches of autobiography and his Ohio
boyhood, and friends often were prototypes for characters in the
strip. Recently Caniff drew several weeks of strips based on his
courtship of his future wife, Ester Parsons, at Stivers High
School. They were married in 1930.
   He donated most of his original material to Ohio State's Milton
Caniff Library for Communications and Graphic Arts, according to
Walter K. Bunge, director of the university's School of Journalism.
   Caniff received at least three honorary doctorates, including
one from the University of Dayton, and numerous other awards. He
also was a founder of the National Cartoonists Society.
   He is survived by his wife, Ester.
   Funeral services were to be announced by the Frank E. Campbell
funeral home in Manhattan.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
