ID: 279	RANK: 45	SCORE: 7.432931
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910129-0014
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910129-0014.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Rafting on the Rio Grande, Owls, Poppies, Hornets and All
   ----
   By Nicholas King
</HL>
<DATE>
01/29/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16
</SO>
<LP>
   Big Bend National Park, Texas -- A cannonball of brown and
white fluff tore from behind the headlights and soared
sharply up and to the right of the road into the blackness of
the south Texas night.
   It was a great horned owl surprised in its act of preying
on some vanished thing on the tarred gravel. Cars are rarer
after dark on these roads than burros or roadrunners or even
owls. We were on our way to this great national park six
hours southeast of El Paso, one of the remotest places in the
U.S.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Big Bend is a thousand square miles of desert and mountain
cradled in the great sweep the Rio Grande makes into the
Mexican state of Chihuahua. The ground is covered with
prickly pear cactus and creosote bushes, the high, spindly
ocotillo called buggy whips and the needle-pointed
lechuguilla. Here dwell the jack rabbits, the lizards, the
scorpions and the tarantulas. The tarantulas live for years.
Some people say their memory capacity makes them good pets.
   Rising abruptly, almost exploding from the middle of this
baking yellow flatness, is a great volcanic mass of red rock,
the Chisos Mountains. They form a citadel 4,000 feet above
the desert, and hold within their sand-castle peaks a
blue-green climate in a basin soft with oak and pine, and
inhabited by an entirely different flora and fauna.
   From the lookouts stretch the distant plains of Texas and
the mountains of Mexico, standing in palisades above the Rio
Grande. Down in the brush at your feet feeds the Carmen
Mountains deer, the dwarflike subspecies of the widespread
white-tailed tribe, confined in the U.S. to this very spot.
   There has been a great amount of rain in recent months by
Big Bend standards, and the desert flowers have been blooming
again as though it were spring. So the normally dry gullies
and promontories and mountain flanks sport out of season the
yellow Mexican poppy, the little blue vervain, and the soft
pink flowers of the ashyleaved cenizos, the bush-high
silver-leaf sage.
   With the rebirth of the flowers the insects are reborn
too. The slopes are covered with butterflies and wasps. On
the flats along the Rio Grande, there are such multitudes of
fat orange hornets buzzing around the sugar in the rafters'
picnics that a guide whipping a cookie from a box finds
himself eating a hornet sandwich: a rueful shout and a
stinging mouth for the rest of the day.
   He was one of the men taking us down the white water of
the Santa Elena Canyon, so he worried about us hearing his
commands and admonitions. In fact they were heard clearly,
and we bumped and tumbled over the spraying rapids without
incident into the limpid gray light that went up 1,500 feet
to the canyon's rim. And so we spun and drifted for the rest
of the seven miles of narrow river, except when the cliffs
turned a corner and the sun broke into the depths, gashing
the planes of the precipices with brilliant color.
   Our boat kept looking vainly up the sheer wall for the
peregrine falcons that nest on its sharp edges. All we heard
was the gurgling of water along the paddles and the low
bubble of the canyon wren.
   We took the rafts out farther down than usual because of
the flooding of the river after so much rain. A telephone
crew, Mexicans and Americans, was restringing a line crossing
the river that was downed by the high water. When this
happens, the Mexican settlements along the banks are cut off
from electric power.
   A few miles farther down, you can cross over yourself. A
bright-eyed, elderly Charon poles you in an aluminum skiff
through a riffle; then it's a skip and jump over boulders to
a pickup truck, which goes a mile to the village of
Boquillas. There you can sit at a cafe on a bluff, look back
at the other side, and then come home. Ten dollars covers
this excursion handsomely.
   ---
   Mr. King is director of the Foreign Press Center in New
York.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
