ID: 279	RANK: 49	SCORE: 7.317350
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880827-0059 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-08-27-88 0819EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a PM-WildfiresRdp     08-27 0739</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Wildfires Rdp,0765</SECOND>
<HEAD>More Army Troops Trained to Fight Fires</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto XYS1</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Another 1,200 Army soldiers underwent training to help
hard-pressed civilian crews battle Western wildfires so numerous a
blaze in Washington state burned out of control today because there
was no one to fight it.
   ``We are really stretched thin on (firefighting) forces right
now,'' state Department of Natural Resources spokesman Rob Harper
said Friday as the 5,000-acre blaze burned on the Colville Indian
Reservation in northeast Washington.
   At Yellowstone National Park, rangers escorted tourists down
roads otherwise closed by fires, and residents of a town on the
edge of the park were told they might have to evacuate. Wildfires
also threatened two Oregon communities.
   Fires also charred woodlands in parts of California, Utah and
Idaho.
   Two more Army battalions, about 1,200 soldiers, from Fort Lewis,
Wash., were being trained to fight fires, according to the Boise
Interagency Fire Center, which coordinates Western firefighting
efforts.
   The soldiers will be flown to Montana on Sunday and Monday to
help fight fires in Yellowstone, said Maj. Frank Ham, an Army
spokesman.
   About 1,200 Fort Lewis soldiers are already fighting blazes in
and near the nation's oldest national park. ``We're told they're
doing a great job,'' Ham said.
   At Yellowstone on Friday, two convoys of up to 350 cars took
visitors from one side of the park to the other in safety after a
ranger checked the road between the Yellowstone communities of
Canyon and Norris.
   The tourists ``think it's a big adventure,'' said Ranger Mona
Devine. ``Of course, some of the people are upset.''
   The convoys filed past the 114,000-acre ``North Fork'' fire, one
of 10 involving more than 400,000 acres of the park.
   Winds, which kicked up the fire on Thursday, on Friday helped
firefighters by rolling the blaze back on itself, said fire
official Troy Corn.
   Just outside Yellowstone's northeast entrance, a 36,000-acre
blaze in the Absaroka-Beartooth wilderness in south-central Montana
came within four miles of Cooke City, and evacuation plans were
readied for 500 to 1,000 people, officials said.
   But the warning was lifted when shifting winds pushed the fire
away from the town.
   ``It's too early to say for sure, but it's looking pretty
good,'' said Forest Service spokesman Steve Waterman.
   Yellowstone stopped charging its $10 entry fee Wednesday because
of the inconvenience fires created for visitors.
   Park facilities at Grant Village, Lewis Lake, Norris, Canyon,
Pebble Creek and Madison remained closed Friday.
   The park's west entrance was re-opened Friday, although
intermittent closures were expected.
   From the south entrance, the Rockefeller Memorial Parkway
leading into Grand Teton National Park also was closed, because of
a 21,500-acre fire in the Bridger-Teton National Forest.
   About 1,520 firefighters, including about 600 soldiers from Fort
Lewis, battled the 162,700-acre Clover-Mist fire burning in the
park and in steep, rugged terrain in the Shoshone National Forest.
   Elsewhere, some residents of Maxville, Mont., a town of about
two dozen households 90 miles southwest of Helena, began trickling
back when a fire that forced them to evacuate turned west after
coming as close as three miles, said fire information officer
Palmer Bowen.
   The fire earlier forced closure of the main road through the
area, destroyed a trailer home and two bulldozers and chased fire
crews out of a mining camp in the Deerlodge National Forest.
   In southwestern Oregon, the lightning-sparked Walker Mountain
fire crept within a half mile of a subdivision of about 1,000
people north of Grants Pass. In the northeastern corner of the
state, the Ward Canyon fire spread to within a mile of the tiny
community of Troy, authorities said.
   Both communities were placed on evacuation alert. The Ward
Canyon blaze had burned 15 unoccupied structures, mostly hunting
cabins.
   About 120 second-grade children from the Fir Point Bible Camp
were taken to a school about 25 miles north of Grants Pass ``as a
precautionary move'' after the Woods Creek fire grew to 500 acres,
said Jim Fisher, a state Forestry Department spokesman. He said the
children headed home Friday and the fire was 75 percent contained.
   Also in the state's northeast corner, the Tepee Butte fire
exploded to 26,300 acres of grass and timber by Friday night from
150 acres Thursday afternoon, and firefighters said it could spread
to as many as 80,000 acres.
   ``It appears as though we may have lost the left flank of that
fire,'' said Wallowa-Whitman National Forest spokeswoman Gail
Aschenbrenner.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
