ID: 279	RANK: 63	SCORE: 7.121469
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900810-0087 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-08-10-90 1344EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a PM-ForestFires 2ndLd-Writethru a0563 08-10 0583</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Forest Fires, 2nd Ld - Writethru, a0563,0592</SECOND>
<HEAD>Lightning Kindles Forests in West, Yosemite National Park Hit</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Leads with 11 grafs to UPDATE with increased acreage of fires
in Idaho, and California, including Yosemite park and Tehama
County. Picks up 12th graf: `In Oregon ...'</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Firefighters today battled lightning-kindled wildfires that have
burned more than 275,000 acres in the West, including 12,000 acres
in Yosemite National Park, which was closed to most visitors.
   Scattered fires in California left 100,000 acres charred by
morning. More than 90,000 acres of forest land have burned in
Oregon in recent days, more than 80,000 acres burned in Idaho and
nearly 5,500 in Utah.
   In Yosemite, the park immortalized by naturalist John Muir and
photographer Ansel Adams, 10,000 visitors were stranded overnight
to keep roads clear for emergency vehicles. Two villages were
evacuated and 25 structures burned.
   The park was closed to most visitors late Thursday, after fires
blocked all the main roads. Fire officials planned to escort out
the stranded campers early today.
   Only California Route 395 over Tioga Pass, a small road near the
Nevada border, remained open. Spokeswoman Paula Brown said only
visitors with reservations at the Wawona camp on the park's south
end would be allowed in.
   About 200 miles to the north, a 3,500-acre blaze forced some
residents to flee Ravendale, said state forestry spokesman Chris
Parker. A 2,500-acre fire threatened the town as well, he said.
   A total of 17,608 lightning strikes were recorded from Aug. 3
through mid-week, sparking more than a thousand fires, Parker said.
He said more than 6,000 firefighters were in action, including
2,000 brought in from out of state.
   A 39,000-acre fire burned in Tehama County, and 20 rural
families were evacuated. A 17,500-acre fire threatened campgrounds
in Sequoia National Park.
   In Idaho, smoke from wildfires blanketed Boise Valley today as a
growing army of firefighters hustled to keep up with several
blazes. ``It could be several days before we'll see clear skies
again,'' said Kathleen Eide, a National Weather Service
meteorologist in Boise.
   Low humidity and temperatures topping 100 helped scores of
blazes sear central Idaho forests, while three large range fires
burned out of control on the southern Idaho desert.
   The largest of the range fires _ a 60,000-acre blaze _ ripped
across sagebrush and grass 35 miles northeast of Twin Falls and
created weather of its own Thursday. ``It looked like a cyclone
with black clouds and a wall of flame rising about 1,000 feet in
the air,'' said Dale Chatterton, a U.S. Bureau of Land Management
dispatcher.
   In Oregon, a 70,000-acre blaze turned away from three small
towns in the southeast corner of the state after 60 mph winds
switched direction. Some residents of Riley fled when flames came
within a mile, while residents three miles from the fire in Burns
and Hines watched its progress closely, said state forestry
spokeswoman Christie Sohn.
   More than 6,500 people from state and federal agencies were
fighting fires statewide.
   In Utah, crews on Thursday cleared landing spots for helicopters
planning to ferry firefighters battling a 5,350-acre blaze into
hard-to-reach areas on the Uintah and Ouray Indian Reservation.
   The blaze in the ponderosa pines and oak brush was nearly
contained Thursday before thunderstorms slowed firefighters and
started new fires.
   Meanwhile today, firefighers in northwestern Utah battled five
brush fires totaling 1,800 acres, including one that threatened
homes in the desert community of Terra about 40 miles west of Salt
Lake City.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
