ID: 279	RANK: 66	SCORE: 6.998820
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890712-0133 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-12-89 1324EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a PM-FiresRdp 4thLd-Writethru a0590 07-12 0955</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Fires Rdp, 4th Ld - Writethru, a0590,0976</SECOND>
<HEAD>Rain Aids Firefighters but Officials Fear Lightning Strikes</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: SUBS 3rd graf to downgrade acreage figure, reflecting new estimate
on Nebraska fire; SUBS grafs 17-18 `The nation's ...' with 3 grafs to UPDATE
with fire contained, new quote, lower estimate of acreage burned; Picks
up 19th graf, ``We are ...'</HEAD>
<HEAD>With LaserPhotos</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By TOM BUERKLE</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Heavy rain overnight helped firefighters get the upper hand on a
wildfire that destroyed 37 homes in Boulder Canyon, Colo., the most
destructive of the many wildfires burning today in eight states.
   But fire bosses worried that storms in several of the burned
areas could also bring lightning and the potential for new blazes.
   Twenty fires were burning on more than 110,000 acres in eight
states _ Arizona, California, Colorado, Montana, Nebraska, New
Mexico, Nevada and Utah, according to the federal Boise Interagency
Fire Center in Idaho.
   Rain helped the 11,000 firefighters working on the lines, but
officials issued a ``red flag'' warning because of thunderstorms
that are expected to move from northern Arizona across Nevada, the
Sierra Nevada range of California, eastern Oregon, Idaho and Montana
in the next two days.
   Officials at the firefighting coordinating agency fear the storms
could add to the more than 70,000 lightning strikes recorded across
the West during the past week, mostly in the past two days.
   ``It's a mixed blessing ... the chance of rain versus the chance
of lightning,'' Jerry Larson, deputy Nebraska fire marshal, said
today.
   Half an inch of rain poured on the Boulder Canyon fire overnight,
helping about 180 firefighters get the 2,000-acre blaze 90 percent
contained, said U.S. Forest Service spokeswoman Melissa Carlson in
Boulder.
   The fire, which broke out Sunday, razed 37 homes and damaged
numerous other structures on private property.
   More rain was expected today, and firefighters hoped to contain
the blaze inside a ring of bare earth this evening.
   Boulder County Sheriff Brad Leach said the blaze began with
``carelessly discarded'' smoking material near a trailer owned by
Mitch Steiner of Boulder, but that there was insufficient evidence
for charges.
   In an interview broadcast Tuesday on KCNC-TV in Denver, Steiner,
28, said he went to the trailer for a few minutes Sunday to pick up
tools, but said he was sure he hadn't smoked or dropped anything
burning.
   The federal firefighting center gave the Boulder Canyon Blaze the
highest priority because of the damage to property and the threat it
posed to inhabited areas.
   Residents were allowed back into the area, but the sheriff's
office was advising people against staying overnight.
   In Arizona, a firefighter was struck dead by lightning on Monday,
becoming the second fatality of the fire season. A firefighter in
California was killed by a falling tree on Sunday.
   Rain helped crews contain or control nearly all the fires that
burned 50,000 acres in southern Arizona. Officials also expected to
bring under control today a 1,700-acre blaze near the Grand Canyon's
North Rim tourist lodge, which had threatened a historic hunting
cabin used by President Theodore Roosevelt, said Wendell Peacock of
the U.S. Bureau of Land Management.
   Several other fires were burning out of control in central and
northern Arizona, including an 800-acre blaze that threatened the
Havasu National Wildlife Refuge, which is home to nesting bald
eagles, and a 500-acre fire in the Tonto National Forest.
   The nation's biggest fire was in northwestern Nebraska, where
planes dumped fire-retardant chemicals on a blaze that burned
between 50,000 and 100,000 acres on ranchland and in Fort Robinson
State Park, where Sioux Chief Crazy Horse was killed.
   Firefighters used heavy equipment and shovels to dig a line of
bare earth around the burning area, said Larson, the deputy fire
marshal. The blaze was declared fully contained late this morning.
   ``The fire is now well within the established fire line. The
weather is cooperating, the winds have died down,'' Larson said.
   ``We are cautiously optimistic that the worst part of the fire is
over,'' Gov. Kay Orr said on a tour of the burned area Tuesday.
   Officials planned to open the park Friday. The fire was ignited
by lightning Saturday.
   Nine people have been treated at a hospital for minor injuries
since the blaze began, Larson said.
   Elsewhere:
   _ Good weather helped firefighters encircle two brush fires in
northern California that burned more than 8,000 acres, but tough
going was reported today in the battle against a blaze at Big Sur on
the coast. The Big Sur fire, believed to be arson, charred nearly
3,000 acres of growth, and firefighters hoped to contain it by 6
p.m. today, said U.S. Forest Service spokesman Maeton Freel.
   _ At Mesa Verde National Park in southwestern Colorado, the U.S.
Forest Service decided today to reopen all but a few sections to the
public, said John Pasquantino, fire information officer. Five
lightning-caused fires Tuesday night were quickly quelled after
scorching 2,600 acres, and Indian cliff dwellings abandoned in the
13th Century were undamaged, he said.
   _ Crews contained a 1,000-acre brush fire in Utah that had
prompted the temporary shutdown of a 345,000-volt line relaying
electricity in the West. And nearly 400 firefighters finished a fire
line around a 15,500-acre fire west of the Colorado line.
   _ Authorities in Yellowstone National Park moved quickly to
extinguish a lightning-caused fire that burned a tenth of an acre
Monday. It was the first natural fire of the season to be snuffed
out following the suspension of the ``let burn'' policy, which was
criticized after last year's massive blazes.
   Elswhere in Wyoming, rehabilitation work began Tuesday in a
3,500-acre section of the Bridger-Teton National Forest scorched by
a blaze that was contained Monday. Full control was predicted for
Monday.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
