ID: 279	RANK: 74	SCORE: 6.920382
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880812-0001 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-08-12-88 2328EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-ForestFires 1stLd-Writethru a0816 08-12 0641</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Forest Fires, 1st Ld - Writethru, a0816,0653</SECOND>
<HEAD>Yellowstone Road Reopened, Storm Sparks Idaho Fires</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Leads with 6 grafs to UPDATE with rain in Yellowstone, fires
in Montana and pilot killed in California; picking up 4th graf pvs
`Park officials.' SUBS 11th graf pvs `In Idaho' with 2 grafs to
include Montana fire and details of Idaho fire.</NOTE>
<DATELINE>YELLOWSTONE NATIONAL PARK, Wyo. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Yellowstone National Park
got its first significant rainfall since Memorial Day on Friday,
and the rain and cooler temperatures aided firefighters battling a
40,000-acre fire.
   In California, the pilot of a U.S. Forest Service plane was
killed Friday when his plane crashed while surveying a fire in the
Sequoia National Forest about 35 miles northeast of Bakersfield,
Calif., authorities said.
   Fires also burned in Idaho and Montana.
   Yellowstone received about two hours of intermittent rainfall
Friday.
   ``One short rain shower is not adequate to douse the fires. But
it does help increase humidity in the air and it helps slow the
fires down,'' said park spokeswoman Joan Anzelmo.
   She said the temperature in Yellowstone cooled down Friday
afternoon, the wind slowed and firefighters made some progress in
their efforts to contain fires burning on nearly 200,000 acres of
the park.
   Park officials on Friday morning reopened a road between Madison
Junction and Old Faithful that had been closed Thursday because of
the fire and smoke.
   The fire, pushed east by winds whipping at up to 40 mph
Thursday, had crossed the road in several spots near Nez Perce
Creek as it grew by about 3,000 acres during the day.
   The fire's north edge was about 1{ miles south of the Madison
Junction campground, which remained open, and wind was pushing the
flames to the east into backcountry, Anzelmo said.
   The 20,260-acre Fan fire in the park's northwestern corner
remained inside containment lines and burning had slowed on the
Shoshone and Red fires, which had charred about 34,000 acres.
   Despite the fires, tourism in Yellowstone remains high, Anzelmo
said.
   ``We are continuing to see a very busy park with campgrounds and
hotels full each night,'' she said. ``But the last two days, there
have been fairly smoky conditions in the park and the vicinity, so
that has been difficult for everyone.''
   In Montana, cool, cloudy weather slowed a 2,800-acre fire
burning in the Elkhorn Mountains southeast of Helena Friday. Fire
crews continued the slow work of building fire lines by hand in
steep terrain, forest officials said. The cool weather also helped
125 firefighters battling an 8,000-acre grass and range fire
southeast of Dillon.
   In Idaho, fire crews carved a break line between the raging
4,000 Walker Creek fire and the southeastern town of Inkom on
Friday. Residents from 16 rural homes were evacuated Thursday when
flames whipped by 60 mph gusts swept over thousands of acres of
sage, grass and groves of trees. The families stayed away from
their homes Friday, and residents of 32 other homes were warned
they might have to leave their homes.
   No structures were lost and no injuries were reported.
   Hundreds of firefighters were strung out across the southern
part of the state against the worst of more than 75 fires started
by lightning Thursday.
   ``We're snowed under here just trying to get people on fires,''
Challis National Forest spokesman Jim James said. ``We're going to
be really thin on resources.''
   In the Nez Perce National Forest, where Thursday's storm sparked
20 new fires, some 180 firefighters tried to regain containment of
the 1,000-acre Ruby Rapids fire after wind-driven flames broke
through the containment line. Fire bosses hoped to recontain the
fire by day's end and control it Saturday.
   Crews finally controlled the stubborn 1,500-acre Spring Canyon
II fire in the Targhee National Forest near the Wyoming border
Thursday night, and fire bosses were hoping to begin demobilization
this weekend.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
