ID: 279	RANK: 86	SCORE: 6.755432
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880826-0052 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-08-26-88 0239EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-WildfiresRdp 4thLd-Writethru a0455 08-26 0922</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Wildfires Rdp, 4th Ld-Writethru, a0455,0941</SECOND>
<HEAD>Firefighters Bolster Yellowstone Defenses</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: LEADS with 5 grafs to CORRECT that Oregon officials now say
they have ordered only that evacuation plans be readied, sted
actual evacuations. Picks up 6th graf pvs, `Effie Rozier ...</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos MED1, XYS2,3</HEAD>
<DATELINE>YELLOWSTONE NATIONAL PARK, Wyo. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Brisk winds carried a
108,300-acre blaze over fire lines Thursday, fanning flames to
within less than a half mile of one of Yellowstone National Park's
most scenic areas and forcing officials to close the park's west
entrance.
   Meanwhile, a fire that came within a mile of a nuclear missile
silo in Montana moved away Thursday, and authorities in Oregon
ordered evacuation plans be prepared as flames neared two small
communities.
   The lightning-sparked Walker Mountain fire in southern Oregon
sent flames 100 feet into the sky less than a mile from a
subdivision outside Grants Pass, prompting the order from state
officials late Thursday that evacuation plans be readied for the
subdivision.
   ``There are ashes falling just like rain on our deck,'' said
Helen McCall, who lives at the Grants Pass city limits, about two
miles south of the 1,200-acre fire. She said 400-500 people live in
the subdivision.
   In eastern Oregon, a 5,000-acre fire caused evacuation plans to
be readied for the tiny community of Troy near the Washington line.
   Effie Rozier of the Red Cross said Troy is a ``motel and a
restaurant'' with about 50 residents scattered nearby.
   Crews in Yellowstone began hosing down the 600 cabins and other
buildings at the Canyon area, one of the largest developments in
the nation's oldest national park, as flames became visible from
the area. Firefighters also began unrolling water lines on roofs
for sprinkler systems to bolster protection.
   By late afternoon, firefighters had drawn the flames away from
Canyon and back toward the main section of the big North Fork fire
by setting backfires, Fire Information Officer Judith Downing said.
While there was no immediate threat to structures at Canyon,
officials won't know if the area is out of danger before Sunday,
she said.
   Two other fires _ the 162,000-acre Clover-Mist fire on the
park's eastern side and a 88,326-acre in the park's southern end _
burned but threatened no buildings. Ash and smoke from the fires
reduced visibility significantly in Wyoming and brought haze and
brightly colored sunsets to Colorado.
   To the south of Yellowstone in Grand Teton National Park and the
Bridger-Teton National Forest, fire managers chose to herd a
15,569-acre blaze north toward Yellowstone, hoping it would run out
of fuel when it merged with other blazes.
   Elsewhere in the West, fire crews struggled with blazes in
Montana, Utah, Idaho, Washington and California.
   In Yellowstone, all roads into the Canyon area were closed and
heavy smoke obscured the sun and reduced visibility to less than
200 yards. With the park's south entrance already closed, only
three entrances now remain open.
   Park officials evacuated 361 visitors from Canyon on Tuesday,
moving them to other park lodgings.
   A fire erupted over 2,500 acres of a mining area in western
Montana, forcing evacuations at one mine, destroying a house and
two bulldozers and threatening a 500-kilovolt power line feeding
power to the Pacific Northwest, officials said.
   In southern Montana, firefighters battling a pair of major
wilderness forest fires that burned close to 60,000 acres braced
for a hot afternoon with gusting winds.
   A lightning storm moved toward the Helena area, where fire crews
hoped to contain a 37,600-acre blaze to the southeast, while a
1,300-acre fire in central Montana moved away from a Minuteman
missile silo.
   That fire broke out Wednesday afternoon and more than doubled to
900 acres overnight, but Zail Chapman, dispatcher for the Helena
National Forest in Great Falls, said, ``The missile silo is
completely secure.''
   Oregon State Fire Marshal Olin Greene issued a statewide ban on
outdoor burning, with the exception of approved field burning, a
day after Gov. Neil Goldschmidt declared a state of emergency in
southwest Oregon, where three major fires charred 2,600 acres and
destroyed a rural house. A 2,000-acre fire burned north of Wallowa
in the northeast part of the state.
   The declaration cleared the way for the National Guard to help
fight the fires, but no troops were called out.
   The fires in southwestern Oregon started with a series of
lightning storms Tuesday night; at least 60 fires, most of them
small, were reported.
   In western Idaho, flames from the raging 2,450-acre Eagle Bar
fire near Hells Canyon spotted into the middle of a valuable
commercial stand of timber, forcing fire bosses to divert at least
one helicopter to try to contain the new blaze. Four other major
blazes were burning on over 4,000 acres in the state.
   In Washington, firefighters battled two large fires covering
more than 750 acres southwest of Mount Rainier National Park and a
200-acre lightning-sparked fire threatened about 15 homes near the
Oregon border. More than 20 small new fires blazed up around the
state.
   Firefighters in eastern Utah expected to contain a 200-acre fire
in the Ashley National Forest 26 miles north of Vernal and a
separate 350-acre fire in northern Utah, according to fire
management officer Ivan Erskin. Officials blamed a spark from a
bulldozer for starting a 150-acre fire in northern Utah at the
Powder Mountain Ski Area.
   Near Cloverdale, Calif., about 65 miles north of San Francisco,
a grass fire set off by a welder's torch burned a barn where the
welder was working and charred some 1,200 acres in steep terrain.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
