ID: 279	RANK: 94	SCORE: 6.686439
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890704-0019 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-04-89 0017EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-FireRdp 3rdLd-Writethru a0831 07-04 0971</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Fire Rdp, 3rd Ld-Writethru, a0831,1000</SECOND>
<HEAD>Wildfires Continue in California, Colorado</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: UPDATES throughout with 15 homes damaged or destroyed, 600 acres
burned, in canyon fire, new acerage in fire near Colorado monument, Glade
Park fire contained, fires in Utah, New Mexico; no pickup.</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto LA11</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   A firestorm ripped through a suburban Los Angeles canyon Monday,
damaging or destroying up to 15 expensive homes and forcing the
evacuation of about 500 people as flames leapfrogged from brittle
brush to rooftops, officials said.
   The blaze in exclusive Turnbull Canyon burned as crews fought
wildfires in Colorado, Utah, New Mexico and Southern California that
have destroyed or damaged homes, injured at least 46 people and
consumed about 18,000 acres.
   Five water-dropping helicopters and about 450 firefighters
attempted to douse the fire as it raced along the ridge of homes
near Hacienda Heights about 20 miles east of downtown Los Angeles.
   Erratic winds intensified by the flames, along with 100-degree
temperatures, caused problems for firefighters, said Los Angeles
County Fire Department spokeswoman Arden Beer.
   There were no immediate reports of injuries, said Los Angeles
County Fire Inspector John Lenihan.
   Thirteen to 15 homes were damaged or destroyed by the blaze,
Lenihan said. At least six appeared to have been destroyed.
   An estimated 600 acres burned as the fire hopscotched through
steep brush-filled canyons between the ridgetop homes and created a
long fireline through the hills, Linehan said.
   The cause of the fire was not immediately known, Lenihan said.
   A black plume of smoke several thousand feet high could be seen
for 20 miles. Neighborhood streets were abandoned, and some
residents turned on lawn sprinklers before fleeing. The few roads
leading into the area were closed.
   About 500 people arrived at Los Altos High School, which was
converted into an evacuation center, said Red Cross spokesman Rick
Diebold.
   ``Some of the people are extremely upset, particularly those who
have lost their homes,'' Diebold said. ``The rest, who aren't sure,
are glued to the television set.''
   Sharon and Dick Hartman waited out the blaze near the fire
command post, sitting beside a van loaded with four caged birds, two
dogs and household items. ``What we grabbed were animals and
heirlooms, '' Mrs. Hartman said.
   She estimated homes in the area were worth $350,000 to $1.5
million.
   In Tulare County southeast of Fresno, a fire erupted shortly
after 3 p.m., said county fire dispatcher Vivian Barnes.
   The grass and brush fire about 30 miles southeast of the county
seat of Visalia was out of control, and had consumed about 300
acres, Barnes said.
   Elsewhere in Southern California, crews gained the upper hand
over wildfires that covered 8,633 acres, but not before several
homes had been burned and dozens of people, mostly firefighters,
were injured.
   In Colorado, a forest fire that gained new life near the Dinosaur
National Monument over the weekend had spread to 1,520 acres by
Monday night. Firefighters closed in on another blaze that burned a
home and two cars west of Grand Junction.
   Fire danger was high.
   ``It's so dry, one firecracker will be enough,'' said Kris
Damsgaard of the U.S. Forest Service's Colorado office.
   The fire south of the monument and 70 miles west of Craig had
been declared near containment early Sunday, but erupted later in
the day and grew because of extremely dry conditions and rough
terrain, officials said.
   Air tankers and 95 firefighters from the BLM, Bureau of Indian
Affairs, Forest Service and other agencies fought the blaze, said
BLM spokeswoman Cathy Cahill.
   About 300 firefighters contained a 1,200-acre blaze that caused
an estimated $200,000 damage to a house, outbuilding and two cars in
Glade Park, 15 miles west of Grand Junction. The fire forced
evacuation of the hamlet for more than a day.
   Other Colorado fires ignited by dryness, heat and gusty winds
were contained or near containment Monday. They included an 800-acre
blaze north of Grand Junction and a 275-acre fire in Poudre Canyon
northwest of Fort Collins.
   In California, a fire near Lake Elsinore south of Los Angeles
blackened 7,880 acres of brush by Monday, but was contained with 23
miles of fire lines, said U.S. Forest Service spokeswoman Rosalinda
Ewen.
   ``We're nowhere near abandoning this fire yet,'' said Cleveland
National Forest spokesman Chuck Judd. ``With all these acres, we
will be here for a while.''
   The fire destroyed four vacation cabins, six mobile homes and one
house before it was surrounded late Sunday. The total cost of the
fire, including burned homes and firefighting costs, was estimated
at $2.4 million.
   Judd said all the injuries were minor and mostly involved smoke
inhalation.
   Also in California, fire crews were on the brink of controlling a
300-acre blaze in San Bernardino County, where 300 firefighters were
on the lines; a fire that destroyed 250 acres on Sunday in a canyon
was declared controlled; and a fire that burned 203 acres on the
edge of Sequoia National Park was extinguished Sunday.
   In southern New Mexico, nearly 550 firefighters battled a blaze
near Diamond Peak in the Gila National Forest that has scorched
2,500 acres.
   About 50 firefighters and two helicopters brought under control a
lightning-sparked fire on BLM land about 48 miles southwest of
Roswell, said Tim Kreager of the agency's Roswell District office.
The blaze burned 2,840 acres.
   In eastern Utah, an estimated 200 firefighters gradually closed
lines around a remote lightning-sparked blaze that has burned more
than 275 acres of forest and grass 23 miles southwest of Duchesne
and a lightning-sparked fire that has consumed more than 350 acres
30 miles south of Vernal, officials said.
   The Rough Canyon fire southwest of Duchesne is expected to be
contained by late Tuesday or early Wednesday, said Forest Service
spokesman Ray Tate. There was no estimate for when the other fire
might be contained.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
