ID: 253	RANK: 21	SCORE: 16.398764

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-46984 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpusr063___94044" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-USR-94-063 </AU>
JPRS 


</HEADER>

<ABS>  FBIS Report: Central Eurasia </ABS>
<DATE1>   7 June 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> WESTERN REGION </F>
<F P=101> BELARUS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Railroad Operational Improvements Viewed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Railroad Operational Improvements Viewed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   944E0907A Moscow GUDOK in Russian 7 Jun 94 p 2 </F>
<F P=103> 944E0907A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow GUDOK </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by GUDOK correspondent V. Perzashkevich, Minsk: </F>
"The Longest Train"] 
  [Text] The first of the radically new DRB1 diesel trains 
has started running on the Polotsk-Vitebsk-Zaolsha section of 
the Belarusian Mainline. 
  Unlike its sister trains, manufactured in series in Riga, it 
consists of 10 rather than six cars. They are all trailer cars, 
and they use two 2M62 diesel units instead of motor cars, one at 
the front and one at the back. Including the design, it cost the 
railroad 1.1 million dollars--one third cheaper than the usual 
DR1A twin-diesel train also manufactured by the Riga plant. But 
there are other advantages too. 
  "The motor cars being produced in Latvia now," says deputy 
railroad chief V. Nazarenko, "are pulled by diesels obtained 
from a defense plant, and they are designed for a short service 
life, without repairs. So in five years the frame wears out and 
cannot be rebuilt. During a diesel train's normal 20-year 
service life, then, the engines will have to be replaced several 
times. Costwise this is equivalent to buying a new train. The 
hydraulic transmission is also unreliable, loses a lot of oil 
and takes a lot of labor to repair." 
  Almost half of the railroad's diesel train fleet has been in 
operation over 20 years. But they still have to be kept in use, 
despite the costs of repairing and maintaining this type of 
rolling stock, because the new Riga diesel train costs 750,000 
dollars, and a German make costs five times that. The railroad 
can't afford that right now. 
  The use of Riga-made trailer cars driven by a 2M62 diesel 
does much to alleviate the shortage of commuter trains, 
especially considering that the sharp decline in freight haulage 
has made about 30 percent of such locomotives available. And 
although they need to be modernized, at least it makes things 
much less costly. 
  The new diesel train has a number of other attractive 
features. In a stock train the cars are heated with hot air 
delivered directly from the motor car's engine room; the new one 
uses a combined method--heaters under the seats run off the 
locomotive's generator, and additional heat comes from a special 
air unit using heat from the diesel. The cars are lighted by a 
radically new system. In a stock diesel train, electricity for 
the lights comes from the starter generator with the motor 
running; in the new make, it is provided by an independent unit. 
Each car has a toilet and a 250-liter hot-water tank. 
  Still, it isn't only the new train's technical specs that 
account for its appearance on the Belarusian Mainline; rather, 
it's the acute shortage of commuter trains owing to rising 
passenger traffic the past while. Earlier, the bus network 
accommodated 95 percent of the republic's communities; this year 
the number of bus runs on the routes has dropped to barely a 
quarter. On the remaining routes the fare has gone up so much 
that it's too much of a burden for a lot of people. Accordingly, 
riders who used to take the bus have swelled the ranks of train 
passengers. Basically these are workers who have to commute from 
the suburbs to the major industrial centers, also persons who 
commute to vacation spots and to their garden plots. Passenger 
traffic has risen abruptly by almost 60 percent over 1990. And 
the full brunt fell to the commuter trains--yet the train fleet 
has remained almost the same size in the three years. The cars 
are so full an apple wouldn't have room to fall. 
  In view of all this, the railroad's management asked 
specialists of the Riga Railcar Plant to examine the technical 
possibility of using 2M62 diesel units to drive 8- to 10-car 
trains. They endorsed the idea, and immediately the partners 
concluded a trilateral contract with a research and development 
firm which was based in the old Riga branch of the All-Union 
Scientific-Research Institute for Railcar Building. In a short 
time a project was designed by which the plant built 10 trailer 
cars and refurbished a diesel locomotive sent by the Belarusians. 
  The first operational tests of the new diesel train in Riga 
was attended by specialists from the Polotsk Locomotive Depot, 
headed by its chief, S. Bokhan. Incidentally, they acted so 
professionally in dealing with the problems of adjusting the 
additional equipment installed on the locomotive that they 
earned high marks from the manufacturers. 
  Then the breaking-in tests were run on the 
Polotsk-Krulevshchizna and Polotsk-Bigosovo sections, and they 
confirmed the reliability of all the new train's systems. In 
late April it carried its first passengers, after which the 
train served sections between Polotsk and Glubokoye, Postavy, 
and Vitebsk. The equipment was broken in, and the locomotive 
crews learned the necessary skills. This was especially vital, 
because there are certain peculiarities in the train's 
operation. In particular, a second assistant engineer is needed 
on the rear unit. In addition, extra platforms had to be built 
at stops located on curved sections to permit observation of 
passenger loading and unloading--after all, it's a long train. 
Finally, the Polotsk Locomotive Depot has to provide facilities 
for the maintenance and repair of trailer cars and diesel units. 
  "We have estimated," V. Nazarenko said, "that sections 
having 
heavy peak-hour passenger traffic will need 60 to 70 of these 
long diesel trains; in other cases we can get by with short 
trains. If this firstborn of ours demonstrates its operational 
reliability, we can use the same technical principle to make 
five- and six-car diesel trains driven by just one unit. In that 
case, the lead car will be equipped with an engineer's cab to 
control the diesel unit attached to the end. The Riga people are 
willing to translate this idea into blueprints and metal. 
  "But we're also thinking about organizing the manufacture of 
trailer cars in our own republic. Belarus has an excellent 
machine-building and engineering potential. Right now, much of 
the industrial complex is working below capacity or even 
standing idle. Officials of Bobruyskfermmash, the big production 
association, have proposed to the head of the railroad and the 
State Committee for Industry and Intersectorial Facilities that 
they organize the manufacture of these cars in their own plants. 
They even went to Riga to familiarize themselves with the 
relevant technology. 
  "There is nothing especially complicated about this. 
Essentially, trailer cars are among the simplest kinds of 
rolling stock. They don't have boilers and heating pipes, 
generators, storage batteries, power switchboards, and coolers 
for drinking water and air conditioners. All these functions are 
provided in the motor car's engine room or, in our case, in the 
locomotive. Railroad Chief Ye. Volodko gave his OK to the idea, 
and the Gomel Giprozhivmash Institute is now working on 
converting the Bobruysk Agricultural Machine-Building Plant to a 
railcar-building plant. 
  "Of course, this 'reprofiling' will take a lot of financing, 
and the railroad isn't in a position to bear the burden by 
itself; the state budget will have to help...." 
  But, he who seeks will find. And the Belarusian Mainline has 
offered to make its own contribution by using its own resources 
to lay tracks on the territory of its future partner--if the 
reprofiling really gets underway. Time will tell how things go. 
Perhaps other railroad people in republics of the CIS will get 
involved and contribute their bit. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
