ID: 253	RANK: 36	SCORE: 14.812493
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911212-0125
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911212-0125.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   A Hometown Boy Gets the Blues in the Night
   ----
   By Thomas D. Murray
</HL>
<DATE>
12/12/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14
</SO>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
OHIO (OH)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Lately I have given some thought to returning to my
boyhood home, a town with the attraction for me of many good
friends who have remained there, and which promises the
comfortable feeling of familiarity and belonging.
   My town -- Middletown, Ohio -- grew up mostly around the
steel and paper industries, and by the 1930s, when I first
became aware of my surroundings, it was a bustling industrial
city of some 35,000 people. It was a town that seemed never
to sleep -- the sirens of the huge overhead cranes at the
steel mill interrupted the tranquillity of the cricket choral
on soft, summer nights, and just as sharply shattered the icy
stillness in winter. Even our daytime routines were regulated
and our clocks set to a work whistle at "the tobacco
factory," which sounded city-wide at 5, 6 and 7 a.m., at noon
and again at 5 p.m -- quitting time.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But by far the most exciting and romantic sounds to a boy
growing up there were the train whistles, and with iron ore
coming in and finished steel and paper products rolling out,
there were a lot of them. Passenger trains, too, ran on
frequent and convenient schedules for townspeople whose
companies filled the railroads' trains with freight and
pockets with gold.
   You could lie in bed at night until sleep came and listen
to the close-by and far-off whistles of the big steam
engines, picturing them in the darkness above the bed,
imagining you were in the cab or tucked between the sheets in
the Pullman sleeper. So special was that sound that when
Lionel brought out its first toy train in the 1930s with a
little whistle that sounded like the big one, the local
hardware store couldn't fill all the Christmas orders for
them. And in the 1950s when the diesel locomotive's horn
became the dominant sound, the Southern Railroad replaced
them with whistles in response to requests from nostalgic
people along its routes.
   In recent years when I've visited my hometown, I've been
surprised how much like the old days the trains still sound,
especially in the night. The "hooie to hooie" that Johnny
Mercer wrote about in "Blues in the Night" still seems to be
echoing out there in the hills on the edge of town, and I've
thought that if I move there, they'll be a poignant part of
the place, constantly reminding me of so many milestone
moments -- leaving for college, home for Christmas, going to
war, meeting my first love's train from Milwaukee, almost
missing the Ohio State Limited that my Dad often took to New
York because he never gave me more than five minutes to drive
the six minutes to the station.
   Then not long ago I spotted an article in the Cleveland
Plain Dealer about a problem in paradise. "No Train
Whistling, Town Orders" was the headline, and the copy
explained that my hometown would bring either a civil or
criminal action against Conrail if an agreement couldn't be
worked out to quiet the whistles.
   No train whistling? With tracks and crossings and sidings
everywhere? Trains are like a cruise ship or like a DC-10
touching down. They've got to roll for a while to lose the
momentum of that weight, and if they can't blow their
whistles to tell us where they are, our cars may be
form-fitted to their front ends. It's such a safety issue,
according to the article, that the Federal Railroad
Administration has already ordered trains in Florida to
ignore local ordinances banning whistling when a study
concluded the sound saves lives.
   Of course, there's bound to be another side, from
residents who consider Middletown a high-tech town now, and
feel all this whistle-blowing is just an old, bad habit. And
maybe some of the upset people have moved to downtown condos,
nearer the tracks, because they're younger and grew up
thinking that trucks and airliners really do all the hauling
these days.
   Quite apart from the "hooie to hooie" emotionalism, it
seems to me that a town that has all its rail lines still in
place and working well ought to stand a better chance in a
high-tech tomorrow that hopes to play down the automobile
than a lot of places that are already as quiet as a computer.
   But I can't push the emotions aside. Maybe in the daytime
it would be all right to be back in a quieter Middletown. But
in the night, silence might just make the town like a
thousand others -- towns where you get in bed and there
aren't any whistles to to start the dreams in the dark that
go with them.
   ---
   Mr. Murray, a senior editor of Car Collector Magazine,
lives in Hudson, Ohio.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
