ID: 253	RANK: 4	SCORE: 26.778418
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911114-0149
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911114-0149.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Jerzy Wasilewski
   Has a Screw Loose
   About Steam Trains
   ---
   But Poland Now Holds Them
   In Low Esteem; Progress
   Is an Engine of Change
   ----
   By Barry Newman
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
11/14/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<MS>
INDUSTRIAL (IDU)
</MS>
<IN>
RAILROADS (RAI)
</IN>
<RE>
EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)
EUROPE (EU)
POLAND (PL)
</RE>
<LP>
   WOLSZTYN, Poland -- With a shriek of its whistle and a
grunting chug, the 3:24 to Nowa Sol pulls out of Wolsztyn
Station on time, its big black locomotive chugging faster and
faster, whistling louder and longer, belching a widening
plume of smoke.
   Exciting, isn't it?
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Back in the passenger cars people look out past the ribbon
of vapor at deer loping across autumn fields and horse-drawn
hay wagons waiting at level crossings. Faces pressed to the
window, two teen-age schoolboys take it all in.
   Isn't this fun?
   As Raphael Rychlik turns to reply, his look conveys
something more like drowsiness than fun.
   "You get in and you ride," he says.
   Sure, but what about the whistle and the chugging? This is
a steam train. Boys -- including the kind with gray hair --
should get excited when they are on one. You smell the coal
and see the sparks and hear the hissing and feel brute power.
If a steam train doesn't excite Raphael Rychlik, what could?
   "An electric train," he says. "It's faster."
   Spoilsport. And he isn't the only one. PKP, the Polish
national railroad, seems embarrassed that Poland still has
great gruff steam locomotives hauling passengers and freight.
Its spirits low as bankruptcy approaches, PKP doesn't give a
hoot about steam.
   "Have a look at this," says Witold Wojtkowiak, master of
the maintenance shed in Wolsztyn, passing a snapshot across
his desk. It shows a field strewn with steam engines looking
like exploded clocks. "Mass liquidation," he says. "They use
dynamite to get rid of them."
   PKP has blown up 800 in the past year. That leaves 250 on
its register, just 40 on the job. Only four steam rail hubs
remain. Of five lines that cross at Wolsztyn, two will soon
be discontinued -- including the 30-mile run south to Nowa
Sol.
   Outside the shed master's window, locomotives growl in
blackened stalls while men in greasy coats feed their fires;
17 more engines stand on the sidings. Most are Polish-built,
dating from the early 1950s. Others were left behind by
Hitler's war machine. One, still on the boil, was made in
1917.
   "No one is interested in this subject anymore," Mr.
Wojtkowiak says. With PKP in trouble, the shed has to survive
by itself. Its master sees a chance to charge Westerners to
take pictures; before, they would have been arrested as
spies. But the few hundred Germans and Swiss who straggled by
this year netted him just $14,000. "We are left on our own,"
says Mr. Wojtkowiak. "Nobody will help us."
   Maybe, but somebody is trying. He's Jerzy Wasilewski, the
one bureaucrat in the railroad's Warsaw offices who is nuts
about steam. Mr. Wasilewski, 41, wears a choo-choo train pin
in his lapel and expounds on his devotion in four languages,
always passionately.
   "Our chiefs think steam is out of mode," he says. "This is
communist mentality] From Romania they order diesels. From
Romania I wouldn't order a frying pan]"
   Steam trains are just the ticket for a railroad in
recession, Mr. Wasilewski thinks. Instead of expensive
Russian oil, they burn cheap Polish coal. Repairs don't call
for experts with screwdrivers, but for laborers with hammers.
Mr. Wasilewski's job, calculating tariffs, has nothing to do
with steam, but that doesn't stop his lobbying PKP. Two
officers in charge of World Bank contacts are filling out
forms when he walks into their room.
   "Diesel pollutes the environment 17 times more than
steam," he announces. Krzysztof Wybieralski looks up from his
papers.
   "You mean 100 years ago there was no pollution?"
   "There were more than 50,000 steam engines in Germany
before World War I," Mr. Wasilewski avows, "and there was no
pollution."
   The bank's reports, about closing useless lines, go on
about the value of electric traction. They don't concede a
thing to steam. "We are not experts in this subject," Mr.
Wybieralski says. He shoots a grin at his colleague, and
returns to his forms.
   But Mr. Wasilewski has found one ally at PKP headquarters:
Ted Michon of the Union Pacific Railroad in Omaha, Neb. He is
here to help PKP switch from communism to capitalism -- which
to some is much like switching from steam locomotives to
electrics.
   "The damn things are old," Mr. Michon says. "As a
coldhearted railroad man, I'd have said get rid of them." But
when Mr. Wasilewski took him to Wolsztyn, Mr. Michon had a
change of heart. "I knew he was onto a real winner. This
isn't pennyante railroad economics. People pay big money to
see trains like these."
   "PKP thinks this is not serious]" Mr. Wasilewski says
later, bumping into Mr. Michon in the hall. "They are serious
men. They don't know they can make money on love]"
   They are coming around to it. PKP has decided to spare 150
locomotives. It doesn't have money for restaurants or hotels
to build up a tourist trade. But on the chance that someone
will chug in from the West and build a few for love, PKP has
agreed to continue running steam trains out of Wolsztyn for
the time being.
   Having dropped off its schoolboys and commuters, the 3:24
rolls into Konotop, halfway to Nowa Sol. Here, the engineer,
Jerzy Magdans, lets a couple of visitors ride in the cab. One
is Gunter Kossek, a gray-haired gym teacher from Stuttgart.
   "It's the only chance in Europe to ride a steam engine,"
he whispers excitedly. "Everyplace else, safety first."
   The locomotive was built 48 years ago in Berlin. "I've
been at this 30 years," Mr. Magdans says. "When she goes to
scrap, so will I." His young fireman, Krzysztof Lukasiewicz,
looks bored. "I'd rather have another job," he says.
   The engineer pulls a lever and the whistle whoops. The
engine gasps and heaves forward. As it picks up speed, the
chugs build into a deafening roar. "Put in some coal]" Mr.
Magdans shouts at his fireman. "In a minute]" Mr. Lukasiewicz
shouts back. He is eating a sandwich, ham on rye. Eventually,
he pulls open the firebox and flings a few shovelfuls onto
the bed of flaming coals.
   Motioning to Mr. Kossek, the engineer vacates his seat and
lets the gym teacher sit. One hand yanking at the whistle,
the other white-knuckled on the throttle, he drives the train
for 30 seconds, gaping at the track ahead with a mix of glee
and panic.
   "It is just like the Western movies]" Mr. Kossek screams
when it's over.
   Power lines appear overhead and the engineer brings the
train wheezing to a halt at Nowa Sol. "When it's going
right," he says, "you know it like you know your own
heartbeat."
   He eases the engine onto a siding, then guides it to the
other end of the train for recoupling. Nowa Sol has no
turntable; it is impossible to spin the train around. On the
return trip, the steam engine puffs in ungainly reverse, coal
tender leading the way.
   "It's the only way to get to Wolsztyn," says the fireman.
"You have to travel backward."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
