ID: 253	RANK: 55	SCORE: 13.978247
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911001-0160
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911001-0160.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Transportation:
   Longtime Symbols of Decay and Delay,
   Commuter Railroads Undergo a Revival
   ----
   By Daniel Machalaba
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
10/01/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   BNI SFX
</CO>
<MS>
INDUSTRIAL (IDU)
</MS>
<IN>
LAND TRANSPORT EQUIPMENT, RAILCARS, BUSES (LDT)
RAILROADS (RAI)
MASS TRANSIT, BUS LINES, SUBWAYS, HIGHWAYS (TRA)
ALL TRANSPORTATION EQUIPMENT (TRQ)
</IN>
<NS>
NEW PRODUCTS &amp; SERVICES (PDT)
</NS>
<GV>
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)
</GV>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
CANADA (CN)
COLORADO (CO)
FLORIDA (FL)
ILLINOIS (IL)
MASSACHUSETTS (MA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
TEXAS (TX)
UNITED STATES (US)
VIRGINIA (VA)
WASHINGTON (WA)
</RE>
<LP>
   WOODBRIDGE, Va. -- It is 7:30 a.m., and Washington-bound
traffic is backed up for miles ahead of Elizabeth Daly on
Interstate 95.
   "It's crazy. The rails are right there," she says,
indicating empty railroad tracks that parallel the highway.
"All you would have to do is put locomotives and cars on
them."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Ms. Daly, a human-resources manager at the Department of
Agriculture, should soon see big changes on her way to work.
Next spring, Virginia officials plan to put commuter trains
to Washington on the tracks of the Richmond, Fredericksburg &amp;
Potomac Railroad, which are now used only by freight trains
and Amtrak.
   For many years, commuter-rail operations have been limited
to a handful of large cities such as New York and
Philadelphia. All too often, commuter trains have been a form
of transportation synonymous with decay, deficits and delays.
But that is changing, as public-transit officials from
Virginia to California prepare to launch new commuter-rail
services to ease problems of mobility, congestion and
pollution.
   "In the past, commuter rail was dirty and slow, and you
could get to work in half the time by car," says William
Withuhn, transportation curator of the Smithsonian
Institution in Washington. "Now, we are choking on all the
cars, and it's becoming easier to take the train."
   Plans for commuter-rail service are nowhere more ambitious
than in California, where voters last year approved measures
that would provide $3 billion for rail projects including
commuter services. "People are fed up with the freeways and
want alternatives," says David Solow, senior manager of
commuter-rail operations for the Southern California Regional
Rail Authority.
   California officials say they will launch commuter trains
on three freight-rail lines to Los Angeles in October 1992.
They plan to expand the network to eight routes and over 400
miles of track by 1995.
   Planners for the new systems have been encouraged by
Tri-Rail, a commuter service linking the Florida cities of
Miami and West Palm Beach that was considered a temporary
measure when it was launched by the state two years ago
during a highway-reconstruction project. But the trains have
proved so popular that Florida transportation officials now
are adding cars and expanding service.
   Commuter-rail service is making a comeback in cities with
established networks, too. For example, Boston has spent
hundreds of millions of dollars in the past 10 years to buy
new commuter trains, rebuild stations and replace track.
Transit officials there plan to restore commuter service on
three lines south of the city that ceased operation in 1959.
   "It's one of the most unlikely renaissances anyone would
have predicted 15 years ago," says Eugene Skoropowski,
director of rail projects at Fluor Daniel Inc. in Irvine,
Calif., who remembers the dilapidated commuter trains he rode
in the 1970s as a suburban Boston commuter. Train riders
opened their umbrellas inside the cars when it rained, he
says. And some of them brought flashlights to read the
newspaper because the overhead lights in the cars were often
missing.
   Critics doubt the new services will attract enough riders
to make a dent in highway congestion or to cover their
operating costs. They also question the wisdom of creating
rail systems to bring commuters downtown when companies are
moving to suburban locations.
   "The trend in modern life is to go toward more
decentralization, more telecommuting and more diverse origins
and destinations for the trips made," says John Semmens, an
economist at the Laissez Faire Institute, a think tank in
Tempe, Ariz. "You aren't going to reverse that by building a
couple of commuter lines."
   Commuter-rail opponents say that commuter-rail operations
make only a minor contribution to the nation's mobility
except in a few places. Commuter-rail ridership nationwide
currently totals just over 1.1 million passengers a day, 60%
of whom are carried by systems in the New York City region.
   Even so, advocates say there are a lot of reasons that
commuter-rail services will play a bigger role. Commuter-rail
service "won't solve all our traffic problems," says Sharon
Bulova, a Fairfax County, Va., supervisor. "But it will help
solve the problem of traffic to {the center of cities}, and
there's a lot of it." Other proponents add that unlike
highway and mass-transit systems, which take many years to
build, commuter-rail services can be started sooner and more
cheaply over existing tracks owned by freight railroads.
   And some freight railroads, which in the past have
regarded commuter trains on their tracks as a burdensome
interference, are changing their view. Railroads "all of a
sudden have awakened to the fact that their urban segments
have a very big unrealized profit potential," says Robert L.
Banks, a transportation consultant in Washington.
   Southern California officials paid $450 million to
Southern Pacific Transportation Co. for track and trackage
rights that will be used by commuter trains. Now, they are
negotiating with Santa Fe Pacific Corp. for additional rail
lines needed to complete their planned commuter-rail system.
But the company and a five-county commuter-rail authority
remain far apart on price and terms.
   Various companies are preparing to capitalize on
commuter-rail growth. Last year, Morrison Knudsen Corp., an
engineering-services company based in Boise, Idaho, refitted
a plant to build new commuter-rail coaches.
   Amtrak is vying with UTDC Inc., a Canadian rail-car
builder, for the contract to operate the Los Angeles
commuter-rail system. To make itself more competitive, Amtrak
has won the right from its rail unions to suspend some costly
work rules. And Burlington Northern Inc., a big
freight-hauling railroad that currently operates a Chicago
commuter line, is negotiating to become the operator of new
commuter-rail services being discussed in Denver and Seattle.
"We move things over the rail, and it's not relevant whether
it is a passenger or a freight train," says DJ Mitchell II,
assistant to Burlington Northern's chairman.
   Some of the new commuter-rail projects are being designed
to avoid the high costs of old systems. That's true in
northern Virginia, where commuter trains are expected to roll
soon on freight tracks connecting Fredericksburg and Manassas
to Washington.
   Thomas Waldron, rail manager of Virginia Railway Express,
says the system will use commuter cars made in Brazil pulled
by rebuilt freight locomotives. Tickets will be dispensed by
mail or by machines at rail stations. A computerized
telephone-information system is "equivalent to 32 warm bodies
in a room I don't have to pay," says Mr. Waldron. Mobile
vendors will sell coffee, doughnuts and newspapers to
commuters at rail stations and take dry-cleaning orders.
   Virginia Railway Express has faced setbacks. It had to
secure expensive liability insurance before freight railroads
would agree to let commuter trains use their tracks. The
launch of the service has been delayed six months to next
spring because the Brazilian rail-car builder has fallen
behind schedule. Some local officials have proved less than
enthusiastic about shouldering the financial burden for the
new service. "A lot of local people feel it is unfair for
them to pay for someone else's ride," says Emmitt Marshall, a
supervisor of rural Spotsylvania County, which declined to
levy a gas tax that would help fund commuter-rail services.
   Nevertheless, Virginia Railway Express's Mr. Waldron is
confident that mounting traffic congestion bodes well for
commuter railroads. He makes that prediction while he drives
at rush hour on I-66 toward Manassas, where a commuter-rail
station and parking lot is under construction. When he sees
traffic backed up ahead, Mr. Waldron brakes his car abruptly.
   "I love it," says Mr. Waldron about such congestion on the
highway. "It's called job security."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
