ID: 253	RANK: 68	SCORE: 13.317905
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880714-0033 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-14-88 0215EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r p PM-ConventionParties     07-14 0835</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Convention Parties,850</SECOND>
<HEAD>Plains Peanuts To Peach Truffles: Plenty Of Festivities Planned In
Atlanta</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By CAROLYN S. CARLSON</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>ATLANTA (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   From friendly, down-home fried-chicken bashes to
elegant, exclusive soirees, hundreds of festive gatherings here
next week will bring new meaning to the term party politics.
   Southern hospitality will be on national display as the city
opens its homes, museums, gardens and parks to thousands of
reporters and delegates to the Democratic National Convention.
   As many as 35,000 visitors will make the rounds of breakfasts,
brunches, dinners, receptions, picnics, parties, fashion shows,
dances and train rides throughout the weekend and during the
convention.
   On Friday, before the bulk of the convention-goers arrive, 6,000
volunteer workers will get a break with a party and a music and
laser show at Stone Mountain Park. Dining on a nearby paddle boat
at the suburban Atlanta park will be 500 Democratic National
Committee staffers, who will ride to their party in a steam engine
train on a newly opened railroad track.
   The partying will be non-stop on Saturday and Sunday, when the
majority of delegates, reporters and the nation's Democratic
politicians converge on Atlanta.
   On Saturday, reporters are invited to a brunch at Zoo Atlanta, a
reception at the Carter Center and a Carribean-music dance at a
downtown nightclub. They'll also hear rock star Stephen Stills and
jazz artist Grover Washington at the official host committee's
party for 9,000 journalists at the huge Georgia World Congress
Center.
   For those who want to work off their party excesses, the
Democratic National Committee is sponsoring a celebrity tennis
tournament Saturday, while Mort Zuckerman, editor-in-chief of U.S.
News &amp; World Report, is distributing special week-long passes to
the Downtown Athletic Club to about 200 political leaders and media
heavies.
   Baseball great Hank Aaron, Atlanta Hawks basketball star
Dominique Wilkins and singer Peabo Bryson are among the ``celebrity
conductors'' on ``Maynard's Midnight Train To Georgia'' late
Saturday night. Former Atlanta Mayor Maynard Jackson, an
unannounced candidate for mayor again in 1989, is taking about 900
politicians and supporters on a $100-a-ticket midnight train ride
around the city.
   Jackson's campaign fund-raiser and a BellSouth Inc. party for
the DNC staff are among several events planned on the state-owned
train operating out of the Georgia Freight Depot, about the oldest
surviving building in a city founded in the 1830s as a railroad
transportation hub.
   For the convention-week parties, the Georgia Building
Authority's 1910 steam engine or one of the state agency's three
diesel engines will be hooked up to 21 party cars _ total capacity
1,000 _ for rides on an 18-mile north Atlanta loop or on the new
track to Stone Mountain Park.
   The party pace grows frenzied on Sunday, with a series of
receptions followed by 56 parties for individual state delegations.
   One of the more coveted Sunday invitations is to a party at the
city's white-tiled High Museum of Art sponsored by Cox Enterprises
Inc., owner of The Atlanta Journal and The Atlanta Constitution,
for 3,000 party leaders and media luminaries.
   Peach tarts, peach cheesecake, peach ice cream, peach sorbet,
chocolate-covered peach truffles and peach shortcake are on the
party's dessert menu. Dinner includes plantation ham on sweet
potato biscuits; Sea Island souffle of shrimp, crab and clams;
sausage balls with pear chutney; Savannah shrimp salad; fried
chicken; barbeque and Plains boiled peanuts.
   Mint juleps will be served with dinner in the Victorian
neighborhood of Inman Park at a party for U.S. House members
sponsored by Rep. John Lewis, Atlanta's Democratic congressman.
   Historical Jonesboro is planning a party featuring three bands
and women in antebellum costumes for the Maryland delegation. It
will be held at Stately Oaks, a restored mansion in the south
Atlanta suburb that served as the fictional Tara plantation in
``Gone With The Wind.''
   Before the convention starts Monday night, Atlanta Mayor Andrew
Young will give a brunch for journalists at Spelman College.
Young's late-night reception Monday at the Marriott Marquis hotel,
a convention headquarters hotel, is one of the few public evening
events scheduled after the convention sessions, which are expected
to run from 6 p.m. to midnight Monday through Thursday.
   But there will be plenty of daytime entertainment _ ranging from
a fried chicken picnic lunch for 4,000 on Tuesday at the Martin
Luther King Jr. Center for Non-violent Social Change to a pig-roast
reception for 6,000 on the grounds of the state Capitol on
Wednesday.
   For those wanting more intellectual pursuits, Atlanta's thriving
arts community is sponsoring plays, exhibits and concerts aimed
particularly at the convention audience.
   The Atlanta Symphony Orchestra's Wednesday afternoon performance
at the ornate Fox Theater will be conducted by Harry Ellis Dickson,
former associate conductor of the Boston Pops and father-in-law of
Michael Dukakis. The hour-long program will be introduced by
Dickson's daughter, Kitty Dukakis.
   And all those connected with the convention _ an estimated
35,000 _ will be welcome at the Thursday night closing gala, a
victory celebration expected to fill the cavernous Georgia World
Congress Center.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
