ID: 277	RANK: 87	SCORE: 5.101487
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910717-0107
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910717-0107.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Soviet Union Selects U S West in Plan
   To Improve Nation's Telephone Service
   ----
   By Mary Lu Carnevale
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
07/17/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C15
</SO>
<CO>
   ERICY MILL T USW
</CO>
<MS>
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
UTILITIES (UTI)
</MS>
<IN>
COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (CMT)
TELEPHONE SYSTEMS, INCLUDING CELLULAR (TLS)
</IN>
<RE>
COLORADO (CO)
EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)
EUROPE (EU)
FAR EAST (FE)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
SCANDINAVIA (SCA)
SWEDEN (SW)
SOVIET UNION (UR)
UNITED STATES (US)
YUGOSLAVIA (YO)
</RE>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- The Soviet Union, embarking on a major
program to upgrade its telephone service, tapped U S West
Inc. to provide three international gateway switches, and a
group including U S West to build a cellular system in
Moscow.
   In addition, the Soviet Minister of Posts and
Telecommunications said at a joint news conference with U S
West that his country will join the International
Telecommunications Satellite Organization, becoming the
consortium's 121st member. The Soviet Union has used Intelsat
satellites for many years; by joining the consortium, the
Soviet Union picks up certain benefits, including training of
its employees in telecommunications technology.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   U S West said it will finance and operate the digital
switching systems, which are expected to greatly improve flow
of telephone calls into and out of the Soviet Union. The
three switches will be built by a Yugoslavian equipment
maker, Nikola Tesla, under license from L. M. Ericsson of
Sweden; they will be installed in Moscow, Leningrad and Kiev.
   U S West's investment is relatively small -- $18 million
over two years -- but the potential could be substantial. The
company said it will receive 16% of revenue over 15 years
from calls switched through the new gateways, which are
expected to be in operation by the end of 1992. Today, the
Soviet Union has a single international gateway in Moscow,
providing about 1,200 circuits. The new switches will add
15,000 international circuits in Moscow and 4,000 circuits
each in Leningrad and Kiev.
   Dick McCormick, U S West president and chief executive
officer, called the three gateway switches "the cornerstone
for the telecommunications infrastructure modernization in
the Soviet Union." The company, he said, viewed the switching
project as a strong stand-alone venture. But even more
important, Mr. McCormick said U S West sees many long-term
opportunities in the Soviet Union, where there is one
telephone for every 13 people, compared with 50 or 60 phones
per 100 people in most developed countries.
   G.G. Kudriavtsev, the Soviet Union's minister of
communications, who has been in the U.S. for meetings with
government and industry officials, said in an interview that
he estimates it will cost as much as $200 million to improve
his country's international telecommunications. The ministry
is also working to upgrade domestic telephone systems, but is
planning to use only its national currency for those projects
and will rely on Soviet design and technology, which is less
expensive.
   The Moscow cellular project, designed to improve
communications for emergency services, businesses and
government agencies, is expected to begin operating later
this year. U S West holds a 22% interest; Millicom Inc.'s
Millicom International Cellular affiliate will hold 20%; the
Fyodorov Eye Microsurgery Science and Technology Complex, run
by Moscow businessman Stanislav Fyodorov, will hold 8%; and
the Soviet Ministry will hold the remaining 50%.
   Mr. Kudriavtsev said that the cellular system would take
about five years to build and would likely remain small,
serving perhaps 60,000 subscribers. Personal communications
networks, he said, hold greater promise for more widespread
use.
   The ventures aren't the first alliances between the Soviet
Union and U S West. The company is building a cellular system
in Leningrad, and is working on alternatives to the Trans
Soviet Line, a proposed fiber optic cable. The fiber-optic
project was rejected by an international body that determines
which technologies can be shipped to Communist countries.
   As for payments from the Soviet Union, a country with a
precarious economy, Mr. McCormick acknowledged some risks,
but said they were outweighed by possible rewards. Mr.
Kudriavtsev said payments would be made in hard currency.
   The Soviet communications minister also said that he has
been working with American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Co. to
establish new services in the Soviet Union. Last year, AT&amp;T
introduced video conferencing capabilities there, and has
sold an international gateway switch to the Republic of
Armenia.
   Just last week, GTE Corp. announced it is forming a joint
venture with the Soviet ministry to build and operate a
telephone and facsimile service linking Moscow with Asia and
the West.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
