ID: 277	RANK: 91	SCORE: 4.566473

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-43021 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpust005___94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UST-94-005-L </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Science &amp; Technology 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Central Eurasia </ABS>
<DATE1>   02 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> TELECOMMUNICATIONS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Yeltsin Dedicates New International ATS </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  947K0005A Moscow ELEKTROSVYAZ in Russian No 5, May 93 p 
2--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 947K0005A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ELEKTROSVYAZ </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by R. Levin: ``Hands Across the Baltic: Russian </F>
President B. N. Yeltsin Has Opened a New Automatic International 
Communication System''] 
  [Text] Unusual animation held sway in the room of the 
Moscow international dial office in the capital region of 
Belyayevo on the morning of 10 April. A crowd of journalists, 
our own and from other nations, high-level European and U.S. 
diplomats, and finally, the arriving presidential entourage 
entering the room headed by B. N. Yeltsin, all bore witness to 
the importance of the forthcoming event. Such considerable 
attention to the international communication system brought 
about by the efforts of specialists, organizations and companies 
from Russia, Denmark and other nations was no coincidence: for 
the first time Russia and Western Europe were being joined by a 
fiber-optics communication line laid at the bottom of the Baltic 
Sea. 
  And so, from this day forth, our citizens can be connected 
with no great effort to 170 world nations, and in Moscow and St. 
Petersburg there will be no need to go through operators and be 
bothered with waiting for the call to be completed: callers will 
be able to dial direct to almost any point on the globe. Such is 
the result of concerted work by the ``Intertelekom'' Joint-Stock 
Company and its foreign partners: Telecom Denmark, the Great 
Northern Telegraph Company of Denmark, and a number of other 
companies from Europe, the United States and Japan. The fiber- 
optics communication line that they have laid at the bottom of 
the Baltic in conjunction with a number of new radio relay lines 
and municipal dial offices is capable of carrying 15,360 
simultaneous telephone calls. We remind you that just last year 
there were only 2900 international channels in all of Russia, 
and the only Moscow international dial office, built in 1980, 
was pretty well overloaded. 
  The end points of the new communication line, which is 2085 
km long, are Moscow and the Danish town of Albertslund near 
Copenhagen, where the fiber-optics communication line is 
connected to the international telephone network. The underwater 
fiber-optics cable, 4 cm in diameter, consists of two pairs of 
fibers having throughput of 565 Mbit/s, and is 1250 km long. On 
the Russian shore, the cable emerges onto dry land in the 
vicinity of Kingisepp. Thence to St. Petersburg and Moscow, 
where three new international telephone offices are installed, 
the relay race is continued by two radio relay lines with 
lengths of 124 and 810 km respectively. The section of the radio 
relay line to Moscow is designed for 5760 channels (3x140 
Mbit/s), and the one to St. Petersburg for 3840 channels (2x140 
Mbit/s). In addition, each main section has a reserve 10 Mbit/s 
trunk that is automatically connected in case of malfunctions. 
  It took just two months to lay the cable along the sea 
bottom, a time that was full of the most unexpected problems for 
those taking part in this complicated operation: Danish cable 
specialists and our divers. For the first time in world 
practice, the task was to bury the cable 60 cm under the bottom 
over the entire multikilometer line. However, it was not until 
work had already begun that it was learned that the heavy marine 
plow, weighing 25 metric tons, by which the cable was to be 
buried, could not be used along the shallow Russian coast. 
Divers had to do the job. But the plow could not always be used 
even in the open sea because it ``stumbled'' over other cables 
or rocky ground. And here all kinds of contrivances had to be 
devised. And when laying the shore cable near Kingisepp under 
arduous land conditions, the builders used an unusual approach: 
the excavator was set up on a raft from which the machine first 
broke through ice, and then made a trench along the bottom in 
which divers laid the cable. Nevertheless, difficulties did not 
stop the project from completion on time. 
  Expenditures on construction of the system amounted to 500 
million rubles and 123 million U.S. dollars. The principal 
investors were the "Intertelekom" Joint-Stock Company, the 
Danish companies Telecom Denmark and GNTC, and also the American 
company U.S. West International. Construction of the new line 
did not impact in any way on growth of the national debt of the 
country, as the government of Russia offered no financial 
guarantees to the parties in the project. At the same time, all 
of the system situated on our territory, and also the underwater 
section of the fiber-optics communication line to the midway 
point have become the property of Russia. 
  Equipment suppliers were determined on a competitive basis. 
They were the British company STC Submarine Systems which 
supplied the optical cable, amplifiers and other equipment for 
the underwater line; the Japanese company NEC, which furnished 
the digital equipment for the relay section; and the Croatian 
company Nikola Tesla which installed its AXE-10 digital 
switching offices in Moscow and St. Petersburg. Credit for 
purchase of the AXE-10 dial offices in the amount of 34.5 
million dollars was provided by U.S. West Int. The Moscow 
offices are designed for 7801 and 4780 channels and lines, and 
the St. Petersburg office for 4170. 
  The Russian President became the first subscriber to the 
system. At the festive opening ceremony in the presence of a 
throng of guests, B. N. Yeltsin and the Danish Prime Minister P. 
Rasmussen had a talk by videophone, ending with a symbolic 
handshake between the leaders of the two nations bound by the 
five-hundred year history of their diplomatic relations. Boris 
Nikolayevich praised the work of Russian and foreign specialists 
who had taken part in setting up the Denmark-Russia line, and 
presented the distinguished order of Friendship of Nations. 
Those present were congratulated for completion of construction 
by Minister of Communications of the Russian Federation V. B. 
Bulgak, and by the heads of diplomatic delegations of Denmark 
and the United States; there was also an announcement of a 
message sent by U.S. President B. Clinton to B. N. Yeltsin on 
the occasion of opening up the new international 
telecommunication system. 
  However, in the words of V. B. Bulgak, there is still a long 
way to go before the needs of the nation for international 
telephone service are satisfied. Therefore plans have been made 
to begin operation of the Southern, Eastern and Trans-Siberian 
sections of a trunk that will close the world telecommunication 
ring before 1998. The overall capacity of the international 
telephone offices of Russia, according to tentative estimates, 
will be 29,000 channels in 1995, 40,500 in the year 2000, and 
64,000 by the year 2005. 
  Within the scope of the Southern project, it is proposed 
that 
a Novosibirsk-Istanbul-Palermo fiber-optics communication line 
be built, 3400 km long, with an extension to Moscow (1622 km), 
and also that an international telephone office be opened in 
Rostov-na-Donu. The Eastern project includes a 
Russia-Japan-Korea underwater fiber-optics communication line 
1809 km long with 930-kilometer Nakhodka-Khabarovsk cable 
section. On the Trans-Siberian section of the trunk, a Moscow- 
Khabarovsk digital radio relay line is to be constructed, 8300 
km in length with capacity of 11,520 channels. It is planned 
that international telephone offices will be introduced by 
stages in Khabarovsk, Novosibirsk, Yekaterinburg and Samara. 
Foreign communications operators and producers of equipment will 
take an active part in realization of these projects. 
  Opening of the Russia-Denmark line has provided a rather 
graphic demonstration that cooperation with us in such 
large-scale projects is not only possible, but even 
advantageous. For example, Telecom Denmark has already sold part 
of the capacity of the new underwater cable to 22 communications 
operators from the United States, Belgium, Italy, Germany, 
France and other nations. From the very beginning of operation 
of the Trans-Siberian trunk, there will certainly be even more 
extensive opportunities for cooperation in the field of 
communications. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
