ID: 277	RANK: 93	SCORE: 4.108583

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-32453 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu122_k_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-122 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Tudjman's `Ustasha' Currency Assailed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Tudjman's `Ustasha' Currency Assailed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0319A Belgrade VREME in Serbo-Croatian 6 Jun 94 pp 26-27 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0319A </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade VREME </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Gojko Marinkovic, AIM: "From the Croatian Dinar </F>
to the Croatian Kuna"] 
  [Text] Croatian President Tudjman has once again been 
proving his obstinacy, arbitrariness, and messianism, but at the 
same time his reputation as a dubious historian and scholar, 
because he has used his power and a raft of pseudoarguments to 
impose on Croatia a new currency, as of 30 May, Statehood Day, 
which is called the kuna. 
  There were no warnings or assurances that could dissuade him 
from his intention: "The president of the republic," Dr. Ivo 
Banac, well-known Croatian historian at Yale, the prestigious 
American university, said the other day, "cannot go to Knin or 
to Glina, but he can impose the ustasha monetary unit. Entire 
barrels of learned ink have already been consumed to prove what 
cannot be proven, that is, that the kuna is a living tradition 
of the Croatian people--not a Pavelic invention--the kuna was 
used in the 13th century, the kuna is on the Slavonian crest, 
and it is our most original kuna. This pseudoscientific battle 
of wits deserves only scorn. This is the shabbiest invention of 
tradition with the difference that the invented Scotch tartans 
(tribal weaves) are something that can be turned into money, 
while the only thing that can be paid with the kuna is Pavelic's 
bills, which were always anything but Croatian. We who all our 
lives in distant parts of the world have been defending Croatia 
from what we might call kunism, can now give thanks to Tudjman, 
the former political commissar, for this particularly pregnant 
act of reconciliation. We will see how long it takes before Dr. 
Tudjman apologizes for this brainstorm. The `only' pity is that 
his `Trackless...' and kunas are paid for by others, 
for example, the refugees from Vukovar or Konavale, whom Serbian 
propaganda has always represented as coauthors of 
`Trackless...,' or troglodytes wearing the fur of the 
marten [kuna]." 
  The man who compares himself to Jesus, because on two 
occasions in past days he has declared "Even among Christ's 12 
apostles, one betrayed him, the other denied him, and the rest, 
but for one, did not follow him on his road to the cross," thus 
decided that the Croats shall no longer precede money amounts by 
HRD [Croatian dinar], but by HRK [Croatian kuna]. Those who 
attempt to point out the harmfulness of this decision of his, 
that is, to change the name of the Croatian kruna [crown], which 
had previously been adopted by vote, to the kuna, he simply 
calls enemies and traitors, because "the kuna will be the proof 
of Croatian sovereignty and the stability of the Croatian 
economy. Croatia had a leadership with a clear objective in 
which the people believed." 
<H5>  The Croatian Jesus </H5>
  What is done is done, and for the present, unfortunately, 
there is nothing more that can be changed: The German mark [DM] 
will be 3.7 kunas, and this dangerous little animal will be 
divided into a smaller unit--the lipa [linden]. But in addition 
to the crucial issue of the name, there are a number of others. 
One is again in the sphere of history, and the other economic. 
That is, many people, after analyzing the persons and cities 
that appear on the new Croatian bank notes, have been calling 
attention to a number of illogical things, that is, a system 
which stubbornly wants to impose just one view of the Croatian 
past. On the other hand, numerous experts are wondering whether 
this is really the right time to remove three zeros and adopt 
the real currency (the HRD was temporary scrip) and whether the 
reasons are not really political and ceremonial? 
  The nine persons on the eight bank notes--according to 
many--including Banac, whom we have already cited, have an 
exceedingly pronounced semantic weight. Petar Zrinski and Krsto 
Frankopan (the 5-kuna note), Juraj Dobrila (10), Josip Jelacic 
(20), Ivan Gundulic (50), Ivan Mazuranic (100), Stjepan Radic 
(200), Marko Marulic (500), and Ante Starcevic (1,000) are all 
of them (except Radic to some extent) figures from the quite 
distant Croatian past who are supposed to demonstrate the course 
of the idea of the Croatian state. This choice demonstrates the 
need of a small state to prove itself powerful, to prove that it 
also had its great men, its bans and imperial generals, and, of 
course, its Father of the Homeland. 
  There was no place on the new bank notes for a Rudjer 
Boskovic, who until yesterday was on all the denominations of 
the temporary dinar? Not a single woman was found, but it is not 
that they could not have found an important Croatian woman. For 
example: Ivana Brlic-Mazuranic, Dora Pejacevic, Cvijeta 
Zuzoric.... Tudjman himself explained why, for instance, 
Ljudevit Gaj, or Strosmajer, Frano Supilo, or even Vladko Macek 
are not on a bank note. Demonstrating once again his incredible 
unfamiliarity with history, or, at least, his strange and 
monstrous interpretation of it, in a ceremonial interview with 
the editors in chief of the Croatian media (but chosen by him) 
he nervously declared: "Who told me that they reproached us for 
not having put Gaj or Strosmajer on the new bank notes? All we 
need is to do more to spread Illyrianism and Yugoslavism." 
<H5>  The Front and the Back of the Coin </H5>
  One can only imagine what the "Croatian Jesus" would answer 
to the question of why there is no Miroslav Krleza, August 
Cesarac, or Nikola Tesla on the kunas (although they would 
probably turn in their graves because of the name). Tudjman has 
proven for the umpteenth time that he is not bound by the 
Croatian Constitution nor by the program of his pseudoparty. 
After all, the Constitution clearly states that among other 
things Croatian statehood is based "on establishment of the 
foundations of state sovereignty in the period of World War II, 
expressed contrary to proclamation of the Independent State of 
Croatia [NDH], in decisions of ZAVNOH [Regional Antifascist 
Council of the National Liberation of Croatia], and then in the 
constitution of the People's Republic of Croatia, and in the 
constitutions of the Socialist Republic of Croatia." And in the 
program of the HDZ [Croatian Democratic Union] it is written 
that it is also based on the spadework done by the Croatian left. 
  On the back of the bank note are the city of Varazdin, the 
arena in Pula, the Vukovar pigeon, Dubrovnik, the Rijeka 
Cathedral, Osijek, Diocletian's Palace in Split, and Zagreb--the 
Cathedral and the Monument to King Tomislav. The justification 
offered for this decision has to do with Croatian geography; 
that is, the four largest cities and four cities on the outer 
edge are represented. At first glance this "holds water," but 
again it is a question of the same criteria, only this time they 
are a bit more confused, since what are the Arena and 
Diocletian's Palace doing here anyway? And if the creators of 
the kuna had taken some other criterion except for 
monumentality, whereby they repeated the mistake they made in 
choosing the people, perhaps the Holy Cross in Nin, Saint Donat 
in Zadar, Viseslav's sacristy (which up to now has been on all 
the dinar scrip), and even Knin (how sacrilegious it sounds) 
might have turned up on one of the bank notes, because the 
Croatian Government is thus obstinately repeating that Knin is 
an old royal city? The front and the back of the Croatian kunas 
have actually exposed the mindset of the Croatian ruler, which, 
incidentally, he was not concealing even the other day when he 
appeared in a military uniform for the first time in public, 
which is probably the first step toward self-proclamation as 
general or generalissimo, and when he turned medieval Medvedgrad 
into some Altar of Croatian Freedom known only to him. But if 
the Croats had to once again swallow the dumpling which Tudjman 
thrust upon them, many are wondering what they have got in 
economic terms with the kuna and the lipas? Croatian Prime 
Minister Nikica Valentic, who is still declaring unlimited 
loyalty to Tudjman and has not wondered for a moment whether the 
kuna should be inaugurated right now, also had this to say a few 
days ago: "The real problems and the wave of bankruptcies that 
will be coming soon will affect entire branches of the economy, 
because the structure of the economy which Croatia has today is 
not tenable. Only now will we see whether we have the strength 
and will to carry out the anti-inflation program on which 
cooperation with international financial institutions depends." 
<H5>  Political Decision </H5>
  Up to now, the Croatian Government has boasted disdainfully 
how it has managed to halt inflation, and when recently its 
deputy prime minister was advised that this is a simple 
operation, he replied: "Well, if it is simple, why didn't others 
do it?" The creator of the "Croatian economic miracle" seems to 
have forgotten that even a Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, where 
inflation was measured in millions of percentage points, managed 
to achieve domestic convertibility in just one day. Many 
economic indicators warn that the Croatian economy has no chance 
of that kind of rapid recovery and that up to now the government 
has only carried out the anti-inflation program, but it has not 
even begun the stabilization program, as Valentic himself has 
declared so clearly. This is best indicated by the figures on 
the drastic decline of industrial output, the drop in exports 
and imports, and the deficit amounting to about $100 million.... 
Dr. Vladimir Veselica, member of the HDZ and a professor in the 
School of Economics at Zagreb University, recently judged that 
the "collapsing curve of economic activity, unresolved property 
relations, that is, the incomplete and highly questionable 
privatization, without whose completion there can be no 
restructuring nor development of the economy, constitute a weak 
support for real convertibility of the first sovereign Croatian 
currency." Another economist (who incidentally is a member of 
the first Croatian government, from which he withdrew because of 
his attitude toward privatization), Dr. Drazen Kalodjera, is 
still more precise: "The prerequisites have not been created for 
introduction of the kuna. I think that the change in the money 
system and denomination did not come at the right moment. This 
is a political decision which has an economically neutral 
effect." 
  Dr. Ivo Banac is convinced (nor is he alone) that Tudjman 
will again have to apologize for yet another historical 
brainstorm and invention as he did in the case of the Jews and 
what he wrote about them in his Trackless.... Ivica 
Racan, president of the Social Democratic Party of Croatia 
[SDSH], says: "The new money will sooner or later pay the price 
of this illusion concerning the great success against inflation, 
regardless of what it is called. Perhaps it is not such a bad 
thing for the odium to fall on a bank note with an inappropriate 
name." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
