ID: 118	RANK: 17	SCORE: 9.160107
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910814-0137
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910814-0137.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Shoes by the Seashore
   ----
   By Thomas J. Meyer
</HL>
<DATE>
08/14/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A6
</SO>
<LP>
   Cannon Beach, Ore. -- The big issue confronting the
Sneaker Society these days is what, exactly, to do with all
the sneakers.
   Someone suggested to Steve McLeod (size 8), who is an
artist here, that he paint his cache -- he's found 64 pairs
and 40 unmatched shoes -- and sell the pieces as sculptures.
Sherli Tarnasky (size 7 1/2), a city clerk in nearby Rockaway
Beach, thinks she might turn hers into some sort of gift-shop
novelty, something akin to Pet Rocks. Burke and Lisa Pond
(sizes 10 and 8 1/2), who have lined up their 150-odd shoes
in a greenhouse behind their Astoria home, are just looking
for buyers.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Mr. McLeod, for one, doesn't want to do anything just yet.
"I feel like if we do, it'll blow the whole karma of the
thing," he said.
   The sneakers -- they're mostly brand new, high-end Nikes
-- have been washing up on beaches in Oregon and Washington
since the beginning of April. At first, nobody knew why.
Those who picked them up just gave them a good scrubbing to
get rid of the long-neck barnacles and the seaweed coating
and the sand. When a Portland television station put an item
on the evening news about Ms. Tarnasky and her new shoe
collection, she started getting calls from other beachcombers
who'd picked up shares of the loot. It turned out the shoes
had spent some time in the currents: Five 40-foot containers
of Nikes -- 40,000 pairs in all -- had fallen off the deck of
a South Korea-to-Seattle cargo ship in May 1990.
   The Sneaker Society -- the name was Mr. McLeod's idea --
started one Sunday afternoon in early spring when Ms.
Tarnasky, a stout, effusive woman, invited everyone over to
barbecue burgers and try to swap the shoes to make pairs.
   All the members of the society have different stories
about how they first came across the shoes. Mr. McLeod was
walking on the beach near his home when he spotted a
seaweed-covered Nike hiking boot in his size. He didn't think
much of it until the next day, when he found a matching shoe
-- same model, same size -- a few miles down the beach. Since
then he's done little besides scour the beaches of Clatsop
County in search of mint-condition Nikes.
   When I visited his apartment, half a block from the
Pacific, it wasn't hard to see that his efforts had met with
some success: There are Nikes everywhere. He has 17 pairs of
Cross Trainers, three pairs of hiking boots, three pairs of
high-top basketball shoes (two Strike Forces and one Solo
Flight), two pairs of Lady Pegasus running shoes, two pairs
of black Healthwalkers and 15 pairs of golf shoes.
   Mr. McLeod, a soft-spoken man with a salt-and-pepper
beard, admitted that he was in the midst of a midlife crisis
even before the sneaker wave. He'd been looking for a break
from his routine, and mating orphaned sports shoes has
brought some new meaning to his life. "I'm just kind of
obsessed with the idea of putting all these pairs together,"
he said.
   Ms. Tarnasky was walking Dixie, her elkhound, one evening
in April when the surfeit of washed-up tennis shoes caught
her eye. With the help of a neighbor, she collected 49 shoes
and dumped them in the beach grass behind her house.
   When I asked Mr. McLeod what sort of shoes he used to
wear, he got excited for a moment. "You want to see?" he said
eagerly, as if he were about to reveal to me a great secret.
"I'll show you." He trotted into his bedroom and emerged with
the full lineup: a pair of duck boots he got from his father
20 years ago, some worn out work boots and two fraying pairs
of moccasins. "I must be one of the only people in Oregon
who's never had a pair of Nikes before," he said. (Nike is
based in a Portland suburb.) These days, he pads around the
house in a pair of white-and-gray Cross Trainers that retail
for about $85.
   In fact, none of the members of the Sneaker Society are
the types to make fancy athletic shoes a priority in their
wardrobe budget. Burke Pond, for instance, a 62-year-old with
a striking resemblance to Fidel Castro, has bought sneakers
before, but only the type he can pick up for $9.95 at
discount stores. "No one in my generation would ever pay $100
for tennis shoes," he said. "But I'm sold on them now."
   Mr. McLeod said he doesn't understand the appeal of the
shoes. "If people wanted my paintings the way they want these
shoes," he said, "I'd be in real good shape."
   Everyone in the Sneaker Society seems hesitant to part
with their spoils. A lot of Mr. McLeod's neighbors here,
noticing the sneakers lined up to dry on his balcony and
outside his front door, have dropped by to inquire.
"Everybody says, `Oh, I'll take a pair,'" he said. "But the
longer I scrub them, the harder they are to give away." And
even once they decide what to do with the pairs, no one can
figure out what to do with the leftover singles, though Ms.
Tarnasky thought she was on to something when she got a call
from a man in Utah who was interested because his feet were
different sizes. "I didn't ask him why," she said.
   All sorts of things wash up on the beaches in Oregon. The
Ponds' basement is full of the stuff they've collected on
their daily walks: glass floats from Japanese fishing nets,
crab pots, spools of rope, barrels, a plastic owl, rice
bowls, a table, a mailbox. Mr. McLeod has furnished most of
his apartment with stuff that's turned up on the beach. And
he once found a woman's body -- though he doesn't seem to
want to talk about that one.
   Still, the arrival of hundreds of high-tech athletic shoes
in high tide was unusual enough to merit some notice in the
local media. Mr. McLeod, for one, got so many calls from
curious people and reporters that he made a call to the
people at Nike to make sure he wasn't saying anything they
didn't want him to say. The woman who answered the telephone
asked him for his address, so she could send him a Nike
T-shirt. "I was never expecting them to reward us," he said.
"But I said, `If you really feel like doing something nice,
you can send a couple boxes of laces.'"
   ---
   Mr. Meyer is a free-lance writer based in Portland.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
