ID: 118	RANK: 24	SCORE: 8.797647
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911031-0102
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911031-0102.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Marketing:
   From Air to Pump to Puma's Disc System,
   Sneaker Gimmicks Bound to New Heights
   ----
   By Joseph Pereira
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
10/31/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   G.PUM RBK S.ARI
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)
TEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX)
</IN>
<NS>
NEW PRODUCTS &amp; SERVICES (PDT)
</NS>
<RE>
EUROPE (EU)
GERMANY (GE)
MASSACHUSETTS (MA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
SCANDINAVIA (SCA)
SWEDEN (SW)
UNITED STATES (US)
WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)
</RE>
<LP>
   First came Nike's Air shoe. Then came Reebok's Pump. And
now there's Puma's Disc System sneaker.
   Forget about shoe laces and a tongue. The Disc System
instead features a "closure unit" that is turned like the
dial on a ski boot, an "anatomically pre-molded compression
unit" that replaces the tongue and "lateral stabilizing
elements" that tighten the sides for a better fit. All for
just $125 a pair.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   It may sound more like astronaut gear than a sneaker, but
that's the point. In the athletic footwear world, the race is
not so much to the swift nowadays as to the one with the
latest gimmick.
   "This industry has turned into the battle of the bells and
whistles. . . . For a time, there even was a real wild shoe
you could hook up to your computer to tell how far you've
run," says Steven Frankel, an analyst at Adams Harkness &amp;
Hill Inc.
   Indeed, with the $5.5 billion U.S. sneaker market maturing
and showing little growth, dozens of makers are touting their
own high-technology shoes, from Adidas AG's Tortion Bar to
Interco Inc.'s Converse Y-Bar to Hyde Inc.'s Saucony Ground
Reaction Inertia Device to Reebok International Ltd.'s Avia
Compression Chamber system.
   Whether the Disc System shoe will revive the sluggish
sales of Puma USA, the U.S. unit of Sweden's Aritmos, remains
to be seen. Most hot shoes have proved to be fads, as fickle
buyers -- especially teenagers, the biggest part of the
market -- switch brands frequently.
   Reebok's Pump, which quickly became a big hit when it was
introduced two years ago, already shows signs of being
winded. So Reebok will soon introduce the Double Pump, a
sneaker that -- yes -- features not one but two air bladders
and two inflation gadgets to pump more air into more parts of
the shoe. It will retail for $159 a pair.
   Reebok says the new shoe will expand the Pump line, and
not replace the single Pump, which costs less. "The Pump
provides a custom fit, but the Double Pump can tailor almost
all of the shoe to the foot," says John H. Duerden, president
and chief executive officer of Reebok brands.
   The brief history of the Pump shows how tough the athletic
shoe business has become -- even for hits. Hoping to improve
Reebok's image as a performance shoe, the company targeted
the 18-to-35-year-old male. But most buyers were younger, as
the shoe became a status symbol for teenagers and their
pre-teen siblings. "I have four-year-olds coming into the
store asking for the Pump," notes Liz Butler, assistant
manager for Lady's Athlete's Foot in Burlington, Mass. "And a
friend of mine has an infant who wears Pumps."
   This year, the Pump will account for about 7% of Reebok's
shoe sales. Reebok says it remains a strong brand, but orders
have dropped, in part because kids are looking for something
new. "It's a very fickle, very fashion-oriented crowd,"
explains Josie Esquivel, a Shearson Lehman Brothers analyst.
"With them, once the fizz is gone, that's it."
   Also hampering the Pump's image were a number of unhappy
customers who returned the shoes to stores either because of
manufacturing defects or complaints that it took too long to
pump up the shoe. "Several of my customers brought the pump
back because the soles fell off or because of a flat-tire
feeling in the arch area," reports Gregory Hatch, an
assistant manager of Snyder's Shoe Store in Washington, D.C.
"Consequently, the Pump started losing its status symbol in
the eyes of my customers."
   Reebok says that any problems have been fixed, and that
excitement over the Double Pump will breathe new life into
the brand. Others aren't so sure. "The Double Pump won't be
overnight salvation," predicts John Horan, editor and
publisher of Sporting Goods Intelligence Management News
Inc., an industry newsletter. "It's going to be a very long
and slow process educating the consumer that this is more
than just a gimmick."
   To be sure, the Pump was a breath of fresh air for Reebok,
which two years ago lost the industry lead in sales to
archrival Nike. The new line helped Reebok regain brand
momentum, boost profits, hoist its stock price 250% this year
and take a run at Nike. Stealing business from some of its
smaller competitors, including L.A. Gear Inc., Reebok
expanded its market share from 22% to 24%, much of the gain
coming in the last year. That compares with Nike's 30%.
   Backed by award-winning advertising, Nike's nine-year-old
Air line is clearly the dominant brand in the market. In
fiscal 1991, Nike sold 40 million pairs of its Air line. By
comparison, Reebok sold six million pair of Pumps, albeit a
much newer line, in two years.
   Some customers are wary of all the high-tech hype. "This
is absolutely crazy," says John Sagebrush, a federal court
clerk, while hunting for a pair of sneakers at a store in
downtown Boston. Scanning a wall mounted with more than 60
different styles and listening to a salesman's description of
their features, he sighs, "How can a man decide? They all
look the same and all sound good enough to wear."
   Adidas, in fact, is trying to take advantage of the
confusion. To raise its shoes above the clutter, Adidas says
in its current catalog, "People are tired of gimmicks, hype
and inflated pricing. They want honest performance, quality
and value. . . . It's time to get back to what is essential."
   Puma insists that its Disc System isn't a gimmick, but a
major step forward in improving fit and performance. "Sure, a
lot of us feel there are lots of gimmicks out there, but the
Disc is giving consumers a tangible benefit," says John
O'Rourke, president of Puma USA.
   Here's how the shoe works: After slipping it on, you
tighten it by turning the disc that's where the tongue is
located on conventional sneakers. The disc is connected to a
series of nylon cords that extend to various parts of the
shoe -- unlike shoelaces, which tighten only the top of a
conventional shoe. This results in a better fit, the company
says. The system is released by turning the disc in the
opposite direction or pressing a release button. Puma will
begin selling running, tennis, "cross-training" and track
spike versions of the shoes next spring.
   No matter how good the shoe is, it won't be easy for Puma
to succeed against the marketing clout of Nike and Reebok,
which dominate the market and spend more than $75 million a
year each on advertising.
   "There's so much product out there," says Jennifer Black
Groves, analyst for Black &amp; Co. in Portland, Ore. "Sometimes,
it comes down to who can shout the loudest and the longest."
   Still, the Disc System just might catch the fancy of
consumers. "The athletic shoe market is a strange business
with lots of surprises," says Ms. Esquivel, the Shearson
analyst.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
