ID: 118	RANK: 74	SCORE: 7.214470
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880713-0253 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-13-88 1341EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>s p BC-DukakisProfile Adv17-2takes   07-13 1153</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-Dukakis Profile, Adv 17-2 takes,1191</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv17</NOTE>
<NOTE>For Release Sunday, July 17, and Thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>Convention '88</HEAD>
<HEAD>Michael Dukakis: Cool, Cautious, No Shot in a Beer Kind of Guy</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By WILLIAM M. WELCH</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>BOSTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   If ever there was a case of truth-in-advertising
by a political candidate, it may have been the television
commercial that Michael S. Dukakis aired briefly last spring.
   An Irish union leader, with a face that said he knew what he was
talking about, looked square into the camera and said Dukakis is
not your ``shot and a beer'' kind of guy.
   Don't expect a backslapper, the ad basically said.
   The commercial was a surprisingly frank attempt to meet head-on
the feeling of distance that many people get from this man who will
become the Democratic presidential nominee.
   No, Michael Dukakis, 54, the governor of Massachusetts, the
victor in a field of Democratic presidential contenders once
dismissed as the ``seven dwarfs,'' is not a chummy sort.
   Cold and aloof, his critics say, even stiff. A politician, some
believe, seemingly without zest for people, despite winning three
terms as governor. A student of the mechanics of government who
would rather talk about an alphabet soup of programs than evoke a
hearty laugh.
   One magazine called him ``a League of Women Voters' dream come
true, a walking, talking Boston Globe editorial.''
   Despite the critics, Dukakis succeeded in winning his party's
nomination, projecting a calm and pragmatic competence along with
his coolness, and an ability to lead by building consensus.
   ``The impression that comes across is not particularly warm,''
agrees his own pollster, Irwin ``Tubby'' Harrison. ``It's an able
one.
   ``I don't think it's easy for him to go out there and stick his
arm around everybody. But I can't either,'' he said. ``I don't
think it means you aren't a warm person.''
   It is unfair, perhaps, that any politician faces comparison with
Jesse Jackson as a campaigner. But it was inevitable that running
against him, Dukakis did.
   Where Jackson loved to play a crowd and move it to its feet,
Dukakis rarely raised his voice _ even let his voice trail off at
the end, his point sometimes escaping his audience.
   Jackson grabbed children in both arms and was rewarded with
smiles and kisses and pictures on the front page. Dukakis
approached children gingerly, addressing one on Nantucket Island
recently with a formal, ``Tell me who you are.''
   Dukakis' campaign style improved measurably as the nomination
became his. Still, he infrequently attempts jokes, and gets mixed
results when he does.
   ``He sort of cringes internally when he has to do that,'' said
longtime friend Richard Giesser.
   Aides say he strikes out one-liners they write into his speech
texts.
   Yet for all his limitations as a campaigner, Dukakis has led the
life of a consummate politician.
   He has dominated the politics of his old-money Boston suburb,
Brookline, for three decades. He has pursued politics
single-mindedly for all his adult life, seemingly pointing toward
this moment.
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   Dukakis' parents came to America from Greece in their youth,
their own parents drawn by the promise of jobs in New England
mills. The story of each is exceptional.
   Panos, his father, arrived at age 16. He mastered the language
and worked himself through college, then Harvard Medical School. He
was the first Greek immigrant to graduate from that school.
   Euterpe, his mother, arrived at age 9. Her father preceded her
and saved money to send for the family.
   A school principal, Stanley Gray, saw a special spark in the
young girl and became her mentor. She graduated Phi Beta Kappa from
Bates College in Maine, and became a teacher.
   She and Panos met briefly as youngsters, but it was not until
Panos had established a medical practice that they courted and
married.
   Dukakis' father died in 1979 after a long and successful general
practice in Brookline, Mass. He left trust funds amounting to more
than $1 million for Michael.
   The thought that a family can move in one generation from Ellis
Island to the White House is a powerful one. Dukakis invokes it
often on the stump, sometimes crediting the sacrifice and
accomplishments of his parents that gave him the opportunity.
   But his Greek connection was not a particular strength in
Irish-dominated Massachusetts, and Dukakis did not stress his
ethnic ties as a young politician.
   During his first term as governor he took a trip to his parents'
homeland that is often described now as a personal awakening. It
was well covered by reporters who noted he climbed the Acropolis in
his wingtip shoes.
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   Dukakis was a studious achiever in high school in Brookline, a
community of affluent families with high expectations for their
children.
   He was on the tennis, cross-country and basketball teams, the
latter despite his slight, 5-foot, 8-inch size.
   An older brother, Stelian, encouraged Michael's athletic
endeavors. Stelian suffered a breakdown while in college in 1951
and led a disturbed life until a fatal accident in 1973. He was
struck by a hit-and-run driver while riding his bicycle.
   Dukakis got a taste of city politics while at Swarthmore College
in Philadelphia in the early 1950s, and by the time he was in
Harvard Law School, after an Army stint in Korea, had made up his
mind to make his career politics.
   At Harvard, Dukakis made a friendship that has endured with Paul
P. Brountas, also the son of Greek immigrants and now his campaign
chairman.
   After taking their bar exams, the two hopped in Brountas'
Karmann Ghia and drove to the West Coast, stopping in Los Angeles
for the 1960 Democratic convention where they saw John F. Kennedy,
also from Brookline, claim his party's nomination.
   In a mostly straight-laced upbringing, this trip has provided
some of the few colorful annecdotes of Dukakis' youth.
   Together they stopped in Las Vegas, where Dukakis only
reluctantly agreed to try the slot machines and won a $30 jackpot
on his first try. He quit after that win, Brountas recalls.
   ``I said, `aren't you going to play any more?''' Brountas said.
``He said no. That's when I knew he'd be successful in politics _
you've got to have luck as well as skill.''
   They traveled to Mexico, hanging out around the pool of a fancy
Acapulco hotel while staying in $2 a night digs elsewhere.
   That budget-conscious streak survives. Dukakis buys his suits at
a Boston department store, Filene's, and boasts of it.
   Katherine ``Kitty'' Dickson was a few years behind him at
Brookline High School, and they did not date until after Dukakis
had begun work in a Boston law firm and was running for a state
House seat. They were married in 1963.
   Kitty had been married previously, and had a young son, John,
now 30. John took the Dukakis name, though he was never legally
adopted. Two more children, Andrea and Kara, were born in 1965 and
1968.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>MORE</NOTE>
</DOC>
