ID: 118	RANK: 79	SCORE: 7.187801
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920203-0076
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920203-0076.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Marketing:
   Reebok Primes the Pump While Rivals Stress Value
   ----
   By David J. Jefferson
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/03/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   LA NKE RBK S.ARI SRR VANS
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)
FOOTWARE MANUFACTURERS (FOT)
TEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX)
</IN>
<NS>
NEW PRODUCTS &amp; SERVICES (PDT)
</NS>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
EUROPE (EU)
MASSACHUSETTS (MA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
OREGON (ORG)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
SCANDINAVIA (SCA)
SWEDEN (SW)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   ATLANTA -- For the most part, "value" is the new buzzword
in the sneaker business, as recession-weary manufacturers
embrace a back-to-basics, best-buy approach to selling shoes.
   Gone is the emphasis on costly gadgetry. Now, companies
such as Adidas USA Inc., a unit of Adidas AG of Germany, are
betting on such sneakers as Response, a $60 tennis shoe that
promises "hi-tech features at low-tech prices." And brand
leader Nike Inc.'s pitch at the Sporting Goods Manufacturers
Association Super Show here is: "Performance and value are
in. Gimmickry is going to be out."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But one towering performer has stayed back from the pack.
   In the face of the new austerity, Reebok International
Ltd. has unveiled two entries in its high-end line of Pump
inflatable shoes. There's Insta-Pump, with three bladders
that are filled with a small hand-held canister of carbon
dioxide. And there's the Pump Custom Cushioning inflatable
midsole, to be used in a running shoe that will feature tiny
electronic pressure gauges with digital readouts -- "ideally
suited for the serious athlete who is scientific about his or
her training," says Reebook, based in Stoughton, Mass.
   The new shoes are designed to inflate the company's
sagging Pump line. The first-generation Pumps were hot
sellers but eventually faded, and a second generation of $159
Double Pumps has failed to excite. The Insta-Pump will be
available next January and the Pump Custom Cushioning in the
spring of next year. Prices haven't been announced.
   To get its message across, Reebook Chairman Paul Fireman
announced that the company will boost its advertising budget
this year to $220 million worldwide from $140 million last
year, outpacing archrival Nike, which will spend about $150
million. Nike, which cautioned that this may not be an
"apples-to-apples" comparison, has long led Reebok in
advertising with its successful "Just Do It" and other
campaigns.
   Again in the ad battle that framed last week's Super Bowl,
Nike emerged the winner. The company got huge exposure from
its much-talked-about "Hare Jordan" commercials, featuring
Michael Jordan shooting hoops with Bugs Bunny. By comparison,
Reebok's "Dan or Dave" spots -- showing U.S. decathletes Dan
O'Brien and Dave Johnson as children romping around in home
movies -- were criticized as somewhat oblique.
   "I believe we have the right products now, and we have to
take advantage of the economy that has everyone {else}
pulling back," Mr. Fireman says of his hang-tough strategy.
"By spending $1 now, we might get $2 to $3 back in 1994." Mr.
Fireman does offer one caveat: If in the next several months
he finds the increased spending "hasn't moved my market
share, I'll pull back." Reebok currently has about 24% of the
$5.82 billion domestic sneaker market, compared with nearly
30% for Nike, based in Beaverton, Ore.
   "I think if they're going to make a significant move in
the market beyond where they are now, this is their
opportunity," says Alice Ruth, an analyst at Montgomery
Securities who attended the Reebok unveiling, a
steak-and-lobster affair peppered with Olympians turned
Reebok pitch people, including gymnasts Nadia Comaneci and
Bart Conner.
   The time may be ripe for Reebok. Retailers need a hot new
product to revive the sneaker market, where growth has all
but disappeared. "It's a good calculated gamble," Mr. Fireman
says.
   It's also a good, calculated public relations move. Even
though the Insta-Pump won't be available to consumers until
next January, Reebok hopes to get a lot of promotional
mileage by putting the shoes on several Olympic
track-and-field stars at the summer games in Barcelona,
Spain. It is estimated that about 80% of those who buy
performance sneakers buy them for prestige rather than
performance.
   At Reebok's trade booth, styled like a Spanish market, Mr.
Johnson mills about in a pair of hot-pink-and-purple
Insta-Pump prototypes. "How do those shoes feel on you,
Dave?" one Reebok publicist not so subtly asks the
decathlete. "It feels like when you step in mud and it
collapses around your foot. But it's feather-weight," Mr.
Johnson dutifuly replies. The Insta-Pump Running Spike weighs
less than half as much as a regular track shoe.
   If Reebok has correctly gauged the tenor of the times,
then nearly every other manufacturer will have to play
catch-up. "Why don't New Balance shoes come with pumps, discs
or other gimmicks to make them fit better? They fit better to
begin with," scream the print ads for New Balance Athletic
Shoe Inc. "The whole mood of the '80s was all hype in the
shoe business, but people are more conservative now," says
New Balance President James S. Davis. The Boston sneaker
company is targeting a less fickle 25-and-up crowd. "They
aren't as influenced by Michael Jordan as is a 16-year-old
kid," he says.
   Puma USA, maker of the Disc lacing system that New Balance
refers to in its ads, actually was pleased to be mentioned.
"I wish everyone at this show would make slams at the Disc,"
says John O'Rourke, president of Puma, the U.S. unit of
Sweden's Aritmos. "Puma's been struggling for a long time for
identity."
   L.A. Gear Inc., the third-ranked sneaker company with
about 8% of the market, has adopted a strategy to move large
volumes of shoes priced at $40 to $60. It is grouping
sneakers into families of look-alikes, with a $50 Mailman
basketball shoe that's almost identical to a $120 Mailman but
is stripped of technological doohickeys. The $120 shoe is
"priced to show," but "the volume shoe is priced to go," says
President Mark Goldston, adding that 80% of its
back-to-school line will sell for less than $60. L.A. Gear is
based in Marina del Rey, Calif.
   Standing in the company's hip trade booth next to a wall
display of blue lava lamps and L.A. Gear shoes under a sign
reading, "A place like this needs shoes like this," the
company's new chairman, Stanley Gold, tells a gathering of
analysts and reporters, "We're not going to base our future
on {one} hot shoe."
   Nike's presentation is filled with messages tailored to
the times. "We're moving away from the conspicuous
consumption of the '80s and focusing on values," one Nike
executive tells analysts in explaining why the company is
focusing on selling outdoor cross-trainer sneakers and
"affordable" matching apparel.
   "Nike is really focused on getting down to basics and
performance," says Heidi Steinberg, a Salomon Brothers
analyst.
   Even companies that are introducing shoes with high-tech
gadgets are trying to keep the prices down. British Knights
is peddling new basketball and casual shoes with a
shock-absorber in the sole called Dymacel, but for between
$70 and $80 instead of the $100 and up sought by the
industry's heavy hitters. "We would never go that high on our
shoes," says Helen Hedges, director of marketing for the New
York-based sneaker company, a division of Jack Schwartz Shoes
Inc.
   Perhaps most indicative of the new cost consciousness, the
darlings of Super Show were the Keds division of Stride Rite
Corp., Cambridge, Mass., and Vans Inc., both longtime makers
of $30 canvas deck shoes that other big makers are emulating.
   "The product is what we call `cool yet basic,'" says Stan
Glickman, director of marketing for Vans, of Orange, Calif.,
which has watched its stock price almost double since its
initial offering of $14 last August. Adds Dominic Ferlauto,
president of Keds, "The market is moving in our direction."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
