ID: 118	RANK: 85	SCORE: 7.133235
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890224-0087 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-02-24-89 0906EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i PM-HirohitoFuneral 2ndLd-Writethru   02-24 1195</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Hirohito Funeral, 2nd Ld-Writethru,a0527,1228</SECOND>
<HEAD>On A Chilly Winter's Day, Japan Honors Its Steward Of War And Prosperity</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: New thruout with details. No pickup.</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos TOK18, TOK24, TOK31, TOK32</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By DENIS D. GRAY</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>TOKYO (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The body of Emperor Hirohito today was sealed inside
a hillside crypt and offerings were made to his spirit, ending a
13-hour funeral attended by the largest gathering of world leaders
in modern history.
   A day of elaborate ceremony concluded by torchlight shortly
before 9 p.m. after the lace-draped coffin was put on a cart and
tugged 33 feet up a slope by a pulley-like device. It was then moved
inside a prepared stone tomb dug into the hillside and sealed with
concrete.
   Hirohito's mound-like mausoleum is in a grove of towering cypress
trees at the Musashi Imperial Cemetary west of Tokyo.
   Worshiped as a living god and branded a war criminal during his
87-year life, Hirohito was honored by official representatives of
163 nations at some of the ceremonies, including President Bush and
his wife, Barbara.
   The Bush's sat in the front row at the funeral, covered with wool
and cashmere blankets to protect them from the winter chill. Bush,
the collar of his black overcoat turned up, paused in front of the
coffin and lowered his head in a slight bow when his turn came to
approach the coffin.
   A bomb exploded in a roadside embankment about 20 minutes before
a motorcade carrying Hirohito's body and members of the imperial
family passed by on its way to the burial ground.
   The motorcade was not delayed and no one was injured. Police said
they suspected radicals planted the bomb. They said groups opposing
the emperor system staged 11 demonstrations in the Japanese capital,
and officers arrested five people.
   A 21-gun salute opened the final, five-hour-long ceremonies of
entombment as the rainy weather that had occurred most of the day
cleared.
   The ceremonies ended with the tombside offering of 16 kinds of
food and six kinds of clothing. The imperial family, now led by
55-year-old Emperor Akihito, then returned to the Imperial Palace.
   The Kyodo News Agency said a sword, ceremonial shoes, books
written by the emperor and favorite items of clothing were buried in
the casket with Hirohito.
   The Yomiuri Shimbun newspaper said more than 100 personal
belongings would be encased, including an old German-made microscope
he used in marine biological research and a recent list of rankings
of sumo wrestlers. Hirohito's favorite sport was sumo wrestling.
   ``The people will remember him forever,'' Akihito said in his
eulogy. He expressed his ``overwhelming emotion'' and ``extreme
sense of sorrow'' while thanking the people of Japan and foreign
countries who sent condolences after his father's death Jan. 7 from
cancer.
   The $74 million funeral began with private Shinto rites within
the walls of the palace in downtown Tokyo.
   The metropolis of 12 million came to a virtual standstill, and
32,000 police mounted the largest security operation in Japanese
history to protect the world leaders and contain anti-monarchy
protests.
   The day was declared a national holiday. Businesses were closed,
and many residents took advantage of the long weekend to head for
ski slopes.
   About 800 protestors burned a Japanese flag and chanted slogans
through loudspeakers as they marched for 2{ miles from Shiba Park in
the heart of Tokyo.
   Another 400 demonstrators from three leftist groups gathered at
another park, carrying banners denouncing the funeral and attacking
Hirohito for his role as titular leader during Japan's World War II
aggression.
   ``The Tenno (Emperor) Hirohito is the greatest of war criminals
during World War II with Hitler and Mussolini,'' said a 36-year-old
high school teacher, who refused to be identified. ``Under the name
of Hirohito, our mothers and fathers were mobilized for war in Asia
and thousands of people were massacred.''
   But others cried or clasped their hands together in prayer as
Hirohito's coffin passed by.
   A 72-year-old farmer, Morie Hiroki, tried to commit suicide by
hari-kiri on the southern island of Kyushu. The World War II army
private left a note saying he felt he had to follow his emperor in
death.
   Hirohito renounced his purported divinity in 1946 as Japan began
its climb from the ashes of World War II toward spectacular economic
success.
   Police estimated 571,400 people braved the 37-degree weather to
view he funeral processions, including more than 200,000 who watched
as a black hearse carrying the coffin drove slowly through central
Tokyo along a four-mile route from the Imperial Palace to the main
ceremony at Shinjuku Imperial Gardens.
   The motorcyle-escorted, 32-car procession passed Parliament, the
democratic core of modern Japan, and the National Stadium where the
emperor opened the 1964 Summer Olympics, heralding Japan's postwar
reemergence.
   Akihito and Empress Michiko led the imperial mourners, but
Hirohito's 85-year-old widow, the Empress Dowager Nagako, did not
attend the public ceremonies due to reported poor health.
   At the Shinjuku gardens, 51 black-robed men carried the coffin on
a 22-foot-long palanquin to a wooden shrine for Shinto rites led by
Akihito. The body of Hirohito was encased in an inner wooden coffin
and an outer one of metal.
   A chamberlain dressed in white followed the bier carrying a
platter with a pair of white shoes that tradition says the deceased
monarch will wear to heaven.
   Flutes and pipes, with an occasional drum beat, sounded a
plaintive tune as the procession entered the ceremonial grounds.
   Members of the imperial family _ the women in veils, men in black
tailcoats and black silk top hats _ protected themselves from the
rain with umbrellas.
   In two vast, heated tents, were the 9,800 invited mourners: a
phalanx of world leaders, Japanese government officials, private
citizens and several champions of sumo wrestling.
   Akihito delivered his four-minute eulogy, a deep-voiced male
chorus sang a solemn mourning song, a poem was read and imperial
family members went individually before the coffin and bowed slowly.
   Shinto attendants wore black robes and traditional headgear, and
eight men carried two sacred evergreen trees while others bore tall
banners with imperial symbols of the sun and moon and chests
containing ceremonial offerings.
   After the religious ceremony, Shinto appurtenances were removed
and the state funeral began with a minute of silence.
   In his eulogy, Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita described
Hirohito's 62-year reign as ``eventful and turbulent times for
Japan, including the calamities of that deplorable war, the struggle
to reconstruct itself from the ruins amid confusion and dire poverty
and to regain its full independence.''
   ``During all these years, Emperor Showa ardently wished for world
peace and the well-being of the Japanese people,'' he said,
referring to Hirohito by his posthumous name.
   After the eulogies, the Bush's stepped to the front of the hall,
paused and made a slight bow before the coffin. During World War II,
Bush was shot down by Japanese anti-aircraft fire.
   Also bowing before the coffin was Britain's Prince Philip, a
Royal Navy veteran of World War II who was at Japan's surrender
ceremony in 1945.
   The Japan Communist Party boycotted the funeral and some members
of the main opposition Japan Socialist Party stayed away from the
Shinto ceremonies while attending the state ones.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
