ID: 118	RANK: 88	SCORE: 7.095832
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911107-0162
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911107-0162.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Clothes That Kill
   ----
   By Barbara D. Phillips
</HL>
<DATE>
11/07/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   News in the fashion press that platform shoes may be
making a comeback this spring brought to mind my mother's
admonitions when they came back once before, in the 1970s:
"Be careful. You could break a leg, or your head." Back then
moms had close to a monopoly on scare stories, and product
liability law was in its infancy. Now, the market has
widened, keeping legions of consumer advocates, journalists
and the plaintiff bar in wing tips, pumps and summer homes.
Yet the folks who have brought us safety instructions on soda
bottles ("Aim away from face") and stepladders have largely
neglected a promising area for litigation: clothing and
accessories for adults.
   The plaintiff bar and consumer activists already have
given the children's sleepwear industry nightmares, says
product liability expert Peter Huber. But adult daywear and
accessories seem largely to have escaped their attention.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The world has always had its fashion victims. Dancer
Isadora Duncan, of the flowing robes, is the best known of
the dressed-to-be-killed: strangled to death in France in
1927 when the end of her scarf got caught in the wheel of her
open sports car (film maker Preston Sturges's mother, who
gave her the scarf, might be called the ultimate accessory).
   In the Sept. 11, 1972, issue of the Journal of the
American Medical Association, Drs. Mutaz B. Habal, Michael M.
Meguid and Joseph E. Murray reported on "The Long Scarf
Syndrome -- a Potentially Fatal and Preventable Hazard." In
their brief article, the three physicians cited 11 North
American cases involving children and adults between 1964 and
1971, including five fatalities. All the deaths, and all but
one of the injuries, involved ski lifts or snowmobiles.
   Under the Freedom of Information Act, I've been able to
obtain 1990 reports of the Consumer Products Safety
Commission's National Injury Information Clearinghouse. While
accidental scarf self-strangulations were not in vogue last
year, there were several variations on the theme. Here's a
sample of consumer complaints, death certificates and medical
examiners' reports:
   -- In Arvada, Colo., a 68-year-old woman suffered watery
eyes and a burning sensation when her handbag emitted a
strong chemical odor.
   -- An 81-year-old man in Cranford, N.J., died from
injuries received when he tried to burn a hole in his belt
but ended up igniting the carpet and setting fire to his
pants.
   -- A 25-year-old woman was killed in Millersburg, Ohio,
when her hooded sweatshirt caught in the drive shaft and she
was asphyxiated.
   -- In Sparta, N.C., the jacket of a 19-year-old man got
caught on the machine he was using to dig holes for fence
posts. He was pulled under the auger and died.
   -- The collar of a 25-year-old man somehow got hooked to a
wire stretched between two trees in Seminary, Miss.; he was
hanged.
   -- A 42-year-old woman in Kirkland, Wash., was burned when
her shirt was ignited by sun rays reflected through a mirror.
   -- In Dallas, a 37-year-old woman said she experienced
headaches and nausea due to a horrible-smelling chemical used
on women's panties sold in plastic tubes. She said she washed
the briefs with bed sheets and the chemicals got on the
sheets, making her sick.
   -- The nose and eyes of an 18-year-old man in Mobile,
Ala., were irritated by fumes emitted from his tennis shoes.
(I gather his feet were not in them at the time.)
   -- In Westland, Mich., a 34-year-old man was injured at
work when his shoelace got caught in one of the metal hooks
on the boot on his other foot, making him fall.
   -- A 41-year-old woman in Los Angeles died of a blood
infection caused by her wearing improper shoes without socks.
(Our mothers were right.)
   -- A 61-year-old woman in Niagara Falls, N.Y., took off
her coat and boots, tripped over a boot, fell against a metal
bannister and caught her coat and sweater on a bannister
ornament. She strangled herself to death.
   -- In Kenmore, N.Y., a 75-year-old woman said a strong
chemical smell from a new pair of walking shoes caused a
burning sensation in her nose and around her lips.
   -- A man in his 40s living somewhere in New York said he
pulled muscles on two occasions when the sole of his shoes
stuck to the surface he was walking on.
   -- A woman, age 53, died in Pineville, W.Va., when she
fell down 10 steps. The death was possibly caused by her foot
coming out of her shoe. (Cinderella didn't know the risks she
was taking])
   What can the rag trade do to keep lawyers' hands from
reaching deeply into its pockets? Warning labels might help
-- the more specific, the better the manufacturer's chances
of not getting injured by a suit of the legal kind. Think of
them as care instructions for the wearer, not the garment:
   "Thank you for buying an Isadora scarf. We are sure it
will bring you many years of wearing enjoyment. First,
however, take the time to read the safety instruction hangtag
. . ."
   Or: "Make sure foot is inserted firmly in (right or left)
receptacle designated for that purpose. Keep shoelaces tied
at all times -- see Diagram A (one-bow method) and Diagram B
(two-bow method). Keep shoes away from face at all times.
Walk with a heel-and-toe motion, ascend and descend stairs
one step at a time, and obey all traffic safety laws. Above
all, do not chew gum at the same time."
   ---
   Ms. Phillips is an assistant editorial features editor at
the Journal.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
