ID: 250	RANK: 23	SCORE: 10.512219
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911007-0107
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911007-0107.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Education:
   Relaxation Classes Rile Many Parents
   ----
   By Sonia L. Nazario
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
10/07/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<NS>
EDUCATION ISSUES (EDU)
</NS>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
GEORGIA (GA)
NEW MEXICO (NM)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   CALABASAS, Calif. -- As birds chirp on a tape recorder,
teacher Betty Mehling soothingly instructs her squirming
fourth-graders to lie on the floor. "Make your teeth tight,
your forehead tight]" Ms. Mehling says. "Now let that tension
go free]"
   Later, the children are told to close their eyes and use
the "TV set in your head" to take a guided-imagery tour of a
happy, magical place. "You feel so rested] So nice]" says Ms.
Mehling, who knows a restful state when she sees it: She
isn't called Lupin Hill Elementary School's "relaxation
teacher" for nothing.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Even here in California, the mecca of mellowness, kids are
stressed out. "These little five-year-olds are coming to
school tight as rocks," says Jeanne St. John, director of the
relaxation program for Santa Cruz County's public schools,
where most teachers take an "experiencing energy" course to
help them relax their pupils.
   Lupin Hill's weekly 30-minute
kindergarten-through-fifth-grade relaxation program is only
one of a number of public-school projects aimed at easing
student tensions with approaches ranging from drawing to deep
breathing to massage.
   "Relaxation should be the fourth `R,'" says Ms. Mehling.
Because it promotes better health, creativity and an ability
to concentrate, she says, relaxation "helps kids be their
best -- in sports, academics, and emotionally."
   One of Ms. Mehling's pupils, nine-year-old Kyle
Burlingame, says he switches on his mental TV set every
night, sometimes envisioning Lupin Hill Elementary -- not as
a school but as a playground. "It really helps me get to
sleep," he says.
   But as relaxation programs proliferate around the U.S. --
in part to provide coping mechanisms for drug, alcohol and
classroom-violence problems -- they are increasingly meeting
vehement opposition from conservative Christian groups, who
many teachers say represent a vocal minority of parents.
   Some critics warn that relaxation techniques are "mind
control" or can undermine parental authority and undercut
home-taught religious beliefs. As a legal basis, some claim
relaxation classes violate separation of church and state by
promoting aspects of Eastern religion.
   Last Tuesday, Michigan's statewide model health-education
program dropped the use of deep-breathing stress-reduction
exercises because of opposition from Christian parents. The
one million elementary and junior-high-school students who
take the class will instead be taught to count to 10 or put
their heads on their desks.
   In Pinellas County, Fla., scores of parents pulled their
kids out of classes conducting stress-reduction exercises,
then threatened to move to the courts and got the program
banned. They argued successfully that the use of guided
imagery, where elementary students were to envision a "wise
person" to counsel them through trouble, was a form of mind
control. New Mexico's Education Department has asked all
school-district counselors to refrain from such techniques
without an express policy and parental consent; a pending
Georgia law, if passed, would require parental review for use
of deep breathing to relax.
   Even at Lupin Hill, where most parents strongly support
and finance anti-stress programs, some raise concerns that
the techniques might constitute a quasi-religious experience;
the school now requires parental consent. One parent, James
R. Buckley, has his two stepchildren sent to the library
during the classes. He wrote to the school that guided
imagery is satanic in origin and that Ms. Mehling's class
taught his children they could control their emotions and
world "to the exclusion of their relationship with God."
   Such concerns helped kill a two-year statewide pilot
program in Minnesota in 1987. Minnetonka, Minn., minister
Patrick Misener accused the schools of using pagan religious
practices. "I can't bring Christianity into the schools, and
they shouldn't be able to use this, even if it's under the
guise of helping children," says Mr. Misener, who with others
petitioned the St. Paul school board to ban "New Age or
Hindu" techniques.
   "They are teaching the child to escape reality by going
within themselves," charges Lou Souders, co-host of a
Marietta, Ga., Baptist church-sponsored radio show that last
year was instrumental in prodding the Cobb County school
board to ban all therapeutic uses of such relaxation
techniques as yoga and guided imagery.
   On one radio program, a mother described how her
five-year-old dealt with a nagging younger brother by
withdrawing into an imaginary world. Shaken out of the state,
the girl was said to have told her parent, "Oh Mommy -- I was
in the most beautiful place inside of me. When I go there, no
one can bother me."
   The subject is so volatile that "it's almost like talking
about abortion," observes Robert Moore, supervisor of
elementary health and physical education for schools in Cobb
County.
   Christians' criticisms aren't the only obstacle to the
programs: Some parents fret that such therapies, because they
involve physical contact, could lead to child molestation,
and some psychologists worry about the power of such
techniques as guided imagery getting into the wrong hands.
   All the criticism notwithstanding, educators around the
country are pressing forward with relaxation classes. A third
of Lincoln, Neb., elementary schools this year are testing
anti-stress programs, despite opposition from several hundred
parents, and a number of other programs in the Midwest and
South seem to be surviving controversy.
   Schools promoting anti-stress classes can point to
research supporting the concept. Studies tie overproduction
of stress-related hormones to imbalanced immune systems and
such health problems as heart disease, cancer, hypertension,
diabetes and asthma. Stress has a more profound effect on
cholesterol levels than does diet, says the Yonkers, N.Y.,
American Institute of Stress.
   Michael Bernard, a visiting scholar at New York's
Institute for Rational-Emotive Therapy, estimates that as
many as 35% of the nation's children have moderate to extreme
stress. It is a condition that can have a "devastating"
effect on school performance, according to Harvard Medical
School psychiatric professor Steven Berglas. And while
"children are more stressed than ever," according to Philip
C. Kendall, director of Temple University's child and
adolescent anxiety disorders clinic, stress is expected to
mount as youngsters are pushed to tackle academic and other
responsibilities for which they aren't developmentally
prepared.
   Outside of the school programs, "no one is communicating
to children how to deal with" stressful situations, says
Saratoga, Calif., stress consultant Donna Wolf. Moreover,
schools pressed to boost academic performance compound the
problem by curtailing such traditional scholastic stress
antidotes as music classes and recreational programs.
   Those schools fighting stress point to the academic
benefits that can be derived from relaxation programs. A
study of four Prince Georges County, Md., schools found
elementary-school children who received two 30-minute
Introduction to Stress classes had higher reading and math
scores, and Irvine, Calif., anti-stress students rolled up
higher grades, fewer absences and a stronger ability to
resist substance abuse. In Santa Cruz, three-quarters of the
special-education children studied showed gains in
psycho-motor, communication and other skills after stress
training.
   Once skeptical, Lupin Hill teachers now rave about
relaxation. "Tension tends to close {pupils'} minds," says
Joan Bitter. When her fifth-graders fidget or tap their
pencils, she has them sit in a "magic circle" and give each
other neck rubs. Before tests, she guides children to an
imaginary beach and into tide pools. "I don't see the
screaming, the anti-social behavior anymore," she says.
   At Lupin Hill, 10-year-old Sheila Rothstein tells how she
uses Ms. Mehling's techniques: "Sometimes, I get so stressed
out. . . . When I'm nervous, I use the TV set in my head. I
tighten up my muscles. I close my eyes. I imagine I'm at the
beach." Before going to sleep, she imagines her house full of
animals for her to play with -- hamsters, cats, rabbits.
"When I wake up, I feel so much better."
   Many of Sheila's schoolmates also say they have begun
using Ms. Mehling's techniques outside school. Eight-year-old
Lauren Frescia says she used relaxation tools when her
friend, Nicole, poured water on her doll. And when another
friend, Tiffany, was troubled watching her parents splitting
up, she taught her how to do deepbreathing exercises to feel
better. "I helped her lots," she says.
   "A majority of parents understand we aren't trying to
create a cult," says Lupin Hill principal James H. Robertson.
"We are just trying to teach children to relax."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
