ID: 250	RANK: 31	SCORE: 9.844802

<DOC>
<DOCNO> SJMN91-06147222 </DOCNO>
<ACCESS> 06147222 </ACCESS>
<CAPTION>  Photos (3); PHOTO: Manouso Manos, shown here with B.K.S. Iyengar and a student
in 1987, has been accused of sexual misconduct with students. There are no
allegations against Iyengar.; PHOTO: Manos' videotape, a popular introduction
to yoga, features remarks by Iyengar.; COVER PHOTO: Jim Gensheimer; OLD
TEMPTATIONS IN THE NEW AGE; Yoga promises a healing of both body and spirit.
But a sex scandal has caused strife among its practitioners. (color)  </CAPTION>
<DESCRIPT>  INDIA; RELIGION; FITNESS; SEX; ABUSE; PROBE; SF-BAY-AREA; MAJOR-STORY  </DESCRIPT>
<LEADPARA>  YOGA IS THE MOST POWERFUL force in the universe, according to the most
prominent yoga teacher in the world, B.K.S. Iyengar of Pune, India.;    On the
purely physical plane, its devotees say, yoga can enhance personal energy,
reduce stress and ease such problems as lower back pain. A deeper yoga
practice can be profound therapy, as serious an investigation of one's life as
Freudian or Jungian analysis.  </LEADPARA>
<SECTION>  West  </SECTION>
<HEADLINE>  BETRAYAL OF TRUST
SPIRITUAL FORCE ENCOUNTERS HUMAN PASSIONS
AS A SEX SCANDAL ERUPTS IN YET ANOTHER NEW
AGE COMMUNITY.  </HEADLINE>
<MEMO>  See also related article on page 8 of this section.  </MEMO>
<TEXT>     Here's how the therapeutic process might unfold. A prospective student,
watching a yoga program on Channel 9, decides to get out of the chair and
learn a few yoga poses, known as "asanas." There are about 200 asanas in hatha
yoga. The point of doing them is to relax and balance the body.;    They range
in difficulty from the apparently simple triangle pose, which involves
spreading the feet and twisting the trunk; to the more intricate headstand; to
postures that take years even to attempt, where the arms point north, the
torso twists south and the legs fly off toward Bombay.;    After a few weeks
of watching classes, the student heeds the advice of the TV teacher and
attends a local class or takes a private lesson. A live teacher is vital to
yoga.;    Teachers are trained to help each individual body adapt to the
rigors of a pose. Often, a feeling of trust develops between teacher and
student; this contributes significantly to the learning process.;    The first
months of yoga can be a wonderful time; after years of stiffness, students
begin to feel what it is to have a relaxed, balanced, flexible body. It's
exciting. It's also scary, because the psychic armor of a lifetime is being
softened. The personal guidance of a teacher can help focus the excitement and
allay the fear.;    Progress usually slows after the first few months. The
process of softening and unfolding becomes more subtle and gradual. Some
students get discouraged and quit; many others level off their practice and
are content with feeling better. But some students stick with the discipline,
and for them, the teacher becomes indispensable -- keeping their spirits up
over the difficult years of daily practice, teaching the seemingly infinite
subtleties of relaxing and opening, demonstrating a belief that one's true
self, one's core self, is OK. Demonstrating, in short, the value of trust.;   
SOMETIMES THINGS GO wrong. Occasionally, the relationship between teacher and
student is betrayed.;    A leading teacher at the Bay Area's foremost yoga
school has admitted publicly that he engaged in sexual misconduct with female
students. Among several allegations against the teacher, Manouso Manos, 39,
are charges that he fondled female students during classes. Manos said at a
yoga convention last June that he had "disgraced" himself.;    The case has
been kept under wraps by the yoga community; this article is the first
disclosure of it to the general public. Some yoga teachers and students are
outraged not only by the sexual misconduct, but also by the subsequent
unwillingness of the yoga world to disclose the case to the general public.
They question the decision made last October by the school, the Iyengar Yoga
Institute of San Francisco, to allow Manos back to teach classes open to
members of the public who have no knowledge of his alleged misbehavior.;    "I
was sexually abused by my father as a small child," says Stephanie Lawrence,
46, an artist and yoga student living in Mill Valley. "I came to the San
Francisco Iyengar institute six years ago to heal those wounds. Fortunately, I
did not study with Manouso when I first came to the institute; had I been
molested in a yoga class, it could have easily re-enacted the molestation I
suffered as a child, and the result could have been psychically disastrous."; 
  Some observers believe this case also points up fundamental flaws in the
Iyengar style of teaching yoga. That style, following the ideas of B.K.S.
Iyengar, is the leading instructional method for yoga in the United States
today, with about 500 teachers. There are some 100 Iyengar schools around the
country.;    The allegations against Manos are also a reminder that a series
of sex scandals has plagued the spiritual/New Age community in the United
States in recent years. They raise again the question of what constitutes
appropriate behavior between men in positions of power or influence, such as
teachers, therapists and gurus, and women who are their students, patients and
followers.;    SINCE OCTOBER, AT LEAST five teachers at the Iyengar Yoga
Institute of San Francisco have resigned to protest the school's handling of
the Manos case.;    The school, located on 27th Avenue in the city's Sunset
District, is the Harvard University of yoga, home base for many of America's
leading instructors and a mecca for students from around the world. The
school's showpiece is its respected teacher-training program. The non-profit
institute is licensed by the state of California as a vocational school.;   
Manos has for years taught well-attended classes at the school, and conducted
workshops around the country.;    Allegations of sexual improprieties caused
the institute to suspend him as a teacher in October 1989. Sources say that
"many" allegations against Manos have been reported in letters and phone calls
to the institute in the last two years. The charges have been reviewed by at
least a dozen people at the institute. The misconduct is said to have occurred
both at the institute and in yoga workshops Manos has given around the
country. No police charges or lawsuits have been filed against Manos.;   
According to three separate sources familiar with the case, all of whom
insisted on anonymity, Manos allegedly rubbed his pelvis against women
students in a sexually provocative way as the women were doing yoga poses,
touched them in private places during classes under the guise of pose
adjustments, and asked certain women students individually into an institute
classroom after group classes, where, behind closed doors, he performed
sexually charged physical manipulations, and had intercourse.;    When he was
informed that the specific allegations made against him would be cited in this
article, Manos declined comment other than this written statement: "Though
there are inaccuracies in the statements made in this article I do recognize
the gravity of the subject matter. I urge anyone who is involved in a
relationship that may be inappropriate (incest, employer-employee,
minister/rabbi-parishioner, therapist-patient, teacher-student) to seek
outside help and guidance.";    The director of the institute, Mary Peirce,
did not respond to repeated requests for comments.;    Accusations of sexual
contact between Manos and students first surfaced in 1987. Confronted with
them, Manos promised an institute representative he would not repeat the
offense. In the late summer and fall of 1989, instances of sexual contact were
again reported, and he was suspended as a teacher that October.;    In the
course of meetings and interviews about the case, Manos apparently never
declared that he was innocent of charges of sexual misconduct. The master and
mentor of the San Francisco Iyengar school, B.K.S. Iyengar, reviewed the
allegations last year and discussed them with Manos. Iyengar, who had the
authority to lift Manos' teacher certification or impose other restrictions,
decided action was not warranted and asked the yoga community to forgive
Manos. The school's board voted to reinstate him in October 1990.;    One of
the leading yoga teachers in the United States, Judith Lasater, then resigned
from the institute's board of directors because, she says, "I did not want to
be associated professionally with such behavior." At least four other teachers
-- Jennie Arndt, Toni Montez, Donald Moyer and Mary Lou Weprin -- resigned in
protest from the school's teacher training faculty.;    A STUDENT WHO MADE AN
allegation against Manos agreed to describe her experience on the condition
that she remain anonymous. The incident, she says, took place in 1986 in a
city where Manos had gone to give a workshop.;    "He had been very
flirtatious with women in the class -- touching women he didn't know well,
putting his arm around their waist and so on. This bothered me a little; it
set a strange tone for the class.;    "At the end of the class we all lay down
in Savasana." (This is the traditional last pose of Iyengar sessions. Students
lie on their backs, close their eyes, breathe in a measured way, and deeply
relax for about 10 minutes.) "He came by and put a block under my shoulders."
(A standard yoga procedure to elevate and open the chest.) "After about three
minutes he came by and put his hand inside my leotard and, basically, gave me
a breast massage.;    "It made me feel horrible. I didn't know what to do. It
scared me. I didn't know if I had done something to bring this on; all the
victim's guilt and shame, 'Am I responsible? Am I at fault?';    "These
thoughts went on for two minutes. I then said, 'That's enough.' He said, 'Oh,
sorry' and walked away. I didn't talk about it to him afterwards. I felt
ashamed and embarrassed -- mortified, actually.;    "I carried guilt around
for a long time, and the feeling that I should have stopped it immediately,
and maybe I had done something to cause it -- but I hadn't.;    "One of the
reasons it was so hard to accept was that it had been done in the context of
yoga. Yoga is a thing we turn to in order to begin opening our bodies; there
needs to be that element of trust there because it can be a very vulnerable
experience.;    "It went on for two minutes because I was in shock, basically.
It took me that long to realize what was happening and to realize it was wrong
-- I had crazy thoughts like, 'Oh, this is the way they do yoga in California,
where he's from, and if I react he'll think I'm uptight about my body.' He was
the teacher, after all; students really abdicate a lot of power to teachers.
I've had many thoughts since then about what I should have done -- instantly
get up and say, 'Get your hands off me, you pig!';    "I didn't report it
right away because I was ashamed and embarrassed, and felt guilty, thinking I
would be judged and not believed. It was easier to go on and forget about it.
And it wasn't as if I had been raped.;    "I felt like I was the only one it
had happened to; when I heard that it had happened to others I thought I could
come forward and be believed.";    MANOUSO MANOS, WHO lives in San Francisco,
is a native of the United States. He became prominent as a yoga teacher in
1984 after successfully organizing and managing the first national Iyengar
convention, in San Francisco. He is perceived as B.K.S. Iyengar's "right-hand
man" in America and as one of the master's "star teachers.";    As a forceful
advocate for Iyengar's yoga and organizational ideas, Manos came into serious
conflict with others in the Iyengar circle who were more inclined to a
flexible approach. The conflict also colored the institute's handling of the
allegations against Manos, according to one teacher. "When we spoke out
against the school's handling of the sexual misconduct matter, we were accused
by some people of waging a personal vendetta against Manouso," the teacher
says. "Our objections to his conduct were discounted on the grounds that we
had personal grudges.";    Iyengar, 72, is "widely regarded as the world's
leading exponent of hatha yoga," according to Yoga Journal. (There are several
branches of yoga; hatha yoga is the branch concerned with physical poses. In
addition, hatha yoga students learn meditation and various breathing
exercises.) Iyengar's Light on Yoga, published in the mid-1960s, is considered
a modern classic in the field. Iyengar's regal demeanor, vigorous air and
fervent teaching style have earned him the nickname "Lion of Pune" (pronounced
poo-nah). After becoming known in India as a yoga master, he attracted
attention in the West in the mid-1950s as yoga tutor of violinist Yehudi
Menuhin, who grew up in San Francisco. (Menuhin's mother, Marutha, lives in
Los Gatos.) A grateful Menuhin gave Iyengar a wristwatch inscribed "To my best
violin teacher B.K.S. Iyengar. Yehudi Menuhin, Gstaad, Sept. 1954.";   
Reached by phone in India and asked if he believed the allegations against
Manos by the woman quoted above, Iyengar replied, "No. That is an old, old
story. I doubt its truth. I do not believe past things when they are kept
quiet for so long.";    Asked if he thought perhaps the woman had been too
embarrassed or ashamed to report the incident, he said, "I do not believe
that.";    Did he question Manos about whether the woman's charge was true?
"He did not say," Iyengar replied. "Why should I ask him? I don't want to
listen to hearsay. When a report is fresh, immediate, then it is more likely
to be true. When reported later it is all dexterous words.";    The fact that
no charges or lawsuits have been filed against Manos has helped keep the case
contained within the yoga community. But there are other reasons for the
community's silence on the matter. Yoga teachers don't know how Iyengar will
react to presentation of the case to a broader public. Teachers do not take
lightly the prospect of displeasing Iyengar. The Iyengar institute may also be
concerned about losing students, especially because it has experienced
financial problems in the past year.;    Iyengar said he does not believe some
of the the charges against Manos, but insisted that Manos has become a
"changed man" who will not repeat his previous actions. Manos is "not the same
person" today as a year or two ago; he is "transformed," Iyengar said.;   
Asked how he was able to judge this, Iyengar replied, "I trust him. I trust
his words. I have taken an oath from him. He told me he had lost so many
others but he did not want to lose me. I told him that I can forgive once but
not twice.";    But is he not in fact forgiving Manos twice, because of
allegations that were reported in 1987, followed by the surfacing of
allegations in '89?;    "No," Iyengar said. "I never knew about 1987. Nobody
told me in 1987. I was only informed later.";    Iyengar said he views the
Manos case as an opportunity to "teach one and all" the importance of high
ethical conduct in yoga: "This is a stepping stone for others to follow. I see
it from this angle, as a learning experience." Ethical conduct, he continued,
is a paramount concern of his.;    When he was asked if, as some sources
claim, he believes Manos was seduced by some of the women, Iyengar said, "Yes,
naturally. Unless a woman shows willingness, the man will not act.";    Does
even strong temptation excuse such behavior on the part of a yoga teacher?;   
"Man is weak; forgiveness is what is important. Did not Christ forgive many
people?";    When she was told of Iyengar's doubts about her veracity, the
student whose allegations are quoted above said, "Well . . . I'm sitting here
trying not to scream or cry. It makes me want to forget about ever doing
Iyengar yoga again.";    "I BEAR MANOUSO NO ILL WILL," SAYS LINDA COGOZZO,
managing editor of Yoga Journal magazine and an 11-year student of Iyengar
yoga. "But thus far there has been no attention paid by the yoga community to
what I believe are the key issues in this situation: the misuse of power and
the betrayal of a student's trust by a teacher.;    "The emphasis in the
community, from Iyengar on down, has been on forgiving Manouso. No one has
talked at all about the women involved. And this makes me wonder what
representation and value I, as a woman, have in the Iyengar community. I'm
thinking not much.";    Others in the yoga community feel the case has been
dealt with properly. Lolly Font, owner/director of the California Yoga Center
in Palo Alto, says the situation "has been a very good thing for Manouso. I
think he's learned an awful lot from having to come clear and admit to what
he's done." Font said she takes classes regularly from Manos and considers his
teaching on par with the best she has experienced.;    Betty Eiler, owner of
Yoga Fitness in San Jose, considers the Manos case "water over the dam." She
adds, "Nobody, really, has a completely clean slate in their lives. Manouso
has suffered greatly over this; he's paid his dues.";    But many agree with
the teacher who says, "I'm disgusted and disillusioned. This event is like a
festering wound that has never been cleaned out. It's still dividing the yoga
community in the Bay Area, and since this area is the center of yoga for the
United States, it's dividing the community nationally, and in fact
internationally.";    Although many teachers say Iyengar should not be blamed
for Manos' alleged misconduct, others, probably a minority, believe he must
share in the responsibility. An experienced teacher said, "Mr. Iyengar can be
physically abusive when teaching. He sometimes slaps students, or hits them in
the head or kicks them, as a way of 'creating awareness,' of saying, 'Hey,
wake up!' And he can be verbally abusive, calling people 'stupid.' Not all
people, and not all the time. I have come to view Iyengar's physical abuse as
related to Manos' sexual abuse. If Iyengar doesn't respect people's physical
integrity, if he crosses physical boundaries, it creates a climate where
sexual abuse can occur.";    Larry Hatlett, co-director of the Yoga Center of
Palo Alto, disagrees. He does not see how Iyengar's style could have led to
Manos' alleged misbehavior. "I think it's Manouso, period," Hatlett says.;   
For his part, Iyengar denies that he is aggressive. "I do not think that word
is accurate. I am intense. I am intense because it is important, the work that
we do. Why waste time?";    THE WORD "GURU" HAS ROOTS IN HINDUISM. In the
strictest sense of the word, a guru is someone "enlightened," profoundly
spiritual and close to God; today, the word is often used by various
disciplines to describe any revered teacher/leader/guide.;    The very first
Indian guru to get widespread attention in the Western mainstream press, the
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, got caught up in charges of taking advantage of the
guru-devotee relationship.;    Several Beatles biographies say the group got
fed up with the Maharishi in 1968 because they felt he was conducting an
illicit romance with one of his female disciples. The Maharishi has apparently
never commented on the matter. The Beatles did make a comment -- their bitter
song "Sexy Sadie" was originally titled "Maharishi.";    Sexual misbehavior is
an extremely delicate topic in the U.S. spiritual/New Age community -- in part
because it seems to occur so often, especially among American devotees of
Eastern religions. In the November/December 1990 issue of Yoga Journal,
Katharine Webster writes, "Sexual contact between gurus and their American
disciples is not a new or rare phenomenon. Over the past 15 or 20 years,
numerous spiritual teachers have admitted to, or been charged with, having
sexually exploitative relationships with their female students.";    In the
1980s, the Zen Center of San Francisco was hit hard by a sex scandal involving
its leader, Richard Baker. The center has rectified its problems. Also in the
'80s, revelations about the sexual conduct of Swami Muktananda and Eknath
Easwaran, among others, generated controversy.;    One of the latest cases
involves Swami Rama, guru of the Himalayan Institute of Yoga Science and
Philosophy. The institute, a huge enterprise based in Pennsylvania, is a hub
for East Coast spiritual seekers, with a publishing company, scientific lab,
yoga teacher-training program and health clinic. Writing in Yoga Journal,
Katharine Webster describes allegations of numerous instances of sexual
misconduct by Swami Rama. The Himalayan Institute has not publicly responded
to the charges.;    Dr. Peter Rutter, a prominent San Francisco psychiatrist
and Jungian analyst, said, when interviewed for this article, that he knows
personally and "conservatively" of about 250 victims of sexual misbehavior in
U.S. and British communities that study and practice Eastern religions. These
250 include his patients, people who have attended his workshops and people
who have written to him.;    In his well-regarded book Sex in the Forbidden
Zone, Rutter discusses the issue of sex between men in positions of power or
influence and women who come to them seeking guidance.;    "The forbidden
zone," he writes, "is a condition of relationship in which sexual behavior is
prohibited because a man holds in trust the intimate, wounded, vulnerable or
undeveloped parts of a woman. The trust derives from the professional role of
the man as doctor, therapist, lawyer, clergy, teacher or mentor, and it
creates an expectation that whatever parts of herself the woman entrusts to
him (her property, body, mind or spirit) must be used solely to advance her
interests and will not be used to his advantage, sexual or otherwise.;   
"Under these conditions," Rutter continues, "sexual behavior is always wrong
no matter who initiates it, no matter how willing the participants say they
are. In the forbidden zone the factors of power, trust and dependency remove
the possibility of a woman freely giving consent to sexual contact. Put
another way, the dynamics of the forbidden zone can render a woman unable to
withhold consent, and because the man has the greater power, the
responsibility is his to guard the forbidden boundary against sexual contact
no matter how provocative the woman.";    The four major "talking" therapy
groups -- psychiatrists; psychologists; marriage, family and child counselors;
licensed clinical social workers -- all forbid relationships between therapist
and patient/client. And in January 1990, California enacted a law making it
illegal for a psychological therapist to have sex with a patient. Seven states
currently have such laws. Yoga teaching, while considered by many a therapy,
does not fall into the framework of the laws.;    As noted, no charges or
lawsuits have been filed in the Manos case. "It's difficult for women to come
out with these charges publicly," Rutter says. "It's a terrible ordeal,
requiring them to make public the most personal, intimate aspects of their
lives, which they would not have to undergo had there not been a violation of
the relationship in the first place.;    "There's tremendous risk for them. If
they speak out they're often punished within a community, or blamed. People in
the community might say initially that a charismatic man 'couldn't possibly
have done such a thing.' The next step in the denial process is 'Well, he may
have done it, but he was seduced.' ";    As Katharine Webster writes in Yoga
Journal, "The followers of 'enlightened' men are usually reluctant to find
fault with them, since to do so could invalidate the students' own years of
study and devotion. Instead they deny the experience of the 'unenlightened'
women who are the guru's victims.";    "Personally," Rutter says, "I am in
favor of women going public with such charges. I think they have more to gain
than lose if they do.";    Rutter adds that today, within some professions,
such as therapy, there is "universal" condemnation of sexual contact. In other
professions, such as teaching, there is only "a gradually growing awareness of
the problem." A number of universities have passed internal rules making
teacher-student sexual contact illegal. The model rule in the academic world,
Rutter says, is a University of Iowa edict that states in part, "Voluntary
consent by the student in such a relationship is suspect, given the
fundamentally asymmetrical nature of the relationship.";    WHY DO SEX
SCANDALS KEEP HAPPENING in the spiritual/New Age community?;    There is, of
course, sexual misbehavior in corporations, volunteer organizations,
mainstream religious groups, professional and collegiate athletics. And many
spiritual/New Age gurus and teachers conduct themselves impeccably, without a
breath of impropriety.;    But in this community -- especially among Western
followers of classical Eastern religions -- there are unique and potentially
volatile dynamics at work. These have to do with the exalted status of the
guru/spiritual teacher, and the spiritual hunger of many people in the West.; 
  Followers sometimes initiate, or welcome, sex with gurus and teachers
because they believe that sex under such circumstances is an especially
life-enhancing thing to do, a way to be permeated with the guru's enlightened
essence.;    "A woman might try to see it as a positive experience," Peter
Rutter says, "but in 99 percent of cases, that veil of illusion sooner or
later falls away and the woman realizes she has been terribly abused and
exploited. This might happen five minutes later or 20 years later.";    A
central reason the woman eventually feels exploited, Rutter believes, is that
the experience is a reinforcement of one of the most degrading things she's
heard (directly or indirectly) about herself: "Sex is all you're good for."
When such a message comes from a trusted guru or spiritual teacher in the form
of a sexual episode, Rutter says, it is especially painful and damaging -- "it
strikes at the heart of her psyche and soul.";    Ganga White, president of
the White Lotus Yoga Foundation in Santa Barbara, identifies "an amazing
spiritual gullibility among those of us in the West." Westerners may have a
hard time differentiating authentic spiritual leaders from those prone to
exploitation, he says, because we have a different way of judging things -- a
way of judgment based on materialism. "Maybe we see spirituality as an
accumulation of things -- accumulation of merit, knowledge, power -- rather
than what it really is: a subtle process of inner opening and understanding.; 
  "The question," he continues, "is not why so many spiritual leaders have
fallen; the question is, who says they had risen to a state of true
enlightenment in the first place? Somebody can be the head of a big
organization and write books and have a lot of centers, but they may not be
any more evolved than you or I. We're duped or mesmerized by a person's
possessions -- possessions of knowledge, charisma and so forth. These are not
necessarily indications of a higher awareness.";    There doesn't appear to be
any easy, sure-fire way to find authentic spiritual guides not prone to
sexual, financial or philosophical exploitation. Indicators of authenticity,
says White, are "love and compassion, and an absence of the 'Me' -- an absence
of ego and self-centeredness. What I suggest to people is, accept teachers who
start setting you free right from the beginning, not ones who ask you to sit
at their feet. There's a difference.";    Donald Moyer, one of the teachers
who resigned from the San Francisco Iyengar institute, says, "The question is,
how do we take a practice like yoga, from a culture, India, accustomed to
hierarchy and dealing with power in a different way, and bring it to the West,
and avoid lapsing into some sort of patriarchal throwback? Westerners, when
they first are attracted to Eastern thought, sometimes tend to put down all
Western attitudes. We need to be able to see the value of our own
contributions -- democratic values, psychological understandings, and
developing a sense of personal responsibility for our actions.";    "The
problem is not yoga," says yoga teacher Arthur Kilmurray. "Yoga is a process
of purification that stirs things up within a person. How those stirred-up
issues are dealt with is a function of such things as the culture, the times
we live in and how an individual is able to deal with the issues.";   
Stephanie Lawrence of Mill Valley says that she is doing yoga exclusively at
home these days. She quit going to classes because of what she terms a
"humbling attitude" exhibited by some male yoga teachers. "The cumulative
effect of many years of studying yoga led me to feel that I had handed some
integral part of myself over to some of the teachers, that I had allowed
myself to be humbled by them, and forgotten that I was my own best teacher.;  
 "I think that climate may be due to a kind of passivity among women that's
confused with surrendering, a word that is often used in yoga. When women
can't stand up for themselves, are passive in that particular way, then that
passivity is almost handing the power to the teacher to do what he wants with
them."; BOB FROST is a contributing writer for West.  </TEXT>
<BYLINE>  Bob Frost  </BYLINE>
<COUNTRY>  USA  </COUNTRY>
<EDITION>  Morning Final  </EDITION>
<CODE>  SJ  </CODE>
<NAME>  San Jose Mercury News  </NAME>
<PUBDATE>   910526  </PUBDATE> 
<DAY>  Sunday  </DAY>
<MONTH>  May  </MONTH>
<PG.COL>  6  </PG.COL>
<PUBYEAR>  1991  </PUBYEAR>
<REGION>  WEST  </REGION>
<FEATURE>  PHOTO  </FEATURE>
<STATE>  CA  </STATE>
<WORD.CT>  4,802  </WORD.CT>
<DATELINE>  Sunday May 26, 1991
00147222,SJ1  </DATELINE>
<COPYRGHT>  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  </COPYRGHT>
<LIMLEN>  0  </LIMLEN>
<LANGUAGE>  ENG  </LANGUAGE>
</DOC>
