ID: 250	RANK: 50	SCORE: 8.318820
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910415-0168
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910415-0168.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   For $1,500 a Head,
   Maharishi Promises
   Mellower Inmates
   ---
   Transcendental Meditation
   Goes to Prison as Backers
   Try to Lock Up Contracts
   ----
   By Jim Carlton
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
04/15/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)
</IN>
<GV>
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)
</GV>
<RE>
ARIZONA (AZ)
CALIFORNIA (CA)
TEXAS (TX)
</RE>
<LP>
   VACAVILLE, Calif. -- It's not easy teaching transcendental
meditation in prison. During the first group meditation at
the prison here last year, instructor Kofi Kondwani told the
inmates to close their eyes. The 60 prisoners eyed each other
suspiciously -- and refused. Mr. Kondwani finally got them to
close their eyes by promising that the other two teachers
would keep their eyes open for any trouble.
   Things went smoothly for a while. Then, in a later
session, Mr. Kondwani said someone decided to burn some
incense. That set off a fire alarm. Fifty guards rushed into
the room on full riot alert.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But the prisoners here say it's all worthwhile. As Paul
Brar, 36, who's serving a life term for murder, says: "It
puts your brain at ease, man."
   TM is the mind-opening technique introduced to the West
about 30 years ago by Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, a former Hindu
monk and onetime guru to the Beatles. It has been taught by
volunteers here and in prisons in such states as Indiana,
Vermont and Massachusetts since at least 1975. Now, Maharishi
has instructed his followers to try to spread TM throughout
the entire prison system in the U.S., which is swollen with
about 800,000 inmates.
   Since December, TM followers have submitted proposals to
prison officials in California, Iowa, Texas and Arizona. The
proposed cost of TM training: $1,500 per inmate, which
Maharishi says is a small price to pay. "Prisons are very
concentrated stress areas. The only way to create a
crime-free society is to disallow stress to be formed," he
says from his European headquarters in Vlodrop, Netherlands.
"Then their logic will always be nourishing."
   Indeed, Mr. Brar and some other inmates say they have
found happiness -- nirvana, in fact -- by reaching deep
within themselves in the dreary confines of their own cells.
Twice each day for about 20 minutes a session, they sit in
their cells, intoning a secret mantra to escape the reality
of prison life. They spend the remainder of the day, they
say, shielded from stress and anxiety. "Without TM,
everything is bumpy. With TM, everything is smooth," says
murderer Roy Folsom, 31.
   Even so, TM will be a tough sell. Texas says it will
consider the proposal, but a prison spokesman adds, "We're on
a tight budget." Arizona rejected the idea. "The biggest
problem was that it was not cheap," says corrections
spokesman Michael Arra. "And it was also unproven, as far as
we're concerned, in a corrections environment." Even the
warden here, Eddie Ylst, says that while he is "fully
supportive of inmates' self-help programs," he needs to spend
his scarce resources on things like food and clothing.
   Small thinking, says the Maharishi. "People should have
happy lives, and when the walls are no barrier they will rise
to a higher state of consciousness," he says. "Everyone lives
in a room, but no one is closed up in a room. This
transcendental meditation immediately injects a feeling of
unbounded awareness." Besides, he says, it's cost-effective.
He says the outlay would be more than offset by savings from
reduced recidivism. "I can guarantee that {a prisoner} will
not commit another crime so long as he uses TM," he says.
   When asked if even Charles Manson could be rehabilitated,
Maharishi responds with a vigorous yes. "Within two or three
days, his face will change," he says.
   Oh, sure, says Vincent Bugliosi, who prosecuted Mr.
Manson. "I think he's beyond redemption," says Mr. Bugliosi,
now an author and private attorney in Los Angeles. "No, I
wouldn't want to see him out," with or without meditation. In
fact, skeptics of Maharishi's program say it's outlandish to
suggest that simple meditation will cure the underlying
social and psychological problems that drive many crimes.
While nearly all the experts concede that TM is useful for
alleviating stress and anxiety, they say it's no more than a
relaxation tool. "It's a nice thought, but it's not the
ultimate solution," says John Blamphin, spokesman for the
American Psychiatric Association.
   Dennis McFarland, a 13-year TM practitioner, is proof of
that. A 47-year-old convicted drug dealer serving 10 years in
prison at San Luis Obispo, he says he "backslid" into drug
abuse between stints in prison despite his twice-daily
meditation. Mr. McFarland had been released from a five-year
sentence in about 1985, only to be returned a year and a half
later for a second drug conviction. "I'm a . . . three-time
convicted felon with a long history of hypochondria,
compulsive gambling and drug addiction with related
problems," he points out.
   But he expects to be paroled in about a year, and he says:
"I am very optimistic that I will make it this time."
   Maharishi's followers cite more than 500 scientific
studies as proof of the rehabilitative benefits of TM, but
they were mostly conducted by TM devotees whose objectivity
is questioned.
   Some prison officials are leery of what they call TM's
cultish overtones. Robert Dickover, chief of research for the
California Department of Corrections, says he would not
recommend that his system pay for the TM program because of
"garbage like the notion of the mantra and genuflecting" to
Maharishi. Mr. Arra says Arizona officials received many
angry calls about the TM proposal from citizens who believed
TM was a religious program.
   Maharishi's devotees, who refer to Maharishi as "His
Holiness," say this is no cult. Charles N. Alexander, a
Harvard-educated researcher at Maharishi International
University in Fairfield, Iowa, says the mention of TM
invariably raises eyebrows because it's different and
unusual. But he says TM is better than nothing for the
overcrowded, tense U.S. prisons. "When you're in a system
that's not working, then you have to look at innovation," Mr.
Alexander says. In at least one prison, even yoga classes
have been conducted.
   A thin, gaunt man named George Ellis introduced TM to
California's tough Folsom State Prison in 1975. Mr. Ellis was
teaching psychology in the prison and hardened criminals
marveled at his poise and relaxation in their midst. "I
thought he had some kind of wonder drug. I said, `Give me
some,'" says Patrick Corum, a murderer who was paroled in
1986. "That was my first introduction to TM."
   Mr. Ellis, now 41 and a Miami businessman, had taught the
meditation technique extensively on the outside, but recalls
feeling some apprehension doing so to prison inmates. "I
didn't know it at the time, but one man I was teaching had
killed five people," Mr. Ellis says. "When we were sitting
together, he said to me, `I could kill you now.' I said,
`Well, why don't we meditate and see how you feel
afterwards?' He meditated, opened his eyes and said, `Well,
you're still in the room, so I guess you're all right.'"
   As word of TM spread, more and more inmates began signing
up for classes. The program was administered both at Folsom
and San Quentin prisons, and last year it was started here on
a trial basis. Mr. Brar, the murderer, says each of the 29
inmates currently in the program sets aside times of the day
to silently intone a sound that was given them by their TM
teacher. In his case, Mr. Brar says he hangs a sign outside
his cell that says "Do not disturb: Meditating." Then he sits
on his bunk meditating quietly early in the morning and again
during late afternoon.
   Mr. Folsom, the convicted killer, says he experienced an
almost immediate transformation. He says he began penning
children's stories and felt at ease for the first time in his
confinement. "It works -- there's no ifs, ands or buts," Mr.
Folsom says.
   But it's not a perfect setting. Sid Landau, 51, a burglar,
says he tried meditating in his cell here, but was too
distracted by jail-house noise.
   Others swear by it. John E. Glidewell, 49, served 17 years
on a drug conviction, but he's been out for 11 years now and
is a sculptor living in seaside Arroyo Grande, Calif. "I
started doing TM in 1979 and this is the only reason I'm
still out," Mr. Glidewell says. "As soon as you meditate,
it's like a line is drawn inside of you and you know what
side you want to be on."
   Maharishi says that's the point. If every prisoner in the
U.S. were signed up for the TM program, it would mean more
than just $1 billion in revenue for Maharishi. "It would be
heaven on earth," he says.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
