ID: 250	RANK: 83	SCORE: 6.566809
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911203-0071
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911203-0071.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Moscow Goes Gaga
   Over Sex, Phantoms
   And `Bio-Energetics'
   ---
   Newly Free Soviets Sample
   Lots of Fads and Cults;
   Sightings of UFOs Rise
   ----
   By Jane Mayer
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
12/03/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<RE>
EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)
EUROPE (EU)
FAR EAST (FE)
SOVIET UNION (UR)
</RE>
<LP>
   MOSCOW -- An audience of some 35 Muscovites sits raptly in
a chilly auditorium, staring at two women facing each other
on stage. The older one, short and doll-like with gray hair
and a maroon wool hat, looks a little miserable as the
younger one gesticulates energetically a few inches above her
nose.
   "Using your phantom fingers to go up through the nostrils,
you must take a ball of energy and heat up her sinuses by
moving your hands in a counter-clockwise motion above the
face," the younger woman, Ludmila Lyalina, says firmly. The
audience takes notes. "In this way, you can clear a stuffy
nose within a half hour. But remember," she warns, "you must
not forget to clear out your own energy channels afterward by
washing your hands."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "With soap?" asks a member of the audience.
   Such are the concerns of Moscow's "Non-Contact Massage"
class, offered as part of a 10-day course in "Bio-Energetics"
at a municipal center. The curriculum also includes
specialties like "The Development of Extra-Sensory
Abilities," "Telepathic Influence at a Distance" and, simply,
"Work With Phantoms." On a recent weekend, the class was
packed, and its instructors said that despite a tuition of
650 rubles -- nearly twice the monthly salary of an average
Muscovite -- some 60 prospective pupils were relegated to a
waiting list.
   There may not be much to choose from on Moscow's grocery
shelves these days, but never before has there been a more
bewildering array of cultural, social and spiritual choices
facing the formerly regimented people of the former Soviet
Union. In some respects, Moscow seems to be undergoing its
own version of America in the 1960s -- questioning authority,
flouting sexual taboos and turning to some distinctly far-out
beliefs, many of which have been imported from California.
   "There's a values vacuum here," says Sergei Plekhanov, a
professor at Moscow's U.S.A. and Canada Institute. "The
collapse of the old ideology has left people wandering and
disoriented. But in a way, it's very sound -- for the first
time people are free to choose whether to have their children
baptized or follow some foreign cult. There's lots of anxiety
in the air, and all sorts of strange movements cropping up."
   Of course, Russians are no strangers to the bizarre and
mystical. The last czar, Nicholas II, and his wife,
Alexandra, revered Grigori Rasputin, a self-proclaimed "Holy
Man" who mesmerized his way into power before being
assassinated by a cabal of jealous courtiers in 1916. Since
then, even through the darkest days of state-imposed atheism,
a kind of underground Slavic mysticism has flourished here,
replete with folk remedies and superstitions.
   Today, all that bottled-up spiritualism is spilling over
into Muscovites' daily life. Newspapers publish specific and
closely followed horoscopes. On television, a program called
the "Lotus Longjump" showed earnest Russians, locked into
yogalike lotus positions, rocking themselves into high-energy
states and then shooting like circus clowns out of cannons.
Soviet sightings of UFOs and vegetarianism are also on the
rise.
   "Suddenly, everyone is looking for personal growth," says
Michael Shezbakov, a blue-jeans-clad 27-year-old, who was
trained as a physicist but now devotes himself to a system of
New Age beliefs from California called Lifespring. "Religion
was banned here for so long, there's a huge interest now," he
says. "We're at the beginning of a new era." For him, it has
meant a new belief in reincarnation, immortality and a kind
of breathing technique he calls "rebirthing," in which he
says after an hour or so he experienced "a tunnel with light,
somebody in white at the end of it and very nice music -- a
cross maybe between John Cage and Mozart."
   Mr. Shezbakov knows about John Cage because he has visited
the U.S., where he took an advanced Lifespring course. He
says he "entertains my friends by healing bruises with my
hands."
   A sign of loosening sexual attitudes here is the
proliferation of pornography in public places. At a makeshift
stand just a few yards from Red Square, a cluster of soldiers
crowds around the latest titles, which include a photocopy of
"The Joy of Sex" for 15 rubles, and an assortment of
photographs of Asian women in black underwear. At a railway
station kiosk, where until recently Pepsi and Pravda were the
main commodities for sale, a display of vibrators leaves some
commuters aghast.
   "I have nothing against these sorts of things," says Tanya
Pogossova, 37, "but should they be so open, right for
everyone to see, in the middle of downtown Moscow? It is so
ugly and so cheap."
   And in a basement union hall still decorated with posters
of Marx, Engels and Lenin, 35 mostly young Muscovites met one
recent night to form a new revolutionary front: for
homosexual rights. In a country that still sends homosexuals
to jail, and that imprisons HIV-positive people for infecting
others, the activists had to look to America for role models.
As a loaf of bread was passed around, a spirited debate
centered on whether they should call their new group "The
Friends of Harvey Milk," after the slain San Francisco gay
activist.
   "Our name is our face," said one young man in a Gucci
T-shirt, "and this Harvey Milk club sounds so secretive. Most
people here have no idea who he is. Why don't we just call
ourselves homosexuals?"
   "Because," another answered, "homosexuality is still
illegal here, and you know the Soviet mentality, very few
people will feel comfortable with contributing money to a
bank account with such a term."
   After 45 minutes, the name issue still had not been
resolved, nor had the issue of how open the group and its
political aims could be. In fact, the discussion had
disintegrated into the kind of chaos typical of Moscow these
days, with some lesbians yelling for it to be named after a
woman ("Sappho]" shouted one), while one young man finally
stood up and complained, "If we're going to spend all our
time discussing our name, I don't want to belong to such an
organization. Haven't we had enough bureaucracy by now?"
   As the old order falls apart, some fear that Russians will
yearn for discipline, and even succumb to fascism. Already
some neo-fascist newspapers have appeared, such as the
tabloid "Our Time," which carries a Nazi-like logo of a black
eagle grasping a swastika-emblazoned shield, and which
recently ran a front-page article suggesting that only
nonwhite people have AIDS.
   But Andrei Osikov, 19, who also calls himself
Anirveshyavapu, has another approach. Standing in one of
Moscow's subway stations, a saffron-colored ski cap warming
his shaved head, the Moscow-based Hare Krishna disciple, who
would have been put in prison by the old Soviet state a few
years ago, says with a beatific smile, "We are all one
civilization." Then in a true '60s flashback, he clasps his
hands together and adds, "It is written: Peace."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
