ID: 288	RANK: 40	SCORE: 5.282662
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891012-0251 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-10-12-89 1223EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>a a BC-EXP--TallerDwarfs Adv16   10-12 1108</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-EXP--Taller Dwarfs, Adv 16,1134</SECOND>
<HEAD>$adv16</HEAD>
<HEAD>For release Monday, Oct. 16, and thereafter</HEAD>
<HEAD>Leg-Lengthening Procedure Spurs Controversy Among Dwarfs</HEAD>
<HEAD>With LaserPhotos</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By LEE SIEGEL</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP Science Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>LOS ANGELES (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Brian Luna doesn't mind that doctors broke
his legs and put him in a wheelchair for 10 months. And the
14-year-old dwarf says he will let them do it again because the
surgery will make him a foot taller.
   ``It's worth it. It's like being on stilts,'' said Brian, who
went from 3-foot-11 to 4-foot-5 during the first stage of the
leg-lengthening procedure.
   ``I can help my mom make breakfast. I can turn on light
switches. I can turn on the radio and reach the top shelf on my
book case. It's real neat. Most little people have extensions in
their car to reach the pedals. I won't have that problem.''
   Brian, of Covina, is one of four teen-age dwarfs undergoing the
process, which costs $40,000 to $50,000, at Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center.
   Doctors carefully broke Brian's shin bones in November 1988,
then used telescoping metal rods to help 6 inches of new bone grow
in each gap. They will do the same to his thigh bones early next
year, increasing Brian's height to 4-foot-11.
   The procedure is drawing criticism from some members of Little
People of America, who believe dwarfs should accept their physical
characteristics. They say teen-agers under 18 are too young to
decide if they want the surgery, and that parents may pressure them
into it.
   ``Most little people can do anything they want to accomplish,
and their height is not a barrier,'' said Daniel Margulies, the
group's immediate past president. ``The fact you're short doesn't
mean there's anything wrong with you. If you're going to do
something as drastic as surgery, you have to take the position that
short height is something that has to be corrected.''
   Brian replied: ``If they say I don't need to do this, it's not
any of their business. I'm pleasing myself. I'm not doing this for
everybody. You really want to have this operation to go through all
this inconvenience.''
   The procedure was developed in Spain a decade ago, but modified
at Cedars-Sinai to reduce pain and hospitalization.
   ``It does an awful lot for their self-image and outlook on
life,'' said Dr. David Rimoin, director of pediatrics and the
hospital's medical genetics-birth defects center. ``It allows them
to drive cars, reach lights and elevator buttons _ to live in
society without the aid that somebody dwarfed in stature requires.''
   The surgery by Drs. Joseph Isaacson and William Oppenheim is
done in two stages: breaking the tibias, or shin bones, and
lengthening them 6 inches, then doing the same thing to the femurs,
or thigh bones. The fibulas _ the lower leg bones next to the
tibias _ are bowed in dwarfs, so they are straightened and trimmed
a bit when the tibias are extended.
   Before each shin or thigh bone is broken, four screws are
implanted, two on each side of the planned break. They extend at a
right angle to the bone, pointing inward toward the other leg.
After the bones are broken and placed in casts, hollow telescoping
rods are attached to screws, parallel to the leg. A knob allows the
rods to be extended one-twenty-fifth of an inch daily, until the
gap between each end of the broken bone reaches 6 inches.
   Because the membrane sheath around each bone is left intact when
the bones are broken with a small chisel and hammer, new bone grows
in the proper place to fill the gap, Rimoin said.
   Leg-lengthening, first developed for people with legs of unequal
length, involves long hospital stays in Italy and the Soviet Union,
where patients are made to walk sooner after surgery, causing
greater pain, he said.
   Cedars-Sinai's patients remain in casts and a wheelchair for at
least eight months: five to lengthen the bone and three for the gap
to fill and heal. They spend only four or five days in the hospital
after each set of bones is broken.
   ``These kids are in and out of the hospital quickly, and after
the postoperative period of a few days, they are pain-free,''
Rimoin said. ``I call it lengthening with a smile.''
   Patients receive frequent physical therapy to maintain muscle
tone while their legs are being lengthened. Rimoin monitors
patients for impaired blood flow or nerve damage, but so far hasn't
seen serious complications.
   Brian had the screws and telescoping rods removed from his shins
in June and got out of his wheelchair and onto crutches in August.
   When his thigh bones are broken in a few months, doctors also
will cut his groin muscles to straighten his back, Rimoin said. The
entire procedure lasts about two years.
   Rimoin said it also will be used to lengthen dwarfs' arms,
although Brian doesn't want that surgery.
   Brian and others undergoing leg-lengthening at Cedars-Sinai are
achondroplastic dwarfs. The inherited birth defect is the most
common form of dwarfism, characterized by short limbs, a normal
trunk, small hands, a large head, prominent buttocks and curvature
of the spine.
   As he grew up, Brian said, people ``would make fun. It would
hurt. They'd call me shorty, stuff like that.'' He also received
impolite stares, wasn't allowed on amusement park rides, needed
specially tailored pants and had to use stools to reach bathroom
sinks or to help in the kitchen.
   Rimoin said the surgery is best done between ages 16 and 20, and
that he approves it only for dwarfs old enough to consider the
consequences carefully _ Brian made a list of pros and cons and
received psychological evaluation.
   ``It isn't something he did on a whim,'' said Brian's mother,
Barbara Luna, a divorcee who works for a defense contractor.
   Margulies fears the surgery is done because doctors and parents
view dwarfism as a ``defect that has to be corrected'' rather than
``a characteristic such as blue eyes or red hair.''
   ``There's no way I would have said, `Brian, do this,''' his
mother said. ``He's the one who had to undergo the pain.''
   ``Most little people, if they wait until they're about 20 and
are fairly well-adjusted, would not want the surgery,'' Margulies
said. ``Once they get through the teen-age years, which are
traumatic for anybody _ especially if you're different _ the desire
to have the surgery is no longer there.''
   Brian is happy with his taller stature, but said, ``I'll always
be a little person in my genes, and I'll have smaller hands. It is
changing my physical appearance, but I'm always going to be a
little person.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Oct. 16</NOTE>
</DOC>
