ID: 288	RANK: 85	SCORE: 4.810474
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910625-0148
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910625-0148.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
   Sweeps and Sculls Prep for Olympics
   ----
   By Frederick C. Klein
</HL>
<DATE>
06/25/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A20
</SO>
<LP>
   Indianapolis -- In the matter of row vs. wade, there was
very little dispute here last week. Waders were few at Eagle
Creek Reservoir -- mostly small children -- while of rowers
there were many.
   There were young rowers and almost middle-aged ones,
lightweight ones and heavy ones, tall ones and, uh, more tall
ones. Some very fast ones, too, which was the point, because
the Hoosier metropolis was host to the U.S. Rowing National
Championship Regatta.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   For four days beginning Thursday, sculls and shells plied
the 2,000-meter Eagle Creek course, and most of the
lawnchaired and picnic-blanketed spectators didn't need to be
reminded that all sculls are shells but all shells aren't
sculls. That's because most had friends or relatives in the
field.
   "That's the kind of crowd we draw," said Alison Townley, a
Minneapolis native continuing her quest for a berth on her
second U.S. Olympic team. "Anytime you wave to the shore, a
bunch of people you know wave back."
   For all the chumminess, though, some real competition took
place, as well as some real sweat, and the rowers weren't shy
about advertising it. "Athletes Row/Others Play Games,"
proclaimed one bumper sticker in the meet's parking lot.
"Conditioning is what the sport's mostly about," confirmed
Mike Porterfield, a rangy Virginian who's a three-year
national team member and winner of two gold medals here. "You
give it all you've got for the first 1,500 meters, then gut
it out the rest of the way."
   U.S. rowers came to this meet in better spirits than in
many past years, because their international fortunes have
been looking up. Rowing has a long history on these shores:
The first American collegiate athletic event was a 1852 race
between crews from Harvard and Yale. But during the late
1960s and '70s the U.S. was eclipsed by the Soviets and East
Europeans, whose pick-'em-young-and-train-'em-hard methods
were well suited to an activity that offers 42 Olympic medals
in six women's and eight men's events.
   So in 1980 the U.S. decided to join 'em, at least part
way, by hiring Kris Korzeniowski, a Polish defector, as a
national coach. He's now technical director for U.S. Rowing,
and coach of the men's sweep teams. (In "sweep" rowing, each
athlete wields one oar; in sculling, each wields two.)
   Under Korzeniowski's guidance, American eight-man teams
won medals in five consecutive world championships or
Olympics from 1984 through 1988, including the gold at the
1987 worlds in Copenhagen. This year, he's been joined on the
staff by Igor Grinko, a Soviet who's coaching the scullers,
and Hartmut Buschbacher, a (formerly East) German who's
tutoring the women sweepers.
   What Korzeniowski did, in brief, was bring some unity to
American rowing in terms of technique and training regimen
("For the first time in my experience, you could go into any
boathouse and see the U.S. program tacked to the wall," notes
34-year-old Mike Teti, a national-team member since 1977).
Korzeniowski also introduced some rationality into a
team-selection system that depended too much on the results
of too few races.
   Korzeniowski says the latter process still needs
improving. "Our system is very American -- open, `fair' and
democratic -- but it's still not the best," he says, smiling
slightly. Further, he wishes that more financial support were
available for postgraduates in a sport where equipment is
expensive and prize money nonexistent. But he believes
rowing's strengths in this country can make up for its
shortcomings.
   "We can't recruit our athletes as young as some countries,
or train them as hard over long periods. But we give away
nothing in terms of individual motivation or intelligence,"
he says. "When someone tells me I have a lot of intelligent
athletes, I correct them. I say every one of them is smart."
   Indeed, short of a Mensa convention, it would be difficult
to corral as brainy a bunch as hauled oar in Indianapolis,
thanks partly to the sport's Northeastern collegiate roots.
The above-mentioned Townley, a bronze medalist at the 1990
worlds, is a Harvard anthropology graduate, and Kris Karlson,
her partner in winning the double sculls here, is a Williams
grad who's a physician. National-team sweeper Jeff McLaughlin
(Northeastern, '89) is an architect. Lindsay Burns (Harvard,
'87), third in the women's single sculls, is now working on a
Ph.D. in neuropsychology at Cambridge University.
   And the fact that most top-level U.S. rowers came to the
sport relatively late in life is widely seen as a plus. "I
swam as a kid, and was burned out by the time I got to
college," testifies the 25-year-old Townley. "I haven't had
time to burn out in rowing yet."
   The national championships were staged on a club basis,
with some teams combining athletes of different skills, and,
thus, weren't as crucial for selecting U.S.team members for
the August worlds in Vienna and the Olympics beyond as some
later meets will be. Moreover, race times mean little in
rowing because they are particularly affected by weather and
water conditions, and the precursor of a line of storms that
visited the area late Saturday afternoon knocked many
clockings out of kilter.
   A few performances did stand out, though, among them a
snappy showing early Saturday by a team of David Gleeson,
Robert Kaehler, Keir Pearson and Allan Green in the quadruple
sculls, an event in which the U.S. had been lagging
internationally; the surprise victory in the women's single
sculls on Sunday by 30-year-old Angie Herron, a one-time
world lightweight champ who's a coach at Penn (there is no
lightweight competition in the Olympics); and a triumph in
the meet-finale men's eights by the Pre-Elite Heavies, an
all-star crew put together with an eye to the world meet.
   And, besides, there was the lift that any competition
brings athletes for whom training is far more toil than play.
"When you work out as hard as we do, meets are like a
reward," says Porterfield, a congenial 24-year-old. "At this
point, whatever medals we get are gravy."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
