ID: 288	RANK: 86	SCORE: 4.804586
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910514-0110
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910514-0110.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Forget the Polyester;
   Blasters' Tourney
   Is Golf for Real Men
   ---
   But Don't Forget to Duck
   Because the Point Here
   Is Distance, Not Accuracy
   ----
   By Robert Johnson
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
05/14/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)
</IN>
<LP>
   LAKE BUENA VISTA, Fla. -- Shhh] We're here at the tee on a
lovely day in Florida. The golfers are taking a few practice
swings on the perfectly manicured grass. Wait a second]
What's that? It's a cute little bunny rabbit, hop-hop-hopping
across the fairway to munch a few blades of the shimmering
green lawn. And now the spectators and some of the players
are beginning a loud chant. Let's get closer and hear what
they're saying:
   "KILL THE RABBIT] KILL THE RABBIT]"
</LP>
<TEXT>
   This is not your ordinary golf tourney. It is the first
stop on the new national pro tour of the World Power Golf
Association -- golf's savage set. If regular golfers are most
comfortable in polyester pants, the guys who play here would
prefer to wear animal skins. They're called blasters, and
their decidedly un-genteel game is simply this: To hit the
ball as far as they possibly can.
   Gathered here are the mostly unknown but indisputable
giants of golf. These are incredible hulks like Joe Hajduch,
a former construction worker from Chicago who spends the
night between rounds sawing and welding his driver to make it
four inches longer. Others add up to an extra foot of steel
to their clubs for so much driving power that blasters are
banned from many courses out of fear for other golfers and
passing motorists.
   Some tote the Guinness Book of World Records in their golf
bags. "I'm right there on page 656," says Corey Morley, a
six-foot, four-inch, 250-pound construction boss from Las
Vegas. He picks up an extra $500 now and then showing his
skill smashing golf balls through phone books and plywood
fences.
   His record drive: 412 yards in Albuquerque, N.M., in 1989.
The longest drive ever recorded was 2,640 yards, or 1 1/2
miles, by Australian meteorologist Nils Lied, but that was on
ice in Antarctica, so it doesn't really count. But even Mr.
Morley's more modest drive is more than a football field
longer than the 280-yard average at Professional Golfers'
Association tournaments, and longer than the entire length of
many golf holes.
   Yet for now, the big time eludes these heavy hitters. When
a camera crew from ESPN, the sports network, appeared in Boca
Raton, Fla., last September at a contest, blasters thought
they had arrived. But ESPN didn't show the match for four
months -- at 12:30 a.m.
   Such slights hurt bangers such as Michael Weber, a
six-foot, five-inch, 260-pound mortician from Edwardsville,
Ill. "The media doesn't appreciate what it takes to hit a
ball further than Greg Norman or Jack Nicklaus," he says. So
the blasters remain obscure jocks, fighting for fame or at
least a little respect. Even their own mascot recently quit
in embarrassment. Tom Tuell, costumed as "The Golfing
Gorilla" at some long-distance events, says, "Their image is
unfair to gorillas."
   The PGA's big names are no kinder. Fuzzy Zoeller, a former
Masters champion, says, "Sure, some of them can hit 350 yards
with a driver, but give them a wedge {used for shorter shots
near the green} and they hit 350 with that, too. When
somebody tells me they hit that long, I ask, `How many
fairways do you use?' I just use one at a time."
   Most of the blasters are also avid amateur golfers chasing
par with some frustration. Few claim great skill at the
game's finer points. Mr. Hajduch recently flunked a test to
qualify for the PGA tour. When asked about his game's major
weakness, he replies, "Depends what day it is."
   There aren't many fine points to long-distance driving.
"This sport is almost barbaric: big arms, shoulders and
wrists hitting the ball as far as possible," says Rick Davis,
president of the World Power Golf Association, which has
organized the new tour: 24 tournaments from Orlando to Las
Vegas offering prizes totaling $510,000.
   The tour events typically last two days each, cost $300
per to enter and pay first prizes of $2,000. On each day,
players receive eight balls in each of two preliminary rounds
and six in the final round. Then they all play the same hole
over and over. The longest ball on the fairway in each round
wins, even if it lands in a sand trap or water hazard.
   Although penny-ante by PGA standards, the blasters' tour,
which began last week, is their best shot yet at fortune.
Television is so far shunning the tour. But that will change,
predicts William Brown, president of American Ball
Manufacturing Corp. "Cable networks are going to be desperate
for something to show besides that truckpulling trash," he
says.
   Mr. Brown has offered his company's ball as the official
one for the tour. It's called, appropriately, the Nitro 440.
When the tour's inaugural event begins here, Mr. Weber, who
wears a black shirt and is nicknamed "The Undertaker," hits
seven of his eight Nitros into and often over the tall pines
bordering the 92-yard-wide fairway. "It only takes one
in-bounds to qualify and even win," he says. Sure enough, his
lone ball on the fairway rolls to 314 yards, 2 feet and 6
inches-good enough for third place on the day and $800.
   One fair ball out of eight is a good percentage in this
group, says David Menary III, a 240-pounder who admits he
missed the entire fairway on 25 of his last 26 swings. But an
intimidating image may provide an edge, adds Mr. Menary, a
golf equipment salesman from San Rafael, Calif. Thus, he
decorates his face war-paint style with yellow sunscreen in
stripes and circles. "They shouldn't let him do that," says
competitor Frank Miller, a former tight end for the
University of Oregon Ducks who works out with 500-pound
barbells.
   "Certainly not," agrees Jerry James, a recent Mr.
California bodybuilding champion. There's too much
psychological harassment in the tournament, he complains. He
compares power golf to bodybuilding contests: "Both involve
massive mental preparation."
   There are definitely some intimidating sights: The
occasional crushing of steel club heads when striking ball or
turf, the violent snapping of shafts in mid-swing and the
mashing of new balls into distorted shapes. John Lindeman,
six-feet, four-inches tall and 245 pounds to start with,
swells as he recalls his drive into the forehead of an
official at a tournament in Saugatuck, Mich., last year. He
later presented the bruised and shaken victim with a
personalized cap featuring a red dot in front under the
inscription: "John Lindeman Was Here."
   In the tournament, Mr. Hajduch's longer club pays off. On
the second day, he improves his best drive to 331 yards,
placing sixth and winning $500. Mr. Hajduch, a six-foot,
two-inch, 210-pounder nicknamed "Godzilla" by his peers, is
sponsored by two tire dealers. His agent, Sam Kavathas Jr., a
Chicago attorney, foresees a national niche for his man:
"Everyone will love the longest driver around. Kids will seek
his autograph. He'll be the regular fan's idol."
   Maybe, but the 100 or so spectators seem unimpressed.
There are plenty of "oohs" and "aahs" at first, but people
tend to drift away. A waitress hired from Hooters restaurant
to keep score dozes off. "Too monotonous," says spectator
William Gatzke, a retiree from Cleveland. "Just bang, bang,
bang."
   By the end of the tournament, about 600 Nitro balls have
vanished into the nearby swamp. Frank Miller and his coach,
Mark Wawsczyk, win the two daily first prizes of $2,000 each,
with against-the-wind drives of 343 and 345 yards,
respectively. Tom Winrow, chairman of World Power, tells the
group in his awards speech, "I'm proud. You're animals."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
