ID: 288	RANK: 97	SCORE: 4.714099
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910429-0122
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910429-0122.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Nangaku, a Man Known for Gambles,
   Wins Permanent License in Las Vegas
   ----
   By Yumiko Ono and Pauline Yoshihashi
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
04/29/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A9G
</SO>
<MS>
CONGLOMERATES (CGL)
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
BIOGRAPHY (BIO)
CONGLOMERATES (CGL)
CASINOS AND GAMBLING (CNO)
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
LODGING, HOTELS, MOTELS, LODGES, CAMPGROUNDS (LOD)
</IN>
<NS>
BIOGRAPHY (BIO)
</NS>
<RE>
JAPAN (JA)
NEVADA (NV)
</RE>
<LP>
   From the glaring neon of Tokyo's electronics-store
district to the glittering casinos of Las Vegas, Masao
Nangaku has strived to get under the world's brightest
spotlights.
   The 72-year-old Mr. Nangaku, who owns Las Vegas's Dunes
Hotel &amp; Country Club, is known by U.S. and Japanese industry
observers as a "shopping-crazy" billionaire who has spent
piles of money on splashy, gimmicky projects, such as the
building of Japan's tallest golden Buddha or amassing his
collection of Salvador Dali jewelry.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "He likes to be No. 1 in everything," says Masahiro Sato,
senior managing director of Mr. Nangaku's Minami Group, a
Japanese conglomerate made up of a giant electrical-appliance
store chain, real-estate developments and numerous leisure
facilities.
   On Friday, Mr. Nangaku was granted a permanent casino
license by the Nevada Gaming Commission after an 11-hour
hearing -- one of the longest on record -- and after
generating one of the highest investigation fees, more than
$450,000. The license, granted on the condition that Mr.
Nangaku guarantee the casino's debts and provide a $3 million
letter of credit, allows the Japanese entrepreneur to make
much-needed renovations to the property, which he acquired in
1987. (Until now, Mr. Nangaku has been operating the casino
under a temporary license.)
   But after all that trouble, Mr. Nangaku is facing
difficulties managing his purchase. He said at the hearing
that he no longer is interested in running the Dunes himself
and that he is seeking partners who will manage and refurbish
the aging landmark while he acts as landlord. He said the
property is losing $500,000 a month. Casino executives and
bankers say remaking the Dunes into a first-class property
could cost more than $100 million.
   The once-acclaimed Dunes, which sits on prime real estate
opposite Caesar's Palace, has been so poorly kept under Mr.
Nangaku that a few hundred older guest rooms have been closed
pending renovation. In addition, Mr. Nangaku has been having
trouble retaining his advisers, and he is now struggling to
assemble his seventh U.S. management team.
   Mr. Nangaku declined to be interviewed for this article.
   Unlike his smooth-running empire in Japan, which posted
sales of 75 billion yen ($544.3 million) in 1990, Mr.
Nangaku's U.S. businesses are stumbling, according to some
casino executives and bankers in the U.S. familiar with the
Dunes. Recently, Mr. Nangaku has been delaying and canceling
some other development projects in America. Forbes magazine,
which estimated Mr. Nangaku to be worth $1.1 billion in 1989,
struck him off the list of the world's billionaires last
year, saying he had more debt than previously thought.
   Nevertheless, his spending sprees show him to be a man
willing to take a gamble, especially if he has a chance to
claim a "first" of some kind. He was the first Japanese to
buy a German castle and he flaunts Japan's biggest collection
of Western antique dolls, as well as the world's biggest
collection of Dali's sculptured gems, in museums near Tokyo.
   Dramatic effects are to Mr. Nangaku's liking as well.
Outside Minami Denkikan, Mr. Nangaku's huge discount
electrical-appliance store in Tokyo's Akihabara district, an
electronic Peter Pan dances to music on the hour.
   Then there is the 115-foot-tall statue of Buddha covered
in gold leaf that Mr. Nangaku built in 1987 near a scenic
lake in Japan's northern prefecture of Akita. Taller Buddhas
exist, but the Nangaku people say theirs is Japan's tallest
golden Buddha.
   Even generosity becomes a record-setting opportunity for
Mr. Nangaku. Four years ago, the Boulder Dam Boy Scouts in
Las Vegas approached Mr. Nangaku, who had just entered the
city's business scene, wondering if he might make a $5,000
donation. Mr. Nangaku asked them "what the largest
contribution had been," recalls Daniel Gasparo, scout
executive of the council. Upon disclosing that the amount was
$8,000, "the next week we received a check of $8,500," says
Mr. Gasparo.
   Born to a bookstore owner in the northern prefecture of
Niigata, Mr. Nangaku began his career by selling parts for
electrical appliances in Akihabara. After opening a discount
store there, he expanded his business rapidly into other
areas, and soon had more than 40 companies. He has built
Japan's biggest chain of bowling alleys, as well as ski
resorts, golf courses, a Japanese hotel chain, and
real-estate and development projects in Hawaii.
   "He has these original ideas, and his style is to think of
a whole range of things," says Mr. Sato, the Minami Group
official. The company logo is a bright red tree with five
spreading branches, showing Mr. Nangaku's ambitions to
diversify, Mr. Sato explains.
   Mr. Nangaku isn't the first Japanese to be granted a
permanent casino license in Nevada. Sukeaki Izumi, an Osaka
real-estate developer who operates the Ramada Hotel San Remo
Las Vegas Casino &amp; Resort, got one last year. But Mr. Izumi
says his business style differs from Mr. Nangaku's. "I'm not
doing it just as an investment," says Mr. Izumi. Unlike Mr.
Nangaku, who spends most of his time in Japan, "I live {in
Las Vegas} and operate the casino myself," Mr. Izumi says.
   Mr. Nangaku heard about the Las Vegas casino when he
decided to invest in a Hawaiian golf-course project five
years ago. Bidding against such opponents as Kirk Kerkorian
and Hilton Hotels Corp., he slapped down $157.7 million in
1987 for the Dunes hotel-casino and golf course, which was in
bankruptcy-court proceedings.
   Recently, his business partners have become less willing
to go along with his aggressive programs. Planners in San
Diego just canceled an agreement with Minami and a partner to
build a new courthouse complex downtown. After repeated
delays, Minami officials suggested that the county finish the
project and bill Minami later.
   That sparked concern in Las Vegas about Mr. Nangaku's
ambitious -- but much delayed -- plans to construct the
city's tallest office building. The 35-story structure, which
initially was expected to be completed in late 1991, is still
having its foundation poured. Mr. Nangaku told the city
council that he has put $35 million into the building and
that he is trying to raise funds to finish the $90-million
project.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
