ID: 281	RANK: 73	SCORE: 5.624947
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890329-0203 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-03-29-89 1422EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>a a AM-ThrowawayKids Adv03   03-29 1316</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Throwaway Kids, Adv 03,1345</SECOND>
<HEAD>$Adv03</HEAD>
<HEAD>For Release Mon AMs, April 3, and Thereafter</HEAD>
<HEAD>System Struggles to Answer Why Infants are Forsaken</HEAD>
<HEAD>An AP Extra</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By BARBARA METZLER</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>LOS ANGELES (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The baby boy was found at the bottom of a
motel trash bin. His face was swollen, his body still, strangled in
the first hours of life and dumped by three people who sped off in
a late-model Chevy Nova.
   ``It's such a waste of life,'' said Gardena police Detective
Bill Moreno, who is trying to trace the mother by a serial number
on the video-game box into which the infant was stuffed. ``Who
would do something like that?''
   The mother who abandons her child is often unwed, perhaps has
lost a job, is addicted to drugs or has mental or physical
problems, experts say. ``Baby blues'' _ postpartum depression _
also can play a part.
   ``I was isolated. I felt very alone. I didn't feel there was
anybody out there in the world that could possibly understand what
I was going through,'' explained Gayle Marcuerquiaga, who left a
newborn girl in a neighbor's trash.
   An estimated 20,860 children were abandoned in 1986 in the
United States, ranging from babies dumped in the trash to toddlers
left in foster homes and not reclaimed, according to the American
Humane Association.
   ``This is just the tip of the iceberg because nobody keeps any
hard figures,'' said AHA spokeswoman Katie Bond. It's hard to tell
if abandonment is increasing, she said, because it represents only
1 percent of child abuse and neglect _ and those reports have
climbed 212 percent since 1976.
   But Alex Morales of the Children's Bureau of Los Angeles, a
private, non-profit agency which places some forsaken babies in
foster homes, said, ``There is an increase and a change in the
flavor of what's behind it. It seems to be very related to
substance abuse problems that the adults are having.''
   ``It's an act of desperation,'' said Thomas Hicklin, assistant
professor of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at University of
Southern California.
   Mrs. Marcuerquiaga, 28, who is appealing her attempted murder
conviction and three-year prison term, calls her Sparks, Nev.,
family typically American. She was a young mother juggling work,
family, children, and financial ruin.
   She believes abandoning her baby last April culminated a series
of events that included her father's death and a back injury that
put her husband Jim out of work. Her job as a manicurist didn't
bring in enough to support their sons, ages 8{ and 4. The couple
separated for six months, and she got pregnant during a one-night
stand. Yet she refused to believe she was pregnant until the child
was born as she sat over the toilet, and even then the child was
not real.
   ``If it were a child to me, that would not have happened,'' she
said of the abandonment. The infant was put up for adoption because
Mrs. Marcuerquiaga did not want her to grow up with knowledge of
her first few hours. ``I felt if we brought her home, she would
have to live with this, and she deserves better.''
   In some cases, children have been left where there is a
possibility someone will rescue them, such as doorsteps, churches,
hospitals.
   A newborn boy was found in March 1988 outside a Mission Viejo
urgent care center with a bag of diapers, a $20 bill and a note
saying: ``Hi, my name is Brett. Please find me a good home.''
   Last November, a woman pinned a note to the yellow sleeper of
her infant son and left him on the steps of a Roman Catholic church
here. The note, in Spanish, said: ``I have no job. I have no money.
I am from El Salvador.''
   In January, a newborn boy dressed in a T-shirt and diaper was
left on the doorstep of a home in the upscale Los Angeles suburb of
Simi Valley. ``We were just thankful that we were home,'' said
Valerie Carrillo. ``It was a shock to open up and see something so
special on the doorstep.''
   The Rev. Alberto Villalobos, who answered a bell at the door of
St. John of God Catholic Church in Norwalk, Calif., in March 1988
to find a week-old boy, said the 22-year-old unwed mother was
driven by fear. ``Nobody knew she was pregnant.''
   The baby had been left with the note: ``Please take care of my
child. Give him a good home. I can't, because I don't have one.''
   ``From what I know, she was a young person down on her luck who
did what she thought was best for the child,'' sheriff's Sgt.
Douglas Dickinson said of the decision not to file charges. The
mother was not identified.
   An abandoned child becomes a ward of the county or, in some
areas, the state. While authorities search for the parents, the
child is put in a foster home, where it might live for up to 1{
years before it can legally be adopted.
   Psychologists and social workers say most abandoned children who
are permanently adopted into good homes will not suffer any special
problems. But Hicklin said ``some children think maybe they're to
blame or something's wrong with them _ they must not be right or
worthy of their mother's love.''
   Finding parents willing to love a throwaway child is not
difficult. Most waiting lines are years long for couples who want
to adopt an infant. Each case of abandonment lights up switchboards
nationwide with would-be parents.
   ``People are clamoring for babies,'' said Ray LaMotte,
spokeswoman for the Los Angeles County Department of Children's
Services. ``They can walk in and hand the baby to us. No one needs
to know their name.''
   All the newborns abandoned in the Los Angeles area in the last
year were unclaimed by parents. With older children, mothers
sometimes do return.
   A woman who abandoned her 3-month-old daughter at a Visalia
hospital in January, saying she couldn't pay her medical bills,
later returned for the baby and was offered help by county mental
health workers.
   One of the more publicized cases is that of Christina LoCasto,
who gave birth to a daughter, Alyssa, July 13 on a United Airlines
jet bound from New York to San Francisco. An airline worker later
found the child stuffed into a bathroom waste bin, suffering from
hypothermia and cuts on her back.
   Mrs. LoCasto, 24, of Staten Island, N.Y., pleaded innocent in
July to one felony count of child endangerment. Custody of the
child has been given to her paternal grandparents, and Mrs. LoCasto
and her husband Louis, who apparently was unaware of the pregnancy,
visit six hours weekly under supervision.
   Mrs. LoCasto is in therapy while awaiting an April 13
preliminary hearing, said her attorney, Richard Bennett. If she
changes her plea to guilty, she will face no more than a year in
county jail.
   ``She doesn't want to go to jail,'' said Assistant District
Attorney Steve Wagstaff. ``But we're not going to agree to that
until we find the answer to the question: Why did she do this?''
   Sharon Elliott survived an undetermined amount of time before
being found Christmas Eve 1931 along an Arizona desert highway by a
couple changing a flat tire. Tucked inside a black pasteboard
hatbox, the tiny red-haired waif drew nationwide attention and
became known as the ``hatbox baby.''
   Ms. Elliott, 57, theorizes she was born to an unwed woman
fearful of a disapproving society, or perhaps the couple who found
her had known the mother and made up the story of finding the child
in the desert.
   She is happy to have been adopted, but there is a hard edge in
her voice when she considers throwaway kids. ``There's so many
places you can take a child. Don't just dump them like a load of
trash.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Mon AMs, April 3</NOTE>
</DOC>
