ID: 211	RANK: 92	SCORE: 22.002829

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-11072 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drlat052_q_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-LAT-94-052 </AU>
Document Type:Daily Report 
<DATE1>  16 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Paraguay </F>
<H3> <TI>   Sanchez Interviewed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  PY1603210894 Asuncion Cerro Cora Sistema Nacional de 
Television Network in Spanish 0300 GMT 16 Mar 94 </F>

<F P=103> PY1603210894 </F>
<F P=104>  Asuncion Cerro Cora Sistema Nacional de 
Television Network </F>



<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Bolivian President Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada </F>
by Stella Ruffinelli; from the "Coordinates" program; place not 
given -- live] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] [Ruffinelli] You have said that 
consensus represents a basic element for strengthening our 
democratic processes. Before your election, you had to achieve 
a mini-consensus to guarantee your second attempt to become 
president. How do you view this now you are president? How can 
a consensus be achieved? 
  [Sanchez] Well, political dynamics, especially as we see it 
in Europe, involves opposition politics, that is, the 
opposition, the ruling party, and all that. 
  Nevertheless, there comes a time when a consensus must be 
reached, and many criticized me over this when I was in the 
opposition. 
  Through fraud and the fact that the second placed party 
voted 
for those placed third, if a majority vote is not achieved in 
Bolivia, you have to resort to Congress. It is almost 
impossible to achieve an absolute majority. 
  [Ruffinelli] You were elected by Congress. 
  [Sanchez] Yes, even though my election, my victory, was 
overwhelming -- I received 15 percent more than the second 
placed candidate. In a proportional representation vote system, 
it is impossible to receive more than 50 percent of the votes. 
Yet the Bolivian Constitution states that if you do not receive 
an absolute majority of the votes, you have to resort to 
Congress. 
  [Ruffinelli] Do you have the support of two thirds of the 
Senate? 
  [Sanchez] Yes. 
  [Ruffinelli] And a good portion or a significant portion of 
the Chamber of Deputies? 
  [Sanchez] We have an absolute majority in the Chamber of 
Deputies. A consensus is required when you draft significant 
measures to really transform society. Privatizations, the 
people's participation program, and education reform are 
revolutionary measures that the people eagerly want, but many 
people, especially the teachers, oppose it. When you design 
significant measures to transform society, a consensus is 
required. This does not mean it must be unanimous, but a 
consensus is essential because it is not enough to have a 
majority in Congress. All parties must decide that the time to 
reach an agreement has come. We will never agree on every 
measure because a government has to rule. These are significant 
measures which involve the changes and transformations required 
by current times -- because these are times of change -- and we 
must try to achieve a consensus. 
  [Ruffinelli] Emphasis has also been placed on the corruption 
issue and how to handle it. You have drug trafficking and other 
fairly difficult measures to solve. How are you handling the 
corruption issue? 
  [Sanchez] We believe the privatizations program will help to 
solve the corruption problem. Under a pluralist democratic 
process, we believe it is incompatible for the state to manage 
economic activities. If you manage state-owned enterprises 
well, you may not lose votes because you will be firing people 
and running the operation very efficiently. If you manage them 
poorly, if you start hiring your fellow party members, the 
enterprise will perform poorly and the services will be lousy. 
This is also bad. 
  We believe it is necessary to radically decentralize our 
country, to remove the state from economic activities, 
transferring them the private area. We must do it through 
privatizations in which the enterprises are not sold to foreign 
capital or directly to private capital, but in which the people 
themselves participate. 
  Second, with this participation of the people, certain roles 
will be transferred to the municipal governments and others to 
rural communities and urban neighborhoods. Like this we believe 
we will achieve the dynamics needed to exercise control. When 
the people control, there is no corruption. In a neighborhood 
or a small town, the people know exactly what is being done and 
who is doing it. We believe this mechanism of decentralization, 
through the people's participation in privatizations, will allow 
them to control. This is not merely a moral or personal 
problem, it is an institutional problem. 
  When there is excessive centralization, it is very difficult 
to control, regardless of the government's good intentions and 
efforts. 
  [Ruffinelli] I want to return to the trafficking issue, 
because it also is somewhat linked to what is happening here. 
Concerning the coca issue, you are, let's say, free to grow it, 
but not to process it. But the United States wants it 
eradicated. 
  [Sanchez] There are regions in Bolivia where coca was being 
grown before the arrival of the Spaniards. This coca, however, 
is very special. It is grown in high-altitude regions. This 
coca requires hard work. It is carefully grown, harvested, and 
dried. 
  There are other new regions where another type of coca is 
grown, a coca that is unsuitable for the traditional purpose of 
chewing or in typical Bolivian rites. This coca is used by 
traffickers. 
  We are now trying to control it and convince Bolivians to 
voluntarily replace coca with alternative development crops. It 
also involves paying them for each hectare they eradicate. It 
is not easy because it is not easy to find a crop that will 
really replace coca production. Nevertheless, we must wage this 
war because, thank God, the narco-guerrillas and drug cartels 
have not yet reached Bolivia. We are very scared because we had 
a military government that was totally at the service of drug 
trafficking. 
  [Ruffinelli] [Former Bolivian President Luis] Garcia Meza's 
detention in Brazil has probably created a little problem for 
your government. Even though it is a relief, it also represents 
a little problem. In Brazil, he said he did not govern alone. 
Coming from a former president, this is politically 
significant. What does this mean to you? 
  [Sanchez] We believe corruption cannot be concealed and, if 
he has something to say, I would be pleased to hear it. It is 
also necessary to be very careful about reports from a man 
sentenced by the Supreme Court to 30 years in prison, and who 
has been at large. 
  [Ruffinelli] But there still are pockets of authoritarianism 
and corruption that have not been removed from the Bolivian 
society. 
  [Sanchez] Obviously. There are many, but I want to tell you 
that my party, the Nationalist Revolutionary Movement, reached 
the government in 1985, through our leader and founder Victor 
Paz Estenssoro. We inherited a 23,400-percent hyperinflation ... 
  [Ruffinelli, interrupting] Was it your program or was it a 
program ...? 
  [Sanchez] Well now, a program ... [pauses] He transferred me 
from the Senate presidency to the Planning and Coordination 
Ministry, and we were able to curtail hyperinflation. 
  I have become president and there is hyper-corruption. I 
will not be able to totally wipe out corruption, because it has 
been imbued in humanity since Eve gave Adam an apple. This will 
not ... [pauses] We do not want hyper-corruption. We want 
single-digit corruption, controllable corruption in which 
coexistence is possible. 
  [Ruffinelli] You do not want it to become a standard. 
  [Sanchez] Correct. As I have just said, we do not want 
hyper-corruption. We do not want such serious corruption. Yet, 
it is not easy. As with hyperinflation and inflation, 
corruption must be reduced with very radical, clear, and 
unrelenting measures. By the time I leave the government, I 
hope to leave a country in which corruption has not entirely 
been wiped out, but where it has been reduced to a level that 
can be managed and controlled by the courts and society. 
  [Ruffinelli] President Sanchez de Lozada, there is a little 
point of common interest between our countries, that is, the 
issue of stolen cars and the concern over their legalization in 
your country. There was even one group who wanted to write a 
little letter on this issue and deliver it to you. Can you tell 
our audience, which is so interested in this issue, about this? 
  [Sanchez] I believe we will solve this point because we want 
all urban and rural municipal governments to responsibly 
participate in this municipalization program. When they see 
stolen vehicles, we want the municipal governments, not just the 
police and the courts ... [pauses] We will launch a campaign, 
with the people's assistance, because it is very harmful to 
Paraguay and is not benefiting us. We would like to resolve 
this point, and we are here to discuss ways to resolve this 
problem because it irritates, damages, and invalidates our 
efforts. [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
