ID: 290	RANK: 12	SCORE: 12.834720
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880913-0019 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-13-88 0010EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-Hurricane-Gilbert 4thLd-Writethru   09-13 1177</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Hurricane-Gilbert, 4th Ld-Writethru,a0786,1214</SECOND>
<HEAD>URGENT</HEAD>
<HEAD>Hurricane Slams Jamaica; 30 Reported Dead</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: LEADS with 29 grafs to CORRECT attribution on report of 30
deaths and UPDATE with amateur radio reports of more damage in
Jamaica and power outages in Haiti, Dominican Republic; midnight
EDT location; PICKS up 19th graf pvs: Cayman Island...</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By LLOYD WILLIAMS</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>KINGSTON, Jamaica (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Hurricane Gilbert slammed into Jamaica
on Monday with torrential rains and 115 mph winds, ripping the
roofs off buildings and spawning flash floods and mudslides. One
report said 30 people were killed.
   Doren Miller, general manager of Radio Cayman, told The
Associated Press that a lawyer in Jamaica called the radio station
and said at least 30 people had died across Jamaica as the brunt of
the storm lashed the Caribbean island Monday afternoon.
   Miller said his station's correspondent in Jamaica reported that
hundreds of families had fled their homes because of rising
floodwaters.
   The hurricane pounded Kingston on the southwest coast and
Montego Bay and Ocho Rios on the north.
   In Cuba, 115,000 people were evacuated from their homes as a
precaution in five eastern provinces when Gilbert's winds brushed
the island, said Prensa Latina, the government news agency.
   Authorities in Kingston said looters stole mattresses from a
hospital, the roof was torn off a home for physically handicapped
people and a firefighter was hurt when heavy winds blew him off his
truck.
   Bob Sheets, director of National Hurricane Center, in Coral
Gables, Fla., said his office was in touch with a meteorological
office in Kingston as the eye of the storm passed over city. On the
leading edge of hurricane, winds gusted to 140, he said.
   ``Then on the trailing edge of the eye wall, there were winds
just as strong and they said they couldn't see anything outside
their windows,'' Sheets said. ``It was quite a frightening
experience for them.''
   At midnight EDT, Gilbert was centered near latitude 18.5 north,
longitude 79.5 west, or 135 miles east-southeast of Grand Cayman,
the National Hurricane Center reported.
   ``The hurricane is moving toward the west near 17 mph,'' the
center said in a statement. ``This motion will bring the center of
the hurricane over or near Grand Cayman in the early morning hours
Tuesday.''
   The Cayman Islands, south of Cuba, are flat and have few
sheltered areas, the center said.
   In Kingston, Jamaica's capital with 750,000 people, the initial
30-minute shock of the storm let up as the hurricane's eye moved
across the city. Skies brightened, winds died and people waited for
an hour before the second blow arrived.
   Amateur radio operators in the United States said they received
reports of buildings collapsing and severe power outages across
Jamaica.
   Bill Carpenter of Shelby County, Ala., said he monitored a
report from a radio operator staying at the Wyndham Hotel seven
miles east of Montego Bay ``and the building was shaking badly by
his description.''
   ``They've been without power in Jamaica since last night for the
most part and telephone service has been real, real spotty,''
Carpenter said.
   Another ham radio operator went off the air after reporting
storm damage at his house near Montego Bay, Carpenter said.
   ``When he got back on the air, he said most of his house had
disappeared,'' Carpenter said. ``It's been a heart-rending
listening to them all day.''
   Amateur radio operator Martin P. Maragni of Coconut Creek, Fla.,
said he also received transmissions indicating widespread and heavy
damage in Montego Bay.
   ``They've had the airport with severe damage,'' Maragni said in
a telephone interview Monday night. ``They had to evacuate the
Montego Bay meteorology center approximately about 8 o'clock this
evening (EDT), so I've been unable to get any reports out of
there.''
   Bob Ebaugh, a National Hurricane Center forecaster, said some
hangar roofs blew off at the international airport in Kingston and
some runway aircraft were damaged. All flights were canceled on the
island.
   Amateur operator Rafael Estevez in Hialeah, Fla., said he has
been speaking with other radio operators in the Dominican Republic,
Haiti, Cuba and Jamaica since Monday morning.
   Estevez also said he heard a report from Kingston saying the top
of a city hospital was blown off and the main television station on
the island was not broadcasting.
   ``People were telling me they saw trees and stuff flying
around,'' said Estevez. ``But so far I haven't heard of anyone
being killed.''
   He said reports from the Dominican Republic and Haiti indicate
widespread blackouts and some damage along coastal areas from high
waves.
   Heaviest damage reports were in Jamaica, however.
   ``The eye of the storm moved right lengthwise down the island,''
Sheets said at 5 p.m. EDT. ``They're getting five to 10 inches of
rain (in Jamaica), and so the mudslides, flash floods and all of
that will be continuing for the next six to eight hours.''
   Sheets said the Cayman Islands has a dearth of sheltered areas.
``They're very flat, there's not a lot of places people can go to
get refuge,'' he
   Miller said at 9 p.m. EDT that Little Cayman had been evacuated,
as well as lower-lying areas of Grand Cayman.
   ``Everyone is waiting with bated breath,'' Miller told The
Associated Press in Puerto Rico in a telephone interview. ``It is
calm here at the moment but we are expecting to take the brunt of
it.''
   Cayman Island airlines was running flights every two hours to
Miami to evacuate as many people as possible before the hurricane
hit, said airline spokesman Claude Chisolm.
   Gilbert reached Jamaica after skirting southern Puerto Rico,
Haiti and the Dominican Republic. Hurricane warnings were issued
Monday for the south coast of Cuba east of Camaguey, the Cayman
Islands, and Haiti, while warnings were discontinued for the
Dominican Republic.
   In Kingston, a policeman suffered a broken leg when a fence fell
on him, another resident was injured when a wall collapsed and a
firefighter answering an emergency call was hurt when the wind blew
him off the fire truck, the disaster office reported.
   The Mona Rehabilitation Center for paraplegics reported its roof
had been blown off.
   Police reported people were stealing mattresses from the
University Hospital and there was scattered looting in the Kingston
suburbs of Westchester, Portmore and St. Catherine.
   There was an unconfirmed report that prisoners had escaped from
Kingston's Gun Prison.
   Jamaica House, the office of Prime Minister Edward Seaga, was
the crisis center. Seaga said in a radio interview that he would
seek international aid.
   Most of Jamaica's 2.3 million people stayed home and boarded up
their windows.
   Prensa Latina, monitored in Mexico City, said 40 mph winds from
the hurricane prompted authorities to evacuate more than 115,000
people from the eastern provinces of Tunas, Guantanamo, Santiago de
Cuba, Granma and Holguin.
   The region is about 90 miles north of Jamaica at its closest
point. More than 80,000 head of livestock in that area also were
moved to safer ground, the agency said.
   In Washington, the Navy reported its bases at Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba, and Roosevelt Roads, Puerto Rico, had taken precautions but
appeared safe.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
