ID: 290	RANK: 20	SCORE: 9.412077
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890322-0256 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-03-22-89 2037EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-Cartel-Bahamas 1stLd-Writethru a0760 03-22 1004</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Cartel-Bahamas, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0760,1028</SECOND>
<HEAD>US Indicts Colombia Drug Cartel, Bahamian Connection</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: SUBS grafs 5-6, `The indictment ..., to CORRECT spelling of
Ochoa, sted Ocho, and to reflect that the Ochoas are brothers; INSERTS
1 graf after 17th graf, `The Bahamian..., to UPDATE with NBC report.</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By RON WORD</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>JACKSONVILLE, Fla. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Leaders of Colombia's Medellin Cartel
were indicted Wednesday on charges of cocaine trafficking and
masterminding the slayings of the Colombian justice minister and a
U.S. drug informant.
   The sweeping indictment alleges that both Nicaragua and the
Bahamas were used as way stations for $1 billion in drug imports to
the United States. Among those charged is a close associate of
Bahamian Prime Minister Lynden Pindling.
   The case ``once again shows that the United States is not going
to let up our efforts to catch these individuals who are supplying
drugs to the United States,'' U.S. Attorney Robert W. Genzman said.
``We feel that the pressure has got to be kept on regardless of how
many indictments come out in the United States against members of
the cartel.''
   In all, 30 people were charged in the ``second wave'' of
indictments resulting from last May's conviction of Carlos Lehder
Rivas, one of the leaders of the cartel, which officials say is
responsible for up to 80 percent of the cocaine imported into the
United States.
   The indictment accuses cartel leader Pablo Escobar Gaviria of
organizing the assassination of Colombian Justice Minister Rodrigo
Lara Bonilla on April 29, 1984, and says Escobar and Fabio Ochoa
Vasquez directed the Feb. 19, 1986, slaying of former Drug
Enforcement Administration informant Barry Seal.
   Other major figures indicted included cartel kingpins Jose
Gonzalo Rodriguez Gacha, Ochoa's brother Jorge Ochoa Vasquez, and
Gonzalo Mejia.
   None of the cartel members has been taken into custody, although
most have already been indicted in Miami. They are believed to be in
Colombia, officials said.
   Genzman noted that it took the government six years to get Lehder
to the United States. ``I am confident that in some point in time we
will be able to obtain custody of the others,'' he said.
   Also indicted was Jack Carlton Reed, who was Lehder's
co-defendant at last year's trial.
   Lehder and Reed were convicted here last May 19 of conspiring to
import cocaine. Lehder _ an unindicted co-conspirator in the new
indictment _ is serving a life sentence and Reed is serving a
15-year term.
   Genzman said the indictment covers a 15-year period from 1974 to
the present, and involves the importation of 44,000 pounds of
cocaine worth $1 billion.
   ``The indictment contains 205 snapshots of a long-term drug
conspiracy in action,'' Genzman said.
   ``The indictment traces Lehder's development into a primary
overseas transporter of cocaine for other Medellin Cartel members,
and his continued assocation with these members after they developed
their own tranportation operations,'' Genzman said.
   The indictment accuses Escobar, Rodriguez, Mejia, Reed and the
two Ochoas of running a continuing criminal enterprise _ punishable
by a maximum life sentence _ and conspiracy to import drugs.
   The indictment alleges that after the slaying of Bonilla in
Colombia the top cartel leaders fled Colombia, and eventually
traveled to Nicaragua. Lehder and others paid Nicaraguan officials
to allow them to stay in that country and use it as a base to
smuggle cocaine to the United States, the indictment says.
   They allegedly stored 1,400 kilograms of cocaine at Los Brasiles
Air Force Base in Nicaragua before flying it into the United States.
   The Bahamian charged in the indictment, Everette Bannister of
Nassau, is charged with receiving bribes to allow the cartel to use
the islands just off Florida's shores as a way station for drug
shipments.
   NBC News, citing unidentified federal law enforcement officials,
reported that an early draft of the indictment said Bannister shared
the alleged payoffs with Pindling and other Bahamian officials.
Pindling's name was dropped from the indictment after it was
reviewed by the Justice and State Departments in Washington, NBC
said. The network did not say whether the early draft named Pindling
as a defendant.
   Bannister's telephone in Nassau was busy Wednesday and he could
not be reached for comment. Bill Kalis, a spokesman for Pindling's
office, said the government of the Bahamas would have no comment on
the indictment.
   Genzman said the United States has an extradition treaty with the
Bahamas, and would seek custody of Bannister. He refused to answer
questions about continuing allegations that Pindling himself was
involved in the drug operation.
   Gorman Bannister, Everette Bannister's son, is a protected
federal witness who testified in Lehder's 1988 trial.
   In the trial, Bannister characterized his father, chairman of
Bahamas World Airlines and a consultant to Resorts International, as
an influence peddler who took protection payoffs from drug smugglers
and regularly supplied Pindling with money.
   In 1987, the younger Bannister, wearing a hood, testified before
a U.S. Senate subcommittee about drug-related corruption in the
Bahamas.
   Bannister testified in Lehder's trial that his father took money
from Lehder and former Jacksonville marijuana and cocaine smuggler
Edward Hayes Ward to help protect them from law enforcement efforts.
   ``My father said he made a deal with Carlos to get $100,000 a
month to make Norman's Cay operational,'' Bannister testified in
February 1988, referring to Lehder's island transshipment point in
the Bahamas, about 40 miles southeast of Nassau.
   Several witnesses in the Lehder trial testified that they had
made payoffs to high Bahamian officials, including Pindling, who has
denied the allegations.
   In 1984, the Royal Bahamian Commission cleared Pindling of any
wrongdoing concerning allegations that he took payoffs from drug
smugglers. Pindling, first elected in 1967, was re-elected in 1987.
   Aside from Reed, who was already in prison, only five of those
indicted Wednesday were immediately arrested, authorities said. They
were identified as Yemel Nacel of New York City, who is Lehder's
former wife; Barry Kane, a Hyannis, Mass., attorney; Jeffrey Edward
Lewis of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.; Diane Helen Thornhill of Southern
California; and Donald Gary Podesto of San Rafael, Calif.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
