ID: 290	RANK: 50	SCORE: 6.519792
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880914-0212 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-14-88 2329EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a AM-Gilbert-JamaicanRelief 1stLd-Writethru a0839 09-14 0689</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Gilbert-Jamaican Relief, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0839,0703</SECOND>
<HEAD>Jamaicans Prepare Relief, Expect Worst From Gilbert</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: SUBS 14th graf, `The Agency ... with 2 grafs to UPDATE with
details of USAID, other Jamaican aid; picks up 15th graf: ``Jamaica
is ...</NOTE>
<HEAD>With AM-Hurricane Gilbert, Bjt</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Jamaican-Americans rallied quickly to their hurricane-devastated
homeland's aid, and hundreds of doctors and nurses and tons of
supplies Wednesday waited for clearance to fly to the Caribbean
nation.
   In the New York area, home to the nation's largest Jamaican
community, a Brooklyn health clinic began accepting food, clothing
and bedding for shipment to Jamaica, and several local Caribbean
groups set up relief funds.
   Dozens of the 50,000 to 60,000 Jamaicans living in South Florida
flocked to the Jamaican Consulate in Miami, waiting nervously for
word of conditions back home. Others staffed makeshift relief
supply centers, gathering tons of food, medicine, clothing, and
building materials.
   Air Jamaica as well as U.S. carriers Midway Airlines and Eastern
Airlines promised to fly supplies to Jamaica for free. But word of
the wreckage Hurricane Gilbert left in its aftermath made islanders
doubt any relief effort would bring their country back.
   ``Kingston was beautiful. Now they can't even recognize it,''
said Vincent Clive Kirkland, waiting for the chance to bring food
and medicine to his family in St. Mary, Jamaica.
   ``I almost want to laugh,'' Kirkland said. ``It's something you
can't believe but you just have to accept it. It don't make sense
to cry.''
   Prime Minister Edward Seaga told his nation Gilbert was the
island's worst natural disaster ever.
   The Jamaican community of South Florida, which puts on reggae
music festivals and has its own clubs and radio shows, often is
overshadowed by larger Latin American communities here. But the
community is closely knit and maintains strong interest in its
homeland, Evans said.
   ``They did not wait for the storm to hit before they began
organizing themselves and when they met with consul general they
already had things under way. The response has been marvelous. It's
always so where our country is concerned,'' said Lancelot Evans,
the consulate's information officer.
   Evans added that the Cuban community also is contributing to the
relief effort, and Spanish-language radio stations broadcast
appeals for help.
   A Telex from the Jamaican government said blankets, sheets,
cots, tents, medical supplies, water, and nonperishable items are
badly needed.
   Joanne Gonzalez, a spokeswoman in Fort Lauderdale for the
Jamaican United Relief Assocation, said hundreds of doctors and
nurses were ready to travel to Jamaica as soon as the government
requested medical assistance.
   Church World Service, the relief division of the National
Council of Churches, said in a statement that it had already
provided $55,000, and was asking member churches to raise an
additional $100,000.
   The Agency for International Development said the federal
government was sending relief supplies totaling $396,000 by
military aircraft from Panama. The supplies include 360 rolls of
plastic sheeting, 200 tents, 3,966 water jugs, 18 water tanks, 10
chain saw kits and 9,600 cotton blankets.
   Partners of the Americas, a group of 60 countries including the
United States and nations in Latin America and the Caribbean
announced it had set up a relief fund to help the people of Jamaica
and Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula.
   ``Jamaica is not like America. People do not have insurance. It
will all be their expense,'' Kirkland said. ``If there's any help
the United States can give, we're going to need it.''
   The Caribbean Action Lobby, an organization encompassing
numerous groups of Caribbean immigrants, began drawing up plans for
a ``major fund-raising event'' _ as yet unspecified, said its New
York regional president, Dr. Waldaba Stewart.
   A hurricane relief task force from New York's Jamaican
community, estimated at 300,000 to 600,000 people and concentrated
in Brooklyn, intends to meet Friday with Gov. Mario Cuomo and
Saturday with members of the Congressional Black Caucus, Stewart
said.
   Later, he said, members of the task force intend to go to
Jamaica ``to make sure that the relief is properly distributed ...
and to make sure it is not used for the political advantage of one
side or the other.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
