ID: 259	RANK: 24	SCORE: 11.004173
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891123-0014 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-11-23-89 0023EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-SpaceShuttle 8thLd-Writethru a0843 11-23 1030</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Space Shuttle, 8th Ld-Writethru, a0843,1058</SECOND>
<HEAD>Discovery Blasts Into Orbit In Spectacular Nighttime Liftoff</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: SUBS 3rd graf to CLARIFY that secret cargo reportedly is a satellite.</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By HARRY F. ROSENTHAL</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Space shuttle Discovery blasted off
on a secret military mission Wednesday night, staging a brilliant
Thanksgiving-eve fireworks show as it rode twin 700-foot geysers of
fire into orbit.
   ``We are delighted with the results,'' said Forrest McCartney,
director of the Kennedy Space Center. ``It's something that
Americans can be proud and thankful for on Thanksgiving.''
   As the shuttle completed its second circuit around Earth,
Mission Control gave a two-sentence status report:
   ``The crew of Discovery has been given a go for orbit
operations; the orbiter and crew are doing well,'' said spokeswoman
Billie Deason. It meant the astronauts had been given permission to
launch their secret cargo, reportedly a spy satellite to be
released in the 10th hour of flight.
   The shuttle lifted almost straight up and headed out over the
Atlantic Ocean, its booster rocket fire carving two trails in the
sky. The light could be seen in Miami, 200 miles to the south.
   ``It was 100 times brighter than a star,'' said Glenna Milberg,
a television reporter in Miami.
   Nothing was heard over the public communications channel from
Col. Frederick D. Gregory, the shuttle commander. NASA provided
launch commentary until Discovery reached orbit nine minutes after
launch and then the system went silent.
   ``Liftoff of space shuttle Discovery for its Thanksgiving Day
flight,'' said Launch Control's George Diller. Indeed, the
astronauts were carrying five meals of turkey and gravy in their
food locker.
   Night turned into day over the central Florida coast as
Discovery flashed to life with a light twice as brilliant as the
sun. The sky was cloudless, the sight dazzling.
   Liftoff occurred at 7:23 p.m. after a blacked-out countdown made
public just minutes before launch.
   At two minutes after liftoff, the spent booster rockets fell
off; ships were waiting below to recover them.
   The shuttle still was visible at the launch center as a very
bright star in the sky even when it was more than 650 miles away
and traveling about 6,800 mph.
   As the 100-ton spacecraft rocketed away, the ground a the space
center shook and windows rattled. Clouds of steam billowed out of
the flame trenches below the shuttle as 100,000 gallons of water a
minute poured out to douse the fire.
   Discovery's mission is to put a spy satellite into orbit, but
the Air Force gave no details. NASA was under instructions to say
nothing further about the mission, except to give advance landing
notice.
   The exact schedule, like everything else about this 32nd shuttle
mission, was secret.
   This was the third night launch in the shuttle program, and only
the fourth in 28 years of manned space flight. Discovery's
timetable was dictated by the cargo and its mission.
   Sources said the 2{-ton, $300 million satellite cradled in
Discovery's cargo bay is capable of listening in on military and
diplomatic communications _ voice and telemetry _ broadcast from
Soviet military installations. The satellite's duty post is to be
22,300 miles over the equator, with line-of-sight to the Soviet
Union, China, the Middle East, Africa and all of Europe.
   A similar satellite was released on a shuttle flight in 1985.
   On the last launch after dark, the fiery trail of the shuttle's
two solid rocket boosters could be seen along a 700-mile strip from
Charleston, S.C., to Key West, Fla., and in the Bahamas.
   Police in nearby Titusville prepared for about 50,000 people to
gather at prime viewing sites _ only a fraction of the crowds that
lined the roads for the early launches, but more than for other
liftoffs in recent months.
   The flight was the fifth turned over entirely to the Defense
Department.
   It is also only the third launch after dark, a timetable
dictated by the cargo and its mission.
   In late morning, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
crews turned valves to send 528,000 gallons of supercold liquid
hydrogen and liquid oxygen surging into Discovery's propellant
tank, a three-hour procedure during which the launch pad area is
cleared of people.
   When that was completed, about 1 p.m., the countdown entered a
two-hour planned hold and an inspection team went to the pad to
check for ice buildup on the fuel tank. Chunks of ice breaking away
during launch could damage the orbiter's fragile surface.
   The astronaut crew of four men and one woman slept past noon to
adjust to the mission schedule. Their flight is expected to last
four days, but NASA won't announce the landing at Edwards Air Force
Base in California until 24 hours before it's due to happen.
   Sources said the 2{-ton, $300 million satellite cradled in
Discovery's cargo bay is capable of listening in on military and
diplomatic communications _ voice and telemetry _ broadcast from
Soviet military installations. The satellite's duty post is to be
22,300 miles over the equator, with line-of-sight to the Soviet
Union, China, the Middle East, Africa and all of Europe.
   A similar satellite was released on a shuttle flight in 1985.
   Gregory, an Air Force Academy graduate, will be the first black
astronaut to command a shuttle mission. He was pilot of the shuttle
Challenger on a flight in 1985.
   Discovery's pilot is Air Force Col. John E. Blaha, making his
second flight this year. He is a replacement for astronaut S. David
Griggs, who was killed last June while practicing stunt flying for
an air show.
   The others are mission specialists F. Story Musgrave, Navy Capt.
Manley ``Sonny'' Carter Jr. and Kathryn C. Thornton.
   Military officials say the secrecy is necessary to make it more
difficult for Soviet reconnaissance satellites and a spy ship off
Cape Canaveral to track the shuttle.
   Critics argue that Soviet intelligence agents undoubtedly
already know a great deal about the mission and that once Discovery
is in orbit, they will be able to track it precisely and know what
is doing.
   The menu for the mission includes ``thermostabilized'' turkey
and gravy, which means the food has enough preservatives to be
carried without refrigeration.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
