ID: 259	RANK: 75	SCORE: 9.689961
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880928-0228 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-28-88 2304EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-SpaceShuttle 4thLd-Writethru a0807 09-28 1093</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Space Shuttle, 4th Ld-Writethru, a0807,990</SECOND>
<NOTE>Eds: Inserts 2 grafs after 2nd with latest weather forecast for
launch. Fueling begins about 1:40 a.m. EDT.</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By HARRY F. ROSENTHAL</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Discovery's five astronauts, anxious
to break an agonizing 32-month drought in American spaceflight,
were ``elated to be headed for space'' Wednesday as the overnight
countdown began for a Thursday midmorning launch.
   NASA officials were admittedly nervous, but confident. ``The
space shuttle is ready to fly,'' said shuttle administrator Richard
Truly, adding, ``Even the weather is looking good.''
   Late Wednesday night, Air Force weather spokesman Mike Beeman
estimated there was a 90 percent chance the weather would permit a
launch Thursday. But he said winds that were currently 10 knots out
of the north were expected to shift to east-northeast by morning,
which would blow across the landing runway. Launch criteria allows
no more than a 12-knot crosswind, in case the orbiter must return
for an emergency landing.
   ``We're real concerned about what those winds are going to do
tomorrow morning,'' Beeman said. ``It's something we're watching
real, real closely.''
   The ship, obscured for weeks behind a giant scaffold, stood in
full view after NASA retracted the structure. The process took
place hours early, so ``workers will have a head start'' on final
countdown procedures. The count resumed at midevening Wednesday
after a daylong, scheduled hold.
   Fueling was to begin at about 1:40 a.m. EDT, with the craft
bathed in brilliant spotlights.
   ``This has been a long 2{ years,'' Truly said of the difficult
period since the Challenger accident in 1986. Liftoff was scheduled
for 9:59 a.m. EDT, with a 2{-hour window to take care of weather or
technical delays.
   After launch officials gave preliminary go-ahead for overnight
fueling of Discovery, Truly passed the news to Frederick H. Hauck,
the shuttle commander. ``The best way to describe him is elated to
be headed for space,'' Truly told reporters.
   The crew studied updated flight plans and received weather
briefings before an early bedtime.
   Around the Kennedy Space Center area, excitement was mounting.
Campers and recreation vehicles found good viewing places across
the Indian River. Souvenir sellers set up shop. NASA's Visitor's
Center sold out of the commemorative envelopes that feature the
crew patch.
   NASA's deputy administrator Dale Myers exulted that ``we have
been working 2{ years to put the shuttle back in business and
tomorrow is the day we plan to do that.'' He said ``it's really the
beginning of the future for our space program.''
   Arnold Aldrich, director of the shuttle program said,
jubilantly, ``tomorrow the shuttle should return to its proper
place in the sky and launch us into a new era.''
   Hauck and his four-man crew had an easy day, relaxing at the
crew quarters seven miles from launch pad 39B. Their wives were
there, too.
   They were to be awakened at 5 a.m., for breakfast, a last-minute
weather briefing, and time to get into their cumbersome flight
suits.
   The four-day Discovery mission will be the first shuttle flight
since Challenger exploded in a fireball 73 seconds after liftoff
from the same launch pad on Jan. 28, 1986. The accident ceded
manned space to the Soviet Union, which has put 16 cosmonauts into
orbit since then, aboard six flights.
   Asked what would be going through his mind as the count ticks
down, the center's deputy director, Tom Utsman, said, ``I'll be
saying that hopefully we have done all the right things, that we
haven't taken any shortcuts, that we haven't overlooked anything.
   ``I'd be a liar if I said I wasn't nervous,'' he said. ``But I
also am confident.''
   As a result of investigations since the accident, the shuttle
fleet and NASA's management have undergone major changes. The
shuttle itself has had 210 modifications, including the addition of
an escape system that would enable the crew to bail out if the ship
had to ditch in the ocean. The escape system would not have saved
the Challenger crew.
   The shuttle booster rockets, blamed for the Challenger tragedy,
have undergone an $800 million redesign.
   Because of the many changes, Hauck said the mission is
considered a test flight. ``We'll probably see some surprises, but
I don't think they'll be life-threatening surprises,'' he said.
   Many astronauts and NASA officials have been immensely
frustrated with the time it took to fly the shuttle again. After
three Apollo astronauts were killed in a launch pad test in 1967,
NASA was flying again within 21 months and on the moon nine months
after that.
   Mission specialist John M. Lounge, one of the Discovery
astronauts, said ``the worst thing you can do to an airplane is put
it in a hangar for three years and make a lot of changes. When you
bring that airplane back, the first thing you do is a test flight
to wring out every system and find the surprises. I expect we'll
see some. But I'm satisfied all the changes are necessary and that
we'll have a safer vehicle.''
   Lounge and Hauck's colleagues on the flight are pilot Richard O.
Covey, and mission specialists David C. Hilmers and George D.
Nelson.
   America's space future could depend on a safe mission.
   ``We have to be successful,'' said Kennedy Space Center
director, Forrest McCartney. ``The nation could not withstand
another accident like Challenger.''
   ``You can't totally take the risk out of something like this,''
McCartney said in an interview. ``But in those last hours of the
count I'll know that we have done everything we know how to make
this a safe flight, that we have reduced the risks as much as we
possibly can.''
   Two problems that surfaced in recent days appeared to be
resolved.
   One had to do with a booster rocket being readied for a twin of
the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite the Discovery crew is to
launch six hours after liftoff. A cut on a small sealing O-ring on
the booster rocket, destined for flight next February, was found to
have a tiny cut _ apparently caused by a metal burr.
   Engineers worked overnight and said tests of rings deliberately
flawed showed they would not leak. The cut apparently was inflicted
during installation and does not represent a design or
manufacturing defect, the engineers said.
   The other snag involved the scraping off of a layer of paint on
one of Discovery's small jet thrusters used to position the shuttle
in orbit. But it was found that underlayers of the thermal paint
were intact, and that the thruster could be bypassed if need be.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
