ID: 308	RANK: 38	SCORE: 10.044764
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910627-0117
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910627-0117.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Politics &amp; Policy:
   Powerful Insurance Lobby Is Being Fragmented
   Just When It Needs to Put a Premium on Unity
   ----
   By Paulette Thomas
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
06/27/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16
</SO>
<MS>
FINANCIAL (FIN)
</MS>
<IN>
ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)
LIFE INSURANCE (INL)
PROPERTY &amp; CASUALTY INSURANCE (INP)
INSURANCE (INS)
LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)
</IN>
<NS>
LAW &amp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)
</NS>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- When former congressman and newly minted
lobbyist Dan Mica escorted an insurance executive to Capitol
Hill last year, he didn't realize he was violating an
industry cease-fire.
   But by the time Mr. Mica returned to his downtown office,
an angry colleague was already on his telephone. "You were
with a guy from a stock company]" he was admonished. "You had
to have someone from a mutual company with you, too]"
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The powerhouse insurance lobby has fallen to pieces.
Although it still outspends every other industry in campaign
donations, its former unity has been shattered at a time when
it faces its greatest threat in decades on Capitol Hill. Big
companies have broken ranks with smaller ones, life insurers
are pitted against property-casualty companies, stock-owned
companies are battling the mutually owned.
   "People within the industry aren't singing from the same
hymnal for the first time on Capitol Hill," says Patricia
Borowski, lobbyist for the National Association of
Professional Insurance Agents. "The industry is running
around like crazy."
   The result is a huge political opening, both for rival
industries and for consumer groups long critical of insurers.
A number of measures being considered could profoundly
reshape the $2 trillion industry. Although regulating
insurance companies has long been the province of state
governments, federal lawmakers shaken by the recent failure
of two large California life insurers are increasingly
disposed toward tightening federal regulation. A bill that
would allow banks to underwrite and sell insurance has a
shot. Insurers are battling with Congress over taxes.
   Moreover, another bill, with excellent prospects of
reaching the House floor, would trim back the industry's most
prized possession: its exemption from antitrust law.
   Industry critics can barely hide their glee. "This is the
year," vows J. Robert Hunter, president of the National
Insurance Consumer Organization, though he adds, "Even
divided, they are powerful."
   Disputes within the industry may seem narrow, but they can
be extraordinarily costly to the companies involved. Take,
for example, Mr. Mica's Capitol Hill visit. Mutually held and
stockholder-owned companies, both of whom belong to the
American Council of Life Insurance that Mr. Mica represents,
are taxed differently. Last year, each side lobbied Congress
to raise taxes on the other, and Congress was only too
pleased to comply with both proposals. The rancor cost the
industry $8 billion in new taxes.
   Mr. Mica has offered advice to his new employers, the
largest life-insurance-company trade group. "I told them,
you'd better get your act together," he says.
   The fractiousness is highly ironic for an industry that
wields so much money and clout. Not only does it spend
millions lobbying state legislatures, but the industry also
gave campaign contributions totaling $8.8 million to
congressional candidates in the 1989-90 election cycle,
according to the Center for Responsive Politics, a
nonpartisan research group. By comparison, it says, bankers
contributed $6.4 million.
   Recently, the insurers' united front fell to pieces in its
biggest fight: its struggle to maintain its exemption from
federal antitrust law. In order to share actuarial
information on, say, the likelihood of heart disease or
floods, the industry, under a law known as McCarran-Ferguson,
has been exempt from antitrust law since 1945.
   In years past, insurers, speaking with one voice, were
wholly successful in persuading Congress to preserve the
exemption. In 1980, Congress passed the Federal Trade
Commission Improvements Act, which bars the FTC from even
studying the insurance industry unless Congress specifically
requests it.
   "Their political stance has always been, `Protect this,
it's the Holy Grail, no bill, no way,'" says Linda Lipsen,
lobbyist for Consumers Union, which wants the law scaled
back. "When you have a unified theme, it's easier to get your
troops lined up."
   That's changed. Now the American Insurance Association, a
trade group of the biggest property-casualty insurers, has
done the unthinkable, offering its own plan for a more modest
repeal of the law. "Instead of being defensive, we are being
on offense," says David Pratt, lobbyist for the group. "This
is a pivotal moment, a real turning point for the industry."
   Other insurers say the AIA, composed of larger companies,
is simply selling out its smaller competitors. The antitrust
exemption is most crucial to smaller companies, says David
Farmer of the Alliance of American Insurers, which represents
smaller property-casualty companies. "This law lets small
companies be players in markets where their own experience
would not allow them to participate," he said. "Some people
view McCarran as getting in the way of other legislative
agendas."
   Mr. Mica's group, the big life insurers, has flipped and
flopped over which side to take. In March, it determined to
follow in the footsteps of the property-casualty insurers and
help offer a watered-down repeal of the law. "We didn't want
to be left aside," says Mr. Mica.
   Abruptly, two months later, the life-insurance council
reverted to the stance that it will fight any version of
repeal tooth and nail. At a recent House Judiciary
subcommittee hearing on the bill, Mr. Hunter, the consumer
advocate, couldn't resist asking one of the life-insurance
lobbyists, "Hey, what's your position today?"
   Even while the industry factions continue to struggle with
each other, they occasionally still find time to flex their
muscles against other foes. After the National Association of
Retail Druggists testified in favor of repealing the
McCarran-Ferguson law, John Rector, lobbyist for the
druggists, exchanged combative letters with insurance
lobbyists. One group, the Independent Insurance Agents of
America, threatened to oppose a bill favored by the druggists
that it might not have otherwise been interested in.
   "That kind of thing hurts {a lobbyist's} reputation," says
Mr. Rector, "and when you lobby, that's everything."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
