ID: 308	RANK: 56	SCORE: 8.489810
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911111-0176
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911111-0176.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Domestic Dilemma:
   Long Effort to Deport
   Terror Suspects Raises
   Difficult Rights Issues
   ---
   U.S. Won't Disclose Evidence
   Against 8 Palestinians,
   Citing National Security
   ---
   Lives Put on Hold for Years
   ----
   By Michael J. Ybarra
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
11/11/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<IN>
LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)
</IN>
<NS>
LAW &amp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)
</NS>
<GV>
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   LOS ANGELES -- The brisk knocking jolted Khader Hamide
from bed at 7 a.m. Immigration and Naturalization Service,
the visitor said. Mr. Hamide, a longtime legal alien and
aspiring U.S. citizen, inched open the door. Shoved from the
other side, it flew wide, and the room filled with initials:
FBI, INS, LAPD.
   Mr. Hamide was a terrorist, they said, handing him an
arrest warrant. Outside, police had blocked off the street; a
helicopter hovered overhead. Handcuffed, Mr. Hamide and his
wife, Julie, were taken away in separate cars.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   At a half-dozen locations in the Los Angeles area that
Monday morning in January 1987, scores of federal agents
crashed in on seven suspected Palestinian terrorists,
including a Kuwaiti engineering student on his honeymoon, who
awakened to pointed guns. An eighth suspect was arrested
later while taking a college chemistry exam.
   For 23 days, six of the detainees sat in maximum security
cells. The INS sought their deportation under the Cold
War-era McCarran-Walter Act, alleging they belonged to a
group promoting world communism -- specifically, the Popular
Front for the Liberation of Palestine, or PFLP, a violent
Marxist splinter group of the Palestine Liberation
Organization.
   More than four years later, and still unresolved, the case
of the "LA Eight" has come to symbolize the conundrum
confronting free societies faced with the threat of
terrorism: How can a government protect the public from
political violence without trampling the rights of those it
suspects of aiding or carrying out terrorist activities? In
this case the answer may be hidden in the twilight zone
separating advocacy of a Palestinian state with support for
terrorism to achieve that goal.
   The question, says Brian Jenkins, a terrorism specialist
at the security firm of Kroll Associates, is, "What is the
tradeoff between public safety and civil rights?"
   None of the LA Eight have been deported. The courts have
refused to hear evidence that prosecutors say must be kept
secret to protect the identity of informants. But the
government has been tenacious. When the immigration law was
changed last year, the government changed the charges against
Mr. Hamide and another man for the third time in four years.
   Civil libertarians argue that the case cuts to the heart
of the constitutional ideal of America, to the free speech
and due process rights accorded even those with radical
ideas. No one has accused the eight of any crimes, and all
deny belonging to the PFLP or having anything to do with
terrorism.
   But the government contends that its ability to protect
national security is threatened if it can't deport aliens it
knows to be involved with terrorist groups, even if it dare
not reveal its evidence. "Do we wait for these people to blow
up the federal building?" asked William B. Odencrantz, INS
regional counsel in San Francisco at the time of the arrests.
The government contends, in filings in U.S. court in Los
Angeles, that once deportation proceedings begin, "the
guarantees of the Bill of Rights are constitutionally
irrelevant."
   There is no doubt the LA Eight are passionately
pro-Palestinian. Mr. Hamide, 37, moved to the U.S. from the
Israeli-occupied West Bank in 1971 to go to college. His
wife-to-be arrived from Kenya four years later for the same
reason. They met in the MBA program at the University of
Oregon. She later worked as an accountant; he sold sun shades
for windshields and sometimes worked as a waiter.
   But politics is Mr. Hamide's life, as he says it is for
most Palestinians. "We eat, drink and sleep politics," he
says. "Every Palestinian gathering turns into a political
discussion. You don't choose to be a political person as a
Palestinian -- you are a political person." Mr. Hamide voiced
his views publicly, writing letters-to-the-editor or
appearing at small college forums. He also worked in the
presidential campaigns of Jesse Jackson. All the while, the
Federal Bureau of Investigation was taking note.
   After a delay of several years, the INS had told Mr.
Hamide he could be sworn in as a U.S. citizen the last week
of January 1987. He was arrested instead.
   Mr. Hamide thought one of the arresting agents looked
familiar. Have we met before, he asked. The man replied that
he had lived next door to Mr. Hamide's Glendale, Calif.,
apartment. For eight months they had shared a thin wall.
"They knew every time I had sex with my wife," Mr. Hamide
says.
   In papers filed in U.S. court here, the government has
admitted tapping the phones of the defendants and their
lawyers. It won't say whether the monitoring continues, but
Mr. Hamide thinks it does. "You never get used to that," he
says.
   The INS, a part of the Justice Department, says the 1987
arrests culminated a three-year FBI probe into a shadowy
network that raised funds for terrorism abroad and threatened
to serve as a springboard for violence in the U.S. According
to the FBI, Mr. Hamide was the California head of an active
but furtive recruiting and support system for the PFLP.
Although the PFLP hasn't been linked to terrorism in the
U.S., its international record is long. It includes the 1976
plane hijacking that was foiled by Israeli commandos at
Entebbe airport in Uganda.
   After the arrests, an INS lawyer acting on orders from the
attorney general sought to block bail for the LA Eight by
introducing secret evidence linking them to the PFLP.
Immigration Judge Roy Daniels in Los Angeles refused to hear
anything in a closed session, and the government declined to
reveal its material in open court, saying that would breach
national security. Mr. Hamide and four others were released
on their own recognizance; the others posted low bonds.
   All eight were first charged under the 1952
McCarran-Walter Act, an effort to guard against subversion
from Soviet-backed communism. It said aliens could be
deported if they belonged to a group advocating "world
communism" or other "totalitarian" doctrine. The law has been
used to bar thousands of foreigners because of their beliefs,
actual and reputed, but hasn't been used often to expel
people. According to the INS, 230 people were deported under
the law in the 1950s and 18 in the 1970s.
   But with the fear of terrorism rising, 31 people were
deported in the 1980s under the statute. It was amid this
atmosphere, and growing concern about possible
Libyan-sponsored terrorism and disruption of the 1984
Olympics in Los Angeles, that the case of the LA Eight
unfolded.
   Three months after the arrests, the INS dropped the
original charges. It instead sought to deport six of the
eight on visa violations, ranging from taking too few classes
to working without a permit. Mr. Hamide and Michel Shehadeh
were also charged with belonging to a group promoting
destruction of property.
   In December 1988, U.S. District Judge Stephen Wilson in
Los Angeles dismissed the charges, saying the cited provision
of the McCarran-Walter Act was in discord with free-speech
guarantees. The INS filed new McCarran-Walter charges against
Messrs. Hamide and Shehadeh, this time accusing them of
belonging to a group that advocates assassinating public
officials. Judge Wilson again dismissed the charges, but his
ruling was overturned last July by the Ninth Circuit Court of
Appeals on the ground he had acted prematurely.
   Enactment of the 1990 Immigration Act a year ago killed
the ideological provisions of the McCarran-Walter law by
explicitly giving aliens the same free-speech rights as
citizens. But the INS filed additional charges against
Messrs. Hamide and Shehadeh in April under the new law's
provision allowing deportation of those who give "material
support," such as financing, to terrorists. The INS didn't
say what aid the men provided. "We think they're deportable
under the 1990 act for terrorism," says a Justice Department
spokesman. "That's all we want to say."
   The case of the LA Eight drags on. Mr. Hamide has toured
the country speaking about his case. Bashar Amer, a
pharmacology student, fought and won the government's
challenge to his visa status, but now faces an INS appeal.
   Aiad Khaled Barakat and Naim Sharif filed for amnesty
under the 1986 immigration act in June 1987. Last year they
sued to find out what was happening. In March the INS replied
that it had secret evidence that they belonged to the PFLP
and that they had 30 days to disprove membership or be denied
amnesty. Messrs. Barakat and Sharif then filed a second suit,
challenging the grounds the INS used to deny them amnesty.
   Whatever the truth of the charges against them, the lives
of all eight have changed radically. Mr. Barakat owned a
masonry business, making good money and working on the
blueprints for a dream house. He says he lost contracts the
three weeks he was in jail, and the company later failed.
After being laid off from a construction job in Virginia, he
adds, he now works as a short-order cook.
   Amjad Obeid, the Kuwaiti whose honeymoon was interrupted
by the INS raid, says he missed the funeral of a sister.
Because of his arrest, he can't return to the U.S. should he
ever visit Kuwait.
   Mr. Shehadeh says that his seven-year-old son sometimes
woke up screaming after seeing his father dragged off by the
FBI, and that his wife lost her job at a day-care center
because of the taint of terrorism. "At the beginning, friends
start avoiding you," he adds. "They didn't believe {the
charges} but they knew we were under surveillance."
   For Mr. Sharif, who moved to the U.S. in 1978 and was
working in a plant nursery at the time of his arrest, the
case sometimes seems to shadow every relationship. Co-workers
jibed him, asking for bombing tips or ways to assassinate the
boss. He lives with his parents, his brother and his family.
He says he is afraid to start his own home with possible
deportation hanging over his head.
   "I never believed that this could happen in the United
States," he says.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
