ID: 308	RANK: 59	SCORE: 8.316656
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911217-0069
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911217-0069.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Tracking Travel
   ----
   By Laurie McGinley
</HL>
<DATE>
12/17/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   TAXES
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
INDUSTRIAL (IDU)
</MS>
<IN>
AIRLINES (AIR)
INDUSTRIAL &amp; COMMERCIAL SERVICES, LEASING, CLEANING (ICS)
INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL SERVICES (SVC)
</IN>
<NS>
TAXES (TAX)
TRAVEL (TVL)
</NS>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>

   Draw Flak From Airlines
                                                                                                       

   AIRLINES and airports are clashing over
passenger-facilities charges -- pesky departure fees that
some airports probably will institute by next spring. The
fees will boost ticket prices by $3 per flight, or a
roundtrip maximum of $12.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   More than three dozen airports are moving to impose the
taxes, with hundreds more expected to follow. But in some
cases, airlines are urging the Federal Aviation
Administration to reject proposed projects as not permitted
under the fee legislation.
   Tulsa International Airport plans to collect $42 million
in passenger-facilities charges over 10 years to help build a
new runway to handle increased traffic that airport officials
say will be generated by a new flight school at Oklahoma
State University. The airlines complain that passengers
shouldn't have to pay for that.
   McCarran International Airport, Las Vegas, wants to
collect $1.42 billion over 30 years for various airport
improvements, including a road that would tunnel under two
runways and hook up with Interstate 15. Tom Browne, vice
president of airports at the Air Transport Association, the
airline trade group, says the project should be financed by
highway funds, not passenger fees.
   The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey may levy
departure fees to improve mass transit to the airports. David
Plavin, director of aviation, says the airports now have an
"odd assortment" of transit facilities.
   At least the fees won't increase Uncle Sam's bite; the
Internal Revenue Service recently ruled that they won't be
subject to the 10% ticket tax.
                                                                                                       

   Defense-Firm Travel Bills
   Face Attack by Congress
                                                                                                       

   CONGRESS IS TRYING to put a lid on defense contractors'
travel bills.
   Contractors traveling on government business rack up at
least $500 million a year in air-travel costs, says the
Senate Appropriations Committee. In an effort to curb those
costs, the panel has urged the Pentagon to prohibit the
reimbursement of any air fares exceeding the discounted rates
that airlines provide to government employees. If the Defense
Department doesn't act, the committee warned, Congress may do
so through legislation.
   To underscore the point, Congress cut $63 million in
estimated travel savings from the Pentagon's fiscal 1992
research budget. The goal is twofold: to prod the airlines
into offering government discounts to contractors on Pentagon
business, and to encourage the contractors to cut travel.
   But the airlines complain that their heavy losses show
they lack the financial wherewithal to extend government
discounts to nongovernment employees. Those discounts can be
as deep as 50% off published fares.
   The National Business Travel Association, which represents
large corporations, argues that congressional efforts to
force airlines to provide government discounts to contractors
might jeopardize the discounts. But Norman Sherlock,
executive director of the NBTA, says Pentagon officials have
assured his group that, for now at least, they won't ban
reimbursement of fares above the government-discount level.
The Pentagon plans to find $63 million in cuts elsewhere, he
says.
   Still, he doesn't expect the issue to go away. "Someone in
Congress believes there are tremendous savings in this area,
and there aren't," Mr. Sherlock says. A congressional staffer
disagrees, saying that the contractors sometimes take
unnecessary trips at short notice.
                                                                                                       

   To Fly Cheap, Take
   A Little Cargo Along
                                                                                                       

   TOM Malone, a graphic artist from Atlanta, recently flew
round trip to Madrid for just $150. But it wasn't because of
any special airline deal. He flew as a free-lance courier.
   All over the country, air courier companies use members of
the general public to transport goods and documents for
corporations that need urgent deliveries. To get these
people, the courier companies offer to fly them for
fantastically low fares.
   The practice isn't new, but has been growing as published
air fares have risen, according to the International
Association of Air Travel Couriers, a Lake Worth, Fla.,
outfit that lists names of courier companies in a bimonthly
newsletter. Some couriers are also listed in phone books.
   The organization estimates that 25,000 courier flights
take off in the U.S. each year, many for international
destinations that express shipping companies take three days
or more to reach.
   The discounts have some drawbacks. Often, the courier
company is looking for someone to travel within a few days --
and often only carry-on luggage is allowed. The length of
stay may be limited, and the traveler may have to post a
deposit to guarantee they will transport the goods.
   But Bryon Lutz, who edits the newsletter for the air
courier association, says travelers usually are asked to
transport only small items or documents, such as canceled
checks or mail.
   Mr. Malone says he had to carry a list of some electronic
parts that were being shipped in the luggage compartment on
his flight. He delivered the list at the airport and spent a
week in Madrid. "I never even saw the parts," he says.
                                                                                                       

   Odds and Ends
                                                                                                       

   BUSINESS Traveler International magazine, judging
business-class wines served by 31 airlines, gave top honors
to American Airlines, followed by Northwest, Singapore
Airlines, British Airways and Air New Zealand. . . . The
Aviation Crime Prevention Institute says 1,400 airplanes
valued at more than $150 million were stolen in the U.S. over
the past decade. But the annual numbers are falling.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
