ID: 308	RANK: 63	SCORE: 8.204542
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910926-0042
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910926-0042.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Runway Inflation:
   Travel Is Off, Airlines
   Ailing, but Airports
   Just Keep Expanding
   ---
   Boosterism and Bonds Fuel
   Projects Even as Estimates
   Of Need Are Scaled Back
   ---
   Empty Gates, More Coming
   ----
   By Jonathan Dahl
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
09/26/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
INDUSTRIAL (IDU)
</MS>
<IN>
AIRLINES (AIR)
HEAVY CONSTRUCTION; INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL (CON)
</IN>
<NS>
TRAVEL (TVL)
</NS>
<RE>
COLORADO (CO)
GEORGIA (GA)
MISSOURI (MO)
NEW JERSEY (NJ)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PENNSYLVANIA (PA)
TENNESSEE (TN)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   DENVER -- This hardly looks like a place that needs a new
airport. The one major airfield here served seven million
fewer passengers in 1990 than in 1986. The second biggest
airline serving Denver, Continental, is teetering in Chapter
11, and a whole corridor of gates is literally roped off for
lack of use. And far from falling apart, the airport got a
$200 million face lift that was completed in 1987.
   Yet city officials in Denver are planning to mothball the
airport in two years, in favor of a brand new one. And it
won't be just any airport. At a cost of $2.4 billion, it will
be the most expensive in history and will sprawl over 53
square miles, twice the size of Manhattan.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Across the U.S., the nation's airports are in the midst of
a building binge that flies in the face of a plateauing
demand for airline travel. The airline industry is reeling
from record losses in 1990 that forced four of the nation's
12 major carriers to file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy-court
protection. After years of double-digit gains, air traffic
has been flat for three years, and analysts don't expect any
big upturn for years.
   Yet cities from Pittsburgh to San Jose, Calif., are adding
giant terminals and runways as if the roaring '80s were still
around. Confident that a big rise in airline traffic is in
the offing, they are raising millions to improve unused
facilities. And they are lavishing money on things such as
wood-paneled conference rooms, stainless-steel palm trees and
tax-abatements -- at the same time that urban highways and
bridges are crumbling.
   All told, airports -- owned by local and state governments
-- plan to pour as much as $50 billion into construction in
the next five years, double what they spent throughout the
1980s. Newark International Airport has started a $2 billion
expansion and renovation, though traffic has plunged 24% in
five years and its biggest carrier is the hobbled
Continental. Memphis plans a new $177 million runway, despite
a 23% decline in traffic since 1986. Atlanta breaks ground
this fall on the nation's largest international terminal and
is scoping out sites for a second airport. Never mind that
Concourse C, which holds one-fifth of the airport's gates,
has been empty for nine months, boarded up and patrolled by
security guards.
   "It does make you wonder," says Andrew Goetz of Denver
University's Center for Transportation Studies. "What's going
on here?"
   Travelers will get stuck paying for part of this --
although they may not realize it. For the first time, most
airports will soon charge every U.S. passenger a $2 to $12
tax for each round-trip, collecting upwards of $1 billion a
year solely to fund new construction. But the charges will be
listed only in cryptic codes on tickets. As airports raise
rental rates to cover bond payments, airlines also may pass
on the costs to travelers in other special surcharges.
   Thousands of bondholders also may be at risk. To finance
the expansion, airports have floated a staggering $30 billion
in bonds, which typically cover 75% of construction costs.
They are counting on a weak revenue source -- landing and
space-rental fees from often struggling airlines -- to pay
them off. If the airports are wrong, they may default or turn
to a city or county to step in, and local taxes could go up
to cover the obligations.
   "What's going to happen when a weak carrier goes broke and
can't pay the fees?" asks Theodore Harris, an aviation
consultant in Virginia. "It's a prescription for disaster."
   Already, the building craze is beginning to exact its
toll. Memphis's airport has had to cut staff 12% in part
because of soaring debt payments. In the last 10 months, the
Standard &amp; Poor's rating service has put the bond issues of
five airports on its Credit Watch list (though it has since
taken two off the list). And the expansion boom has proven a
bust in cities abandoned by some of their major carriers.
Clearwater, Fla., for example, has a new terminal, a new
baggage claim area -- and no flights at all on some days
earlier this year.
   "You could shoot a cannonball through some of these places
and not hit anyone," says Robert Young, an attorney fighting
Denver's project. "We're building the ghost towns of
tomorrow."
   To be sure, some of the construction clearly is required
for modest upgradings of aging or overcrowded airports. But
most of the building binge is fueled by unbridled boosterism
and easy money. The funds are happily raised by underwriting
firms that profit on new bond issues. Many bond issues get
glowing marks from bond-rating firms that sometimes don't
update their public reviews of the increasingly bleak market
for air travel. Cities, meanwhile, often see airports as a
way to promote tourism, attract jobs and put their names on
the map, all at the same time. They view multimillion-dollar
expansions and renovations as the way to attract the
airlines.
   When Larry Hedrick, the airport director in Columbus,
Ohio, asked the city to approve construction of five new
gates a few years ago, he got a surprising mandate: "They
said to build 10. They had a real positive attitude about the
future here." So far, six of those gates have been completed:
One isn't used, the other five operate at only about half of
capacity, and Columbus has assumed $15.5 million more of bond
debt. But city officials say it's a good investment: They
believe traffic will eventually pick up, and when it does,
the gates will be ready.
   Underlying the building boom is the questionable notion
that the current slump is just a temporary, cyclical blip. By
the time construction is completed, airports say there will
be plenty of new customers -- airlines -- for the expanded
operations, and that they will be healthy enough to pay for
all the new services.
   Travel experts say that sanguine scenario is outdated. Air
travel zoomed in the 1980s because discount carriers kept
cropping up, and cheap fares were prevalent. Now monopoly
routes and high prices are commonplace, and the chances of
another PeopleExpress and $9 fares are remote. Only a few
mega-carriers dominate the skies. They aren't strong enough
to set up major hub operations at more than a few sites. And
they are particularly unlikely to set up at airports which a
rival carrier already dominates.
   Yet airport officials continue to offer bullish
predictions of a surge in air travel to justify their
expansion designs -- and to sell bonds to pay for it all.
   In raising funds for a new $300 million terminal,
Atlanta's major airport, Hartsfield, forecasts a hefty 30%
increase in passengers by the end of the decade. It predicts
two major airlines will use it as a hub. Yet traffic is off
20% this year alone. The airport did have two hub tenants:
Eastern and Delta. But it lost Eastern when the airline went
out of business. That left Delta to amass 80% of the city's
traffic. "No one can go in there with Delta so strong," says
Alfred Checchi, co-chairman of Northwest Airlines, which
rejected the idea of moving a hub there.
   But once a forecast flops, airports are reluctant to
adjust their predictions downward. When Pittsburgh's airport
authority issued bonds in 1988 for a new terminal -- which
will cost more than half a billion dollars -- investors were
told to expect steady growth in passengers in each of the
next 10 years. By 1990, though, traffic had fallen 5%. Yet
when Pittsburgh put out a second bond offering last year to
raise still more money for the terminal, it didn't adjust its
forecasts. And this year? The passenger count is down once
again, dropping 6%.
   "Forecasting is more an art than science," explains Alan
Stewart, an assistant director at the airport authority.
   At $690 million for 76 gates, the Pittsburgh terminal is
running double the cost per gate of some airport projects.
Amenities include arches that "bring to mind the great
Edwardian rail stations," according to a brochure; $2 million
worth of sculptures, murals and "meditative gardens"; and a
planned 60-foot-high ceiling in a main terminal room the size
of two football fields.
   "It's really great to have a vaulted ceiling -- until you
start paying the higher air-conditioning bills," says James
Murphy, an aviation consultant in Alexandria, Va. "It's easy
to get carried away."
   Piling on too many plush features can work against luring
airlines. Though they initially may be drawn by the fringe
benefits, airlines don't like paying the accompanying higher
rents. With its neon-streaked elevators and steel palm trees,
the Las Vegas McCarren Airport has to charge airlines $89 a
square foot for baggage-claim space -- one of the highest
rates of any airport in the U.S. Several carriers even sued
the airport briefly over the charges. In the end, passengers
paid for much of the airport's revamping: Several carriers
imposed a $7.50 departure charge at Las Vegas for several
years.
   Airports insist they must take on risky expansions to hold
on to the airlines they've got. Yet they are left at the
mercy of a troubled airline when it belly-flops or reneges on
the promise to set up a hub. "It's the price of
deregulation," says John Duba, an administrator at Kansas
City's Aviation Department. Before deregulation in 1979, the
federal government dictated airline routes. Now it is more
difficult to predict an airport's needs.
   Kansas City knows the hazards well -- it got burned four
times. Its airport was built in the 1970s to serve as a hub
for TWA, which later pulled out and located at St. Louis.
Then the airport opened its doors three times to airlines
promising to build hubs. Braniff International Corp. set up a
hub first, then went out of business. In came Eastern, which
later dropped out and sold its space to the reorganized
Braniff Inc. Then Braniff Inc. went belly-up in 1989.
   That left the airport $4 million in the hole for
renovations and unpaid bills owed by Braniff. These days
about 180,000 square feet of space, or almost one-third of
the airport, is vacant. Still, Kansas City International
Airport is building a $45 million additional runway. "O ye of
little faith," the airport's Mr. Duba responds to those who
doubt the wisdom of expanding. "If you don't build, then you
won't be able to attract the airlines."
   Some of the expansions are being forced by airlines that
hoard unused gates. Lambert-St. Louis Airport plans to add
eight more gates for $45 million next year, even though its
hub carrier, TWA, doesn't use many of its gates at full
capacity. TWA holds 25-year leases on 52 of the airport's 78
gates and refuses to give any of them up. Competitors at the
airport, meanwhile, are out of space and demanding more room.
   "We asked TWA about its gates," says Donald Aubuchon,
assistant airport director. "They said, `no.'"
   None of the risks seem to be making airport officials
hesitate. And nowhere are they more eager to expand and to
spend than in Denver.
   To win United Airlines's support for the $2.4 billion
project -- the first totally new airfield in the U.S. since
1974 -- the airport authority promised to assume more than
$40 million of United bond debt, finance the construction of
the airline's private club for VIPs, and spend half a billion
dollars on improvements that will benefit United, as well as
Continental. But Denver may have lost sight of such obvious
problems as location: The new site is an $80 round-trip cab
ride from downtown.
   When the airport was proposed, Denver officials told the
public a new airport was needed because of strong growth in
air traffic. But that thinking turned out to be wrong.
Federal experts had first projected that 54 million
passengers a year would fly in and out of Denver by 1995.
They later reduced the forecast by a third -- but only a full
year after Denver had issued bonds and started construction.
Now local officials are pressing a different justification
for the new airport: to cut airport travel delays. The
current airfield, Denver Stapleton Airport, was notorious in
the 1980s for flight delays because of bad weather and
cramped conditions. But, with traffic down, delays fell more
than 10% between 1988 and 1990. This year, delays ticked up
slightly; still, seven other major airports have delay rates
that are far worse -- and aren't building entirely new
airfields.
   Undaunted, local promoters have mounted a major campaign
to win support for their behemoth project. At the huge
construction site, against a backdrop of newly laid concrete
and freshly churned earth, the city has set up an observation
stand -- binoculars included -- for visitors to take in the
vast panorama of giant cranes and bulldozers toiling away.
   And at the existing airport 18 miles to the west,
electronic billboards rattle off an endless stream of glowing
statistics: "66 million cubic yards of earth moved . . .
2,000 people working at the site . . . Under budget and ahead
of schedule. . . ."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
