ID: 308	RANK: 92	SCORE: 7.009108
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900126-0054 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-01-26-90 0803EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a PM-WeatherpageWeather 1stLd-Writethru a0520 01-26 0819</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Weatherpage Weather, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0520,0843</SECOND>
<HEAD>Snow Socks Northwest, Great Lakes, and More to Come</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: INSERTS 1 graf after 7th graf, `On Thursday ...', to ADD
power outages, airport and road closings; pickup 8th graf pvs, `In
severe ...'</NOTE>
<HEAD>By The Associated Press</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   A major snowstorm moved toward Canada today after socking the
mountains of the Northwest and the central Great Lakes states with
as much as 17 inches of snow, knocking out power lines and
crippling air and road traffic.
   ``It was real close to a blizzard,'' National Weather Service
meteorologist John Haase said. Accumulations would continue today,
he said.
   More snow and winds were forecast through the weekend as a cold
front churns from the Rockies to the Appalachians. Arctic air was
expected to follow the front southward into the upper Plains.
   The Southwest, however, looked today for above-normal
temperatures, mostly sunny skies and an end to the dense fog that
has lingered in the valleys all week.
   Westerly winds preceding the cold front were predicted to lash
the eastern Rockies _ at an average of more than 40 mph _ from
southeastern Montana to central Colorado. Gusts near 100 mph were
possible.
   Gale-force wind warnings were posted for much of the Great Lakes
and from the central New England coast to the Virginia coast.
   On Thursday, high winds ripped roofs off buildings in Michigan
and lightning injured 12 people in Illinois.
   Electricity was interrupted to at least 138,000 customers in
Wisconsin, Michigan and Illinois; airports in Milwaukee, St. Louis,
Detroit closed and Chicago airports canceled at least 50 percent of
their flights; and several highways were closed in Illinois, while
scores of minor accidents were reported throughout the region.
   In severe weather elsewhere, a tornado tore through a trailer
park in Centenary in south-central Alabama, injuring 28 people and
causing an estimated $2 million in damage.
   In the Washington Cascades, 17 inches of snow fell at Stevens
Pass on Thursday, half of it in 4 hours during the afternoon.
   Snowfall in Illinois ranged from 6 inches near Moline to 12
inches in Chicago's northern suburbs.
   Snowfall in northern Michigan included 8 inches at Sault Ste.
Marie, 10 inches at Pellston and about 11 inches at Traverse City.
   The northeastern mountains of Washington state and Oregon's
coastal range and Siskiyous were advised to expect more snow today.
   Winter storm warnings were posted over the Washington Cascades
and Olympics and for Wyoming's northwestern mountains.
   Snow advisories were in effect today for the Lake Tahoe-Truckee
area, northeastern California and parts of the Sierra Nevada.
   Winter storm watches remained over Wyoming's southwestern and
central mountains today and in Colorado's northern and central
mountains through Saturday.
   Winds gusting to 50 mph in downtown Indianapolis on Thursday
blew out windows from the 21st and 36th floors of the INB National
Bank Tower, injuring a 54-year-old woman who received a cut from
falling glass.
   The storm lashed southeast Iowa with 45 mph winds that whipped 5
inches of snow into a treacherous near-whiteout on roads slick with
ice.
   Winds gusted to about 70 mph at Beaver City, Pa., Laramie, Wyo.,
and Livingston, Mont. Gusts of 91 mph were recorded at Peru, Ind.
   Thursday was unseasonably warm for much of Florida. Record highs
were set in Jacksonville, with 83 degrees; West Palm Beach with 84
and Orlando's 85.
   High temperature for the Lower 48 states Thursday was 87 at
Melbourne, Fla.; the low was minus 10 at Gunnison, Colo.
   Other reports at 3 a.m. EST today:
   _EAST: Albany, N.Y., 47 rain; Atlanta 35 fair; Boston 57 cloudy;
Buffalo 32; Charleston, S.C., 48 rain; Chattanooga 35 fair;
Cincinnati 29 cloudy; Cleveland 30 snow; Detroit 30 windy; Hatteras
68 windy; Jacksonville 50 cloudy; Key West 72 partly cloudy;
Knoxville 35 cloudy; Macon 42 fair; Miami 71 fair; New York 46
foggy; Philadelphia 50 showers; Pittsburgh 30 snow; Portland,
Maine, 35 foggy; Richmond 54 rain; Tampa 58.
   _CENTRAL: Birmingham 33 fair; Bismarck 30 cloudy; Chicago 19
fair; Denver 35 partly cloudy; Des Moines 19 fair; Fort Worth 37;
Indianapolis 26 cloudy; Kansas City 27 fair; Little Rock 32 fair;
Louisville 33 partly cloudy; Memphis 34 fair; Nashville 30 fair;
New Orleans 41 fair; North Platte 22 fair; Oklahoma City 32 fair;
Omaha 26 fair; Rapid City 42 partly cloudy; St. Louis 32 partly
cloudy; Minneapolis-St. Paul 14 fair; Sault Ste. Marie 24 snow.
   _WEST: Albuquerque 23 fair; Anchorage -6 fair; Boise 44 cloudy;
Casper 32 windy; Fairbanks -28 fair; Great Falls 39 windy; Honolulu
74 cloudy; Las Vegas 37 fair; Los Angeles 59 fair; Medford 39
showers; Pendleton 36 showers; Phoenix 49 fair; Portland, Ore., 37
cloudy; Reno 46 fair; Salt Lake City 39 cloudy; San Diego 59 fair;
San Francisco 49 partly cloudy; Seattle 37 cloudy; Spokane 34
cloudy.
   _INTERNATIONAL: Calgary 28 windy; Montreal 41 cloudy; Ottawa 37
windy; Regina 32 windy; Toronto 34 snow; Winnipeg 18 snow; Mexico
City 43; San Juan 74.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
