ID: 284	RANK: 12	SCORE: 17.922415
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910228-0098
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910228-0098.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   REVIEW &amp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):
   Chug, Chug, Chug
</HL>
<DATE>
02/28/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<CO>
   LABOR
</CO>
<IN>
RAILROADS (RAI)
</IN>
<GV>
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
CONGRESS (CNG)
</GV>
<LP>
   For the past seven years, the Reagan and Bush
administrations have submitted budgets zeroing out the
subsidy to Amtrak, giving a happy-to-oblige Congress the
burden of restoring the funds. This year, with Budget
Director Richard Darman working the rails, the administration
itself ponied up for Amtrak.
   Yet the National Railroad Passenger Corp., as the
parastatal Amtrak is properly known, is less high speed than
slow motion. At least it's moving in the right direction.
When it takes reservations, it now has a "yield management"
pricing system, which the airlines mastered years ago for
maximizing passenger revenue. A few years after it was freed
from a statutory ban on borrowing capital to improve its
rolling stock, it has gone into debt for a few hundred pieces
of equipment.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But though they often run full, the trains still break
down frequently and cause delays. Twenty years after its
creation, Amtrak is looking ahead to the day -- in the year
2000, maybe -- when it will no longer ask for taxpayer
operating subsidies. Like cars and planes, rail backers say,
Amtrak will continue to rely on government funding for
infrastructure such as tracks.
   With the administration trying to zero them, Amtrak
appropriations gradually declined during the 1980s. It
remains to be seen, of course, whether the Bush
administration's new offer of about $500 million, a little
below what Congress spent last year, will elicit a
higher-stakes bidding war on Capitol Hill.
   The politics of Amtrak goes a ways toward explaining why a
system with year-long reservation lines for overnight
passenger cars can't be transformed into a going concern.
Congress micromanages the trains, and power blocs such as
those in the Northeast insist on special consideration for
commuter-rail operations. Certainly Members of Congress, from
both parties, have never shrunk from their desire to see
subsidized Amtrak service extended to their own districts.
Sometimes they succeed wildly, as with the high-cost service
from Philadelphia to Atlantic City that effectively allows
gamblers to lose the saved fare money in casinos.
   Plus, there's labor. Part of the subsidy is the $150
million Amtrak pays annually to make up for shortfalls in the
national railroad retirement system. Private freight carriers
have cut back their work forces to stay in business, so
Amtrak, with a stableload of 24,000 employees, gets to bear a
big part of the railroad industry's pension burden.
   You can bet that if any or all of Amtrak were privatized,
the new enterprises wouldn't want or be able to carry the
legacy of America's featherbedded rails. Likewise, they would
have no use for the chairman of some subcommittee who wants
them to cart Uncle Bill from here to there any day of the
week he chooses. Under these rules, it's no wonder the
studies of privatization find no buyers.
   Obviously, the Reagan approach failed to eliminate Amtrak
or, except indirectly perhaps, to make it more of a business.
Perhaps this President has a better notion of how to let
those who know how to run a 1990s railroad, whether inside
Amtrak or out, conduct the needed restructuring. Skeptics
must assume, however, that stoking the engine with more tax
dollars will only keep us chugging up a neverending hill.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
