ID: 284	RANK: 63	SCORE: 15.112041
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910501-0147
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910501-0147.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Travel:
   Amtrak Takes a Cue From Airlines,
   Adding Restrictions as Demand Surges
   ----
   By Jonathan Dahl
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
05/01/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<MS>
INDUSTRIAL (IDU)
</MS>
<IN>
RAILROADS (RAI)
</IN>
<GV>
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)
</GV>
<LP>
   The rules for riding the rails are getting stricter.
   For the first time, Amtrak is making some of its lowest
rates nonrefundable, at least for the next two months. The
railroad company already has begun imposing cancellation fees
on some routes and is requiring reservations on a growing
number of trains.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Only a year ago, train travelers enjoyed the kind of
freedom that airline passengers, car renters and hotel guests
could only dream about. They could show up for many shorter
trips without making any reservations and be guaranteed a
place on board. On the longer routes that required
reservations, they almost never had to pay penalties if they
changed plans at the last minute.
   "It's sad to see," says Steve Salatti, president of the
Empire State Passengers Association, a consumer group in New
York. "They're becoming more and more like the airlines."
   The changes come just as travelers are relying more on
Amtrak. With airline fares soaring, train travel is becoming
an increasingly popular alternative for both leisure and
business travelers. Last fiscal year, more than 22 million
people took Amtrak -- a record high. And ridership was up
again in the past six months, even in the midst of a travel
slump.
   But that boom in business has led to many of the new
restrictions. For one thing, it gives Amtrak the power to
demand more from its customers, who are costing revenue by
booking seats they never used. On trains that didn't have
reservations, about 250,000 people were forced to stand last
year, the company says. Many other people were unable to book
seats on reserved trains because some travelers would
overbook reservations.
   Amtrak, which plans to announce the changes today, said
the nonrefundable policy will apply to a group of special
discounts that will be about 10% to 20% lower than its
standard All Aboard America fares. Travelers who don't want
the nonrefundable rates will still be able to buy the
standard discounts, which have no restrictions.
   The new rates, which go into effect May 15 to June 30,
range from $138 to $228 roundtrip, depending on the length of
the trip. New York to Miami round trip will cost $138;
Chicago to Los Angeles will cost $188.
   An Amtrak spokesman said the company hadn't decided if it
would continue nonrefundable rates later this year, but
travel experts said they assumed it would. Last year, Amtrak
offered a nonrefundable rate on selected routes on the East
Coast but not on a national scale. "It only figures that a
policy that has been so successful for airlines would spread
elsewhere," says Ed Perkins, editor of Consumer Reports
Travel Letter. Indeed, some hotels and car rental companies
have started experimenting with nonrefundable rates on either
domestic or foreign business.
   Along with nonrefundable fares, Amtrak this month decided
that half the trains on its New York City to upstate New York
routes would require reservations; none had before.
Reservations are also now required on more cars on its
Chicago to Detriot service, Los Angeles to Santa Barbara, and
New York to Boston. About a year ago, Amtrak for the first
time began imposing $10 to $150 cancellation penalties on
sleeping-car reservations changed within two days of travel.
   The stricter rules on the upstate New York routes came
after heavy opposition from passengers who were used to
changing plans on short notice. These passengers argued that
the policy was unfair because it barred them from trains that
weren't completely sold out. Amtrak backed down from plans to
impose the policy on all trains. "The problem here is change,
and people don't like change," says Mr. Salatti of the Empire
State Passenger Association.
   But Amtrak says travelers who don't like the tighter rules
actually have Uncle Sam to blame. The railroad company is
partially subsidized by the federal government, which has cut
funding by more than 30% since 1981. In the past few years,
Amtrak has expanded its 1,700-car fleet by only 100 cars.
"We'd like to add more trains, we just don't have the funds,"
a spokesman says.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
