ID: 284	RANK: 92	SCORE: 14.291973
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890304-0022 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-03-04-89 0118EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-Eastern-Transportation 2ndLd-Writethru a0413 03-04 0910</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Eastern-Transportation, 2nd Ld-Writethru, a0413,0934</SECOND>
<HEAD>Airports, Railroads, Ports Brace for Eastern Strike</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: Leads with 6 grafs to UPDATE with early Machinists' demonstration,
ALPA vote to honor picket lines; picks up 3rd graf: `Negotiations between
...</HEAD>
<HEAD>With AM-Eastern, Bjt</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By MARCY GORDON</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>MIAMI (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Airports, railroads and seaports nationwide braced
Friday as Eastern Airlines' Machinists went on strike, a walkout
that threatened secondary action against the nation's transportation
system.
   Airports that handle heavy Eastern traffic boosted police
patrols, designated picket areas and mapped contingency plans to
keep operations running normally after the Machinists went on strike
at 12:01 a.m. EST Saturday.
   Machinists quickly established that they intended to shut Eastern
down, storming the gate at Miami International Airport. Police in
riot gear helped push them back.
   At approximately 12:10 a.m., the 3,400 Eastern pilots voted
overwhlemingly to honor the Machinists strike.
   J. B. ``Skip'' Stokes, spokesman for Eastern members of the Air
Line Pilots Association said early Saturday: ``We will honor their
picket.''
   Referring to the pilots who don't honor the picket line, he said
``a shadow would be cast over them for perhaps the rest of their
careers at Eastern.''
   Negotiations between the airline and Eastern collapsed despite an
undisclosed offer by the carrier at 10 p.m., two hours before the
deadline, and Machinists' officials offering to extend talks at the
mediators' request.
   Defensive activities were especially evident at airports in south
Florida, the Miami-based Eastern's home region. Security also was
beefed up at many airports, including Atlanta, Washington, Seattle,
Philadelphia and Newark, N.J.
   Preparations took on new urgency Friday afternoon when President
Bush announced he would not intervene in the bitter labor dispute _
an action that would have stalled a strike by triggering a 60-day
cooling-off period.
   Eastern cut up to three-quarters of its weekend flights on
Friday, including most out of its Atlanta hub and nearly 60 other
cities. The airline planned to maintain service to almost 50 cities,
including most flights out of Miami and on Eastern's Northeast
shuttle and Latin American routes.
   Other carriers moved in to pick up some of the slack.
   Pan American World Airways said it would add two or three flights
per hour on its shuttle service from New York to both Boston and
Washigton.
   Delta Air Lines said it would consider adding flights from
Eastern's Atlanta hub to Florida and from Northeast points south. It
planned to honor Eastern tickets, with certain conditions.
   Continental Airlines, American Airlines and United Airlines said
they would honor some Eastern tickets but planned no additional
service.
   Greyhound Lines said it planned expanded bus service beginning
Monday.
   Amtrak said it would add 12 daily trains between New York and
Washington. In the event of a secondary strike, the rail line said
it would attempt skeleton service run by supervisors. Amtrak carries
33,000 passengers on 108 trains a day in the Northeast corridor and
28,000 daily passengers elsewhere.
   In Washington, the head of Amtrak said the national passenger
railroad could continue limited operations for only a few days if
picketed by workers supporting an Eastern strike.
   A recording on a Amtrak station telephone line in Providence,
R.I., said, ``The effect of an Eastern strike is uncertain. Our
current plans are to operate a normal schedule.'' The recording
began by stating that lines were tied up because of the anticipated
strike.
   National union leaders and locals threatened to disrupt
transportation around the country in sympathy with the Eastern
Machinists.
   In Newark, Gene Hoffman, general chairman of District 100 of the
Machinists, said there was a ``good possibility'' union members at
Trans World Airlines, United Air Lines, Northwest Airlines and USAir
would strike if the Eastern Machinists walked out.
   In metropolitan New York, freight railroads and commuter lines
that carry about 320,000 people into Manhattan each day expected to
be hit by a secondary strike.
   ``It looks like a very bad situation,'' said Robert Kiley,
chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, parent agency
of the Long Island Rail Road and Metro-North Commuter Railroad.
   Extra buses were ordered to shuttle passengers from outlying
suburbs in western Connecticut and the northern suburbs to subway
terminals in the Bronx and Queens.
   The Long Island Rail Road established telephone hotlines to help
commuters find alternative routes and subway connections. The city
Department of Transportation said it would put extra traffic agents
at busy intersections and activate all tow trucks to deal with an
anticipated surge in traffic.
   At the port of Miami, port officials and cruise line
representatives made contingency plans for an estimated 8,000 to
10,000 booked passengers who would be unable to get to cruise ships
or return home if Eastern flights were disrupted.
   At Miami International Airport, adjacent to Eastern's corporate
headquarters, extensive preparations were made to maintain airport
operations and ``protect the public's right of access to the
airport,'' said Dade County Aviation Department spokeswoman Amalia
Fernandez.
   ``Things are very quiet right now,'' she said Friday afternoon.
``The airport is operating. We have increased police presence as
planned, the staffing is increased in all areas and will continue
throughout the weekend until we see what happens,'' said Ms.
Fernandez.
   In Atlanta, Eastern's second-largest operating location with
6,700 employees, picket lines went up outside the Eastern
maintenance hangar after machinists were sent home with pay and the
gate to the maintenance area was locked. Union members set up a
strike tent across the street from the gate and police set up
barricades nearby.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
