ID: 145	RANK: 15	SCORE: 16.443327
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900313-0187 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-03-13-90 2329EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>a e AM-APArts:Oscars-Invasion Adv19   03-13 1161</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-AP Arts: Oscars-Invasion, Adv 19,1198</SECOND>
<NOTE>$adv19</NOTE>
<NOTE>For Release Monday AMs, March 19, and thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>THE OSCARS 1990: And the Winner Is ...</HEAD>
<HEAD>The Foreign Invasion: Foreign Films Popular at Oscars</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By HILLEL ITALIE</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>NEW YORK (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Sir David Lean can only laugh at how calmly
Hollywood is taking this year's ``foreign invasion'' of the Academy
Awards:
   ``My Left Foot'' from Ireland, five nominations including best
picture; Camille Claudel'' from France, two nominations including
best foreign film; ``Henry V'' from England, three nominations
including best director.
   Yet, it's business as usual at the Oscars. There are, of course,
the usual arguments over who made it and who didn't, but nothing
like the press conference called by Samuel Goldwyn in 1946, when
Lean's ``Brief Encounter'' and Laurence Olivier's ``Henry V'' were
among several foreign films enjoying critical and commercial
success.
   ``Hollywood is facing a challenge,'' said Goldwyn, producer of
such films as ``Wuthering Heights'' and ``The Little Foxes.''
   ``Today it is by the British, tomorrow it may be the French or
the Italians or the Russians. To maintain it's place, Hollywood
must set aside the old formulas. It must find honest stories,
stories with something important to say, stories that reflect these
disturbing times in which we live.''
   Lean was amazed by Goldwyn's warning because he was sure ``Brief
Encounter'' would flop. After all, the film had closed down after
three days in one Italian city because, the British filmmaker had
heard, leading man Trevor Howard was too ugly.
   So when ``Brief Encounter'' was previewed at a tiny screening
room in Manhattan, Lean did his best to slip in and out unnoticed.
It didn't work.
   ``I waited until the lights went out and snuck in the back
because I just wanted to see what sort of print would be there,''
Lean said in a recent phone interview from Los Angeles, where he
received the American Film Institute's annual Life Achievement
Award.
   ``When the lights went up, I sneaked out. I got a few steps down
the passage, and a voice said, `Hi, excuse me.' It was the critic
from Time. `He said, `Tell me, did you direct that?' And I said,
`You're right, I did,' thinking he was going to say God knows what.
He said, `Let me shake your hand, that was marvelous.'
   ``And that was the first time I knew I was going to get a break
in America.''
   ``Brief Encounter'' received three nominations (but won no
Oscars) and Lean eventually felt right at home at the Academy
Awards, totaling 56 nominations and 27 awards for such films as
``Great Expectations,'' ``A Passage to India,'' ``The Bridge on the
River Kwai'' and ``Lawrence of Arabia.''
   Since 1932 when Charles Laughton won best actor for the title
role in a British production of ``The Private Life of Henry VIII,''
Oscar has had an ambivalent relationship with foreign movies.
Hollywood preferred American products to win, but constantly
recognized worthy foreign efforts.
   Foreign films, especially British, have won various prizes from
cinematography (``Black Narcissus'') to best picture (``Hamlet''),
from screenwriting (``The Search'') to costume design (``La Dolce
Vita'').
   In 1956, foreign language film became a separate category.
Italy's ``La Strada'' won that year. But that didn't stop the
Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences from nominating foreign
films and filmmakers in other categories. In 1966, the French film
``A Man and a Woman'' won a screenplay Oscar and was also named
best foreign film. In 1973, Sven Nykvist won the cinematography
award for Sweden's ``Cries and Whispers.''
   The British have dominated the Oscars on several occasions,
including ``Lawrence of Arabia'' in 1962, ``Tom Jones'' in 1963,
``Chariots of Fire'' in 1981 and ``A Room With a View'' in 1986.
   ``The Academy Awards in some ways is the absolute tops for a
moviemaker; you can't do better,'' Lean said. ``It's terrific to
get and I never thought I would get one.''
   Lean's favorite of his own films is ``Lawrence of Arabia,''
which was released in 1962 and earned seven Academy Awards,
including best picture and director.
   An ``adventure of a lifetime'' is how Lean remembered the 19
months of location work for the film. ``Anybody who can go out and
live in the desert for a year is a lucky man,'' he said of the
title character.
   For the starring role, he wanted Albert Finney, one of Britain's
hottest young actors at the time, but after four days of testing,
Finney turned him down. Lean took a chance and cast a then unknown
Peter O'Toole.
   ``I was desperate because I didn't have a leading man,'' Lean
said. ``I went to a theater in the West End and I saw a film called
`The Day They Robbed the Bank of England,' and in it was Peter
playing a small part. I had never seen him before. As he came on
the screen, I thought, `Wait a minute, that's a star.'''
   But it's not as much fun anymore, insists Lean, who has made
just two films in the past 20 years: ``Ryan's Daughter'' and ``A
Passage to India.'' There's too much talk about money, and ever
since ``Easy Rider'' in 1969, producers have been looking for hit
films that cost little to make.
   The director even longs for the return of bosses such as
Goldwyn, tirades and all.
   ``Hollywood was something special,'' Lean said. ``Those chaps
like Goldwyn, they were uneducated, but all of them, however tough,
whatever they were, they just loved movies and sought quality. Now,
it's, `How much?'''
   Lean spoke of a recent dinner with Billy Wilder, another
Oscar-winning director and AFI honoree who has struggled to find
work. They talked about the problems of being part of Hollywood
history in a business that's always looking ahead.
   ``When you get over 80 the pressures are worse than they ever
were,'' said Lean, who turns 81 on March 25, the day before the
Academy Awards presentation.
   ``Billy's bright as a button, really entertaining and really
quick. You would think by the way he's treated, he's just
beginning. Anybody who makes `The Apartment' and `Some Like It Hot'
should be up in the highest position.''
   Fortunately, Lean said, he likes the young directors who greeted
him so warmly on his recent trip. He is especially enthusiastic
about Oliver Stone and predicts that Stone and other directors will
eventually take control of Hollywood from the agents and lawyers.
   Stone recently won the Directors Guild award for his ``Born on
the Fourth of July,'' which has received eight Oscar nominations
including best picture.
   ``The filmmakers in Hollywood I think are very special. They're
really keen and they're all bright and intelligent and they've got
a sense of humor. They are full of enthusiasm that doesn't seem to
be at all envious of others,'' Lean said.
   ``They just give it to you on a plate. It's very nice for an old
bird to get that.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Monday AMs, March 19</NOTE>
</DOC>
