ID: 145	RANK: 25	SCORE: 13.538342
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890927-0286 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-27-89 1816EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u f AM-Columbia-Sony 1stLd-Writethru f0202 09-27 0908</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Columbia-Sony, 1st Ld-Writethru, f0202,0935</SECOND>
<HEAD>Columbia Agrees to $3.4 Billion Buyout by Sony</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: SUBS 7th-9th grafs bgng, The deal ... to include Allen &amp; Co.
option agreement on its stake, analyst comment on Coca-Cola plans and closing
stock prices. Picks up 10th grafs pvs, Sony reportedly ...</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By SKIP WOLLENBERG</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP Business Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>NEW YORK (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc., the
storied producer of such movies as ``Ghostbusters'' and TV hits
like ``Who's The Boss,'' agreed Wednesday to a $3.4 billion cash
buyout by Sony Corp.
   The deal comes 21 months after the huge Japanese video and audio
equipment maker bought CBS Records for $2 billion. It marks the
biggest step of Sony's push into the ``software'' side of the
entertainment business that will provide products such as movies
and records to complement its stereos, televisions and
videocassette recorders.
   The agreement also extends the recent trend of foreign buyouts
of Hollywood studios that has gobbled up MGM-UA Entertainment Co.
and 20th Century Fox.
   Sony said it intended to allow Columbia's U.S. management
independence in day-to-day operations, but some top-level changes
are expected.
   Columbia said its president and chief executive, Victor A.
Kaufman, and its chief operating officer, Lew Korman, intend to
resign on completion of the buyout.
   There were published reports that movie producer Peter Guber was
expected to replace Kaufman. Guber, who co-produced ``Batman,''
``Rainman,'' and ``Flashdance,'' is considered one of Hollywood's
top producers.
   The deal should provide a big payday for Coca-Cola Co., which
stands to collect $1.45 billion in gross proceeds from selling its
49 percent stake in Columbia under Sony's $27 a share offer.
Coca-Cola signed an option agreement with Sony to tender its nearly
54 million shares of Columbia stock, subject to approval by
Coca-Cola's board, which is expected to meet Monday. The investment
firm Allen &amp; Co. Inc. signed an option agreement to sell its 3
percent stake.
   Coca-Cola declined comment on what it intends to do with the
cash, but analysts speculated that it would reinvest in its
soft-drink operations and possibly repurchase some of its stock.
   In trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Columbia rose 25
cents a share at $26.50 while Coca-Cola rose 50 cents a share to
$64.62{.
   Sony reportedly has been looking for a movie studio for more
than a year in an effort to extend its reach into new areas of the
entertainment business that it already serves as a dominant maker
of consumer electronics.
   Michael Schulhof, vice chairman of Sony Corp. of America, said
he had held informal discusssions with Columbia executives for
about a year but that the talks got serious only in the past week.
He said Sony decided on a proposal this past weekend and presented
it on Monday.
   Sony's U.S. subsidiary, Sony USA Inc., intends to launch its
tender offer by next Tuesday and expects to complete the
acquisition by early November.
   The deal had been widely rumored since Monday, when Columbia
disclosed it was in buyout talks with a third party that it refused
to identify. Sony confirmed early Wednesday from Tokyo that it had
made an offer.
   Columbia Chairman Donald R. Keough, who also is president of
Coca-Cola, said Sony was ``an ideal buyer.''
   ``It has all the right characteristics and very importantly has
the ability to take the company to its next important step,'' he
said.
   Columbia began as a tiny studio in 1920 and grew into a major
Hollywood force, placing fourth with 14 percent of 1989 domestic
box-office revenues through Sept. 4, according to the trade journal
Variety.
   Its owns two film studios, Columbia Pictures and Tri-Star
Pictures, but its box-office results have been considered
disappointing in recent years. Among its most recent releases have
been ``Ghostbusters II,'' ``The Karate Kid Part III'' and
``Casualties of War.''
   It has been more impressive in television, where it has produced
or distributed 11 prime-time series, including five new shows.
   Coca-Cola has been involved in Columbia since 1982, when it
bought a predecessor company. Coca-Cola subsequently launched a new
studio called Tri-Star Pictures in a joint venture with CBS Inc.
and Home Box Office Inc.
   In late 1987, Coca-Cola merged its entertainment business with
Tri-Star and wound up with 80 percent of the company that was
called Columbia Pictures Entertainmment. It subsequently
distributed part of its interest in Columbia to Coca-Cola
shareholders and retained 49 percent.
   In its statement, Coca-Cola's chairman and chief executive,
Roberto Goizueta, said Coca-Cola shareholders ``have benefited
significantly from our investment in the entertainment business
during the decade of the '80s.''
   But he said the company's ``core soft drink business offers
unequaled opportunity to expand our global leadership'' in the
1990s.
   Analysts said Columbia's huge library of more than 2,700 films
and more than 23,000 TV episodes should prove valuable to Sony.
   In the Columbia library are such films such as ``On the
Waterfront,'' ``Lawrence of Arabia,'' ``The Bridge over the River
Kwai,'' ``Kramer vs. Kramer'' and ``Tootsie.'' Tri-Star films have
included ``The Natural'' and ``Rambo: First Blood Part II.''
   Its TV programs include ``Designing Women'' and ``Married ...
With Children'' as well as syndicated programs such as ``The
Jeffersons'' and ``Barney Miller.'' Its TV library includes the
series ``Father Knows Best'' and ``Route 66.''
   Columbia also operates 820 movie screens in 220 locations
through its Loews Theatre Management Corp.
   Columbia earned $16 million, or 14 cents a share, on revenue of
$1.62 billion in the fiscal year ended Feb. 28.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
