ID: 145	RANK: 60	SCORE: 9.016370
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891023-0225 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-10-23-89 2155EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>a e BC-WKD--HomeVideo Adv00   10-23 1143</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-WKD--Home Video, Adv 00,1184</SECOND>
<HEAD>$adv00</HEAD>
<HEAD>For Release Anytime</HEAD>
<HEAD>AP WEEKEND ENTERTAINMENT AND ARTS</HEAD>
<HEAD>Video View: Home Video Reviews</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By DOLORES BARCLAY</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP Arts Editor</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   
   ``Lawrence of Arabia'' (MCA Home Video. VHS, $89.95. Rated PG)
   
   When film students, critics, historians and other buffs are
asked to list the best movies ever made, ``Lawrence of Arabia''
appears with well-deserved frequency. This majestic epic is
cinematic poetry.
   When the David Lean masterpiece, which introduced an unknown
actor named Peter O'Toole, landed in New York on Dec. 17, 1962, it
opened with a few lovely touches including a program book complete
with bibliographical and biographical material. Although called a
``camel opera'' by some wags, and homoerotic by others because of
its absence of women and glorification of men with men, few could
elude the movie's raptures.
   And the charms and cinematic seductions of ``Lawrence of
Arabia'' still hold up on the small screen, despite the thick black
frame that allows Cinemascope to be reduced.
   What's being offered on video is a new, restored version of the
film, which played theatrically earlier this year.
   After a decade, 32 minutes of the movie had been cut and one
print contained a complete reversal (Lawrence's watch is switched
from hand to hand). There were also original editing cuts made when
the movie was first released to trim it for American audiences with
a short attention span. Lean has restored some of those scenes, at
times calling some of his actors (notably O'Toole) into a studio to
record new dialogue.
   Lean has added a scene in which Lawrence rudely breaks up a
snooker game at the officers' club and a harem scene. The flogging
scene before a panting bey (Jose Ferrer) is more fully developed
and suggests even more strongly the sexual connotations.
   The restoration by Robert A. Harris and Anne Coates, who won an
Academy Award for editing the original movie, takes the film to a
running time of 218 minutes. The new version, with an added 20
minutes, is still breathtaking but attempts to more deeply probe
the elusive and enigmatic Lawrence.
   T.E. Lawrence was an arrogant cartographer in the British army
who is sent to Arabia to assist Prince Feisal (Alec Guinness) in
the 1917-18 Arab revolt against the Ottoman Empire. He quickly
adapts to the desert and the Bedouin way of life _ he drinks water
only when his guide does; he eats the same tepid swill as they do.
He also becomes a messianic warrior whose strategy and wisdom are
matched only by ego and obsession.
   With his almost virginal white robes, O'Toole, with eyes the
deep blue of the Mediterranean and hair the color of golden straw,
struts about not with the swagger of the British gentleman but with
the stance of a god. Indeed, the exploits Robert Bolt so craftily
chisels in his excellent screenplay, paint Lawrence as a demigod.
   Unlike many of today's filmmakers who take their audiences to be
simpletons, Lean has a keen eye for detail and strives for cultural
accuracy. The costumes, props, blocking all hold up today _
``Lawrence of Arabia'' could have been made in the 1980s. The
makeup, however, especially the shoe polish on Guinness, is dated.
   The performances by a rash of stars who also include Omar Sharif
in his Western screen debut and Anthony Quinn, are excellent. But
the movie's real star is the desert with its smouldering dunes and
poetry of colors.
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   
   ``Miss Firecracker'' (HBO Home Video. VHS-Beta, $89.99. Rated
PG-13)
   
   How much can one hope for in life? Not much, but that still
leaves a lot of room. And as we learn in Thomas Schlamme's ``Miss
Firecracker,'' anything is possible.
   The key is to just be oneself, and to honestly approach and
embrace the opportunities in life. Beth Henley's story drops enough
homilies between the lines to stuff a goosefeather-filled quilt.
But these wise little nuggets are drizzled with spice and wit and
charm.
   Carnelle Scott (Holly Hunter), a plain little thing who cleans
fish in a catfish factory, has spent her life in the shadow of her
beautiful cousin, Elain, a delicate but catty magnolia blossom who
won the Miss Firecracker beauty contest in 1972.
   Carnelle, who's known in town as Miss Hot Tamale because of her
lusty ways, has held only one dream in life: to win the pageant. So
when she reachs the cutoff age, she dies her hair a brassy,
fire-engine red, and enters.
   Her main support is a young woman who is equally plain _ an
endearing seamstress with the improbable name of Popeye (Alfre
Woodard), who taught herself to sew by making little outfits for
her pet frogs as a child. Popeye, whose brother threw gravel in her
eyes when she was a child and then tried to ease the pain with
eardrops, hears through her eyes and sees beyond the surface of
things in life. She dreams of one day finding that one special love.
   Elain (Mary Steenburgen) returns to Yazoo City for the contest
to give a speech, ``My Life as a Beauty.'' Her wild brother,
Delmount (Tim Robbins), has just been released from an insane
asylum after Elain committed him for what she saw as his
anti-social ways. After a brief stint removing squished animals
from highways, he arrives in Yazoo City to sell the family home.
   It all comes together on the runway. Selfishness is exposed like
an ugly boil; loyality, optimism and honesty glow.
   Henley, who received a Pulitzer Prize for ``Crimes of the
Heart'' in 1981, opened ``Miss Firecracker'' off-Broadway to rave
reviews in 1984. She wrote the screenplay for the movie version.
   In portraits bursting with the magic and eccentricities of the
same Southern literary tradition that gave us William Faulkner,
Harper Lee and Tennesee Williams, Henley has created memorable and
rich characters. These are real people, not Hollywood plastics.
   Hunter originated the role of Carnelle off-Broadway, and is
marvelously hyper as the unsophisticated, unassuming beauty
hopeful. Robbins is strangely maniacal but boyish and easy to love.
Steenburgen, who was born in Arkansas, plays magnolia blossom to
the hilt and is delicious. But it is Woodard who steals the movie
with her lovely innocence as Popeye. We know what love really means.
   Play this one for the entire family. The language might be a
little strong for younger children, but the values are even
stronger.
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
   G _ General audiences. All ages admitted.
   PG _ Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be
suitable for children.
   PG-13 _ Special parental guidance strongly suggested for
children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young
children.
   R _ Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult
guardian.
   X _ No one under 17 admitted. Some states may have higher age
restrictions.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Release Anytime</NOTE>
</DOC>
