ID: 145	RANK: 81	SCORE: 8.089051
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911106-0019
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911106-0019.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Bojidar Yanev Has
   A Passion for Bridges
   That Doesn't Quit
   ---
   As Chief Inspector of Spans
   In New York City, He Is
   An Aerialist With a Ph.D.
   ----
   By Daniel Machalaba
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
11/06/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<IN>
BIOGRAPHY (BIO)
</IN>
<NS>
BIOGRAPHY (BIO)
</NS>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- With lights flashing and sirens wailing, six
police cars raced to the Williamsburg Bridge to investigate a
report that a man was climbing to the top of the main cable.
   Officers blocked two lanes of traffic. A patrol boat was
positioned below the bridge, just in case.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "Come down, slowly," an officer with a loudspeaker shouted
to the man perched 300 feet above the East River.
   He did, too, but not gladly, and not all the way. When he
got within about 60 feet of the police, he dropped them his
business card.
   This wasn't the only time Bojidar Simeonov Yanev (his
friends call him Yanev) has been mistaken for a jumper: It
has happened to him three times this year on that one bridge
between Manhattan and Brooklyn.
   "It's a big nuisance, the police give me hell," says Mr.
Yanev, who is chief bridge inspector for the city's
Department of Transportation. He is in charge of the 40
inspectors who monitor 872 bridges owned by the city, and he
is out there himself acting like an aerialist.
   The police aren't the only ones watching Mr. Yanev. With
more than half the city's bridges in an advanced state of
decay, the Bulgarian-born Mr. Yanev and his crew are the
first line of defense against catastrophe.
   New Yorkers may not know him and his daredevil style, but
Mr. Yanev is a celebrity abroad, where the decline and fall
of New York's bridges is a matter of amazement.
   Mr. Yanev's slide shows of rusted beams, cracking girders
and crumbling concrete pack meetings in Paris and his native
Sophia. "New York is the best laboratory in the world for
studying the consequences of deterioration," says Jacqueline
Llanos, a research analyst at the Central Laboratory for
Bridges and Highways in Paris. Adds Iskra Nesheva, a research
associate in Sophia and a Yanev family friend: "There isn't
anything he loves as much as the bridges, except his mother."
   A Japanese TV crew recently filmed him climbing cables
like a circus performer (Look Ma, no hands) for a show called
"A Man Over Troubled Bridges." And he has played host to more
than 30 tours of the city's bridges for the enlightenment of
engineers, politicians, business leaders, reporters and
visitors from as far away as Tokyo and Helsinki.
   A Columbia University doctor of engineering science, the
44-year-old Mr. Yanev, Dr. Yanev really, has always been a
showman. As a teen-ager, he toured Europe playing the violin
with the Bulgarian Children's Philharmonic Orchestra. In New
York, he has been known to play his violin on a Greenwich
Village street corner; one night he made $30 from passers-by.
Now he teaches a graduate course at Columbia in "buckling,"
the science of forecasting when a structure will give way. A
field trip to a buckled bridge is a must, he says, given the
"rich field of examples" the city offers. His favorite is the
Honeywell Bridge over railroad tracks in Queens.
   Tagging along with Dr. Yanev brings out the acrophobia in
a reporter who didn't know he was afraid of heights. Because
of Dr. Yanev's life-long fascination with acrobats and his
irresistible urge to act like one, he is known as "Spiderman"
among city officials.
   At the dilapidated Madison Avenue Bridge over the Harlem
River, the tall, lean, lithe Dr. Yanev scrambles up exposed
reinforcing bars on a bridge pier, scattering bits of
concrete as he goes. Coming down, he grasps a rusting bar
like a swaying birch and glides to the river bank. "Someone
has been playing here," he says, explaining the damage. But
structurally the problem "isn't so serious."
   At the Manhattan Bridge, dressed in an orange jump suit
and wearing rubber-soled wing tips, Dr. Yanev casually
traverses a beam 120 feet above the East River, pointing out
cracks. As usual, he wouldn't dream of wearing a hard hat and
safety harness. "Does an airline pilot wear a parachute?"
asks the longtime admirer of French tightrope walker Philippe
Petit.
   "Compared to the French acrobats, what I do is rather
pedestrian," adds Dr. Yanev, who once invited Mr. Petit to
join him on the cables of an East River bridge. Still
awaiting the reply he never got from Mr. Petit, Dr. Yanev was
arrested last summer attempting to scale the Pont Massena, 60
feet above Parisian railroad tracks. His interest was purely
intellectual, he says: He wanted to learn more about
cable-stayed design, of which the Pont Massena is a striking
example. It looks, he notes, like a stylized Christmas tree.
   Dr. Yanev's angular, rubbery features come alive when he
talks about bridges. His office at the city's Bureau of
Bridges is decorated with broken stanchions, rusted steel
plates and concrete chunks gathered during inspections. The
day last April he was mistaken by police for a jumper, Dr.
Yanev was searching the cables of the Williamsburg Bridge for
the source of a steel clip that had crashed through someone's
windshield. The driver of the car was unharmed, but other
bridge failures have cost lives. The city currently is
defending itself against a suit brought by the family of a
dental technician who was crushed under a falling 400-pound
chunk of concrete on the FDR Drive.
   Dr. Yanev has pictures of the Eiffel Tower and the Golden
Gate Bridge on the walls of his Manhattan apartment. The
windows afford a view of the Brooklyn, Manhattan and
Williamsburg bridges. In his spare time, he reads the
treatises of famous New York bridge designers.
   "He's a bridge artist," says Samuel Schwartz, the former
Transportation Department chief engineer who hired Dr. Yanev.
Mr. Schwartz is in awe, not of Dr. Yanev's derring-do, but of
his expert judgments: "He told me to restrict or close some
bridges, and he was right. Other times, he told me to keep a
bridge open. He was always right."
   Dr. Yanev, en route, is no more predictable than Dr. Yanev
aloft. He makes an abrupt U-turn in Harlem to wash his
city-owned Chevrolet Celebrity in water from a gushing
hydrant. He blocks traffic on the Kosciuszko Bridge when he
stops the car to take a photo of cemetery gravestones against
a backdrop of New York skyscrapers. "I shouldn't do this, but
I want this shot," he says as horns blare. "The best view of
the city is from the bridges."
   New York City officials say a $3.3 billion rebuilding
program will take care of the city's bridge problems by the
year 2004. But by that time, Dr. Yanev observes, "we'll need
a new bridge program."
   For now, New York is where the action is in bridge decay.
"No other city in the world built so much and neglected so
much," says Dr. Yanev, who boasts that New York's data on how
spans fall apart are unexcelled.
   Dr. Yanev says he once had dreams of designing bridges;
inspecting them he considered a "professional rock-bottom
low." The son of Bulgaria's chief bridge and highway
engineer, Dr. Yanev came to America in 1972 in search of
freedom, opportunity and challenge. But after earning his
doctorate in 1976, he found no work to love until 1990, when
he found his metier in this dangerous, rewarding
$64,900-a-year job.
   Bridge inspection, he now feels, is "the best of all
possible worlds. You get to look at all these excellent
problems, and all of it is essential to the life of New York
City itself," he says. "And you also get to walk on these
bridges."
   From a tower of the Williamsburg Bridge, Dr. Yanev takes
in the sweep of downtown Brooklyn, the twin towers of the
World Trade Center, the nearby Manhattan and Brooklyn bridges
and a barge 30 stories below. When he steps onto the cable
and grips the handropes and walks toward Manhattan, he says
he imagines that "I'm holding the bridge by the reins and
riding it into the city."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
