ID: 193	RANK: 49	SCORE: 15.482778
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910425-0127
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910425-0127.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Law -- Legal Beat:
   Judge Rejects Suit Over Failure
   Of Firm After Leveraged Buy-Out
   ----
   By Amy Dockser Marcus and Arthur S. Hayes
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
04/25/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B12
</SO>
<CO>
   HE
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
UTILITIES (UTI)
</MS>
<IN>
AIRLINES (AIR)
BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)
ELECTRIC UTILITIES (ELC)
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)
RESTAURANTS, FAST-FOOD, CATERING (RES)
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
TEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX)
</IN>
<NS>
BANKRUPTCY DECLARATIONS AND PROCEEDINGS (BCY)
LAW &amp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)
ACQUISITIONS &amp; MERGERS, TAKEOVERS, BOARD BATTLES (TNM)
</NS>
<GV>
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)
CONGRESS (CNG)
</GV>
<RE>
HAWAII (HI)
MASSACHUSETTS (MA)
NEW YORK (NY)
VIRGINIA (VA)
PENNSYLVANIA (PA)
</RE>
<LP>
   A federal judge rejected a lawsuit over a failed leveraged
buy-out in one of the first court tests of whether former
shareholders can be held accountable when a transaction goes
bust.
   The suit was brought by Craddock-Terry Shoe Corp., now in
bankruptcy court in Lynchburg, Va., against former directors
and other shareholders who sold the company to a buy-out
group in 1986. The company claimed that the selling
shareholders were paid such a high price for their stake that
the surviving company couldn't possibly pay off its resulting
debts.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But after considering written evidence and holding
hearings, U.S. District Judge Jackson L. Kiser of Lynchburg,
Va., ruled that the defendants couldn't be compelled to
return the cash they received in the deal. Bankruptcy lawyers
said that the ruling is likely to be cited by defendants in
other such cases, few of which have reached the trial stage.
   While Virginia's law is slightly different from that in
other states, the Craddock-Terry case is similar to cases
pending over the failed buy-outs of Revco D.S. Inc. and
Wieboldt Stores Inc., among other companies. In such
"fraudulent conveyance" cases, the plaintiffs generally
allege that people who benefited from a buy-out did so with
the knowledge -- or the reason to know -- that the resulting
company wouldn't be able to survive.
   Under Virginia law, the judge said, a suit can't succeed
unless the company received nothing of legal value for what
it paid to buy out former shareholders or unless the
participants intended to commit fraud at the time of the
transactions. In this case, he said, the company received new
management and an infusion of capital. "While the investment
did not work out well for {the buy-out group's} creditors, it
was neither fraudulent nor unlawful at the time it occurred,"
the judge wrote.
   Virginia Powell, a Richmond lawyer representing the former
Craddock-Terry directors, said the court's decision indicates
that "a transaction cannot be set aside merely because the
deal was highly leveraged and the surviving company performed
poorly."
   The Craddock-Terry suit was brought against 45 of its
former shareholders who received amounts ranging from $6,000
to $6 million each in the leveraged buy-out. The successor
company, C-T of Virginia Inc., has been in Chapter 11
bankruptcy proceedings since 1987 and hasn't filed a plan of
reorganization.
   Harold Bonacquist, the New York lawyer for the company,
said his client hasn't decided whether to appeal. He said
that while the decision "is not good news for plaintiffs in
Virginia," it did not have wide implications for litigation
involving failed buy-outs. But Sandra Mayerson, a New York
lawyer who is a court-appointed examiner in the Interco Inc.
bankruptcy proceedings, said that if other courts follow the
judge's ruling, it will make it difficult for plaintiffs to
win.
   Ms. Mayerson also noted that Judge Kiser considered each
element of the buy-out separately, such as the bank's
financing of the deal, the creation of a buy-out company,
shareholders' tendering of their stock and actual payment to
shareholders. He found that each element, taken by itself,
was properly structured and that there was no broader
evidence of fraudulent intent on anyone's part.
   In contrast, Ms. Mayerson said, some other courts have
said that all the elements of a deal should be considered
together to determine whether the overall effect is to render
the company insolvent. She said Judge Kiser's view, if widely
adopted, would mean that properly structured deals couldn't
be attacked even if the overall effect of the transaction was
to leave the company insolvent.
   ---
   POWER FAILURE spawns lawsuit by businesses claiming
losses.
   A group of small businesses on the island of Oahu sued
Hawaiian Electric Co. to recover $75 million in damages
including lost profits allegedly caused by an islandwide
electric power failure that lasted up to 12 hours on April 9.
   Five plaintiffs, including four restaurant concerns and a
laundry machine company, are seeking certification of the
suit as a class action. The class would include all of the
utility's business customers on Oahu, said plaintiff attorney
Paul Devens.
   The suit, filed Friday in state court in Honolulu, accuses
the utility of negligence and breach of contract. The
blackout occurred because Hawaiian Electric failed "to
properly maintain its utility easements . . . including
control of natural growth of trees that came in contact with
electric wires and lines," the suit states.
   A spokesman for the utility's parent, Hawaiian Electric
Industries Inc. of Honolulu, said that investigations into
the cause of the outage are continuing, but that the
"probable cause" was trees that interfered with power lines.
The company's general counsel declined to comment on the
suit.
   Customer lawsuits against utilities resulting from power
outages are rare, but not unprecedented, said a spokesman for
the Edison Electric Institute, a Washington trade group. Most
failures are due to storms and other natural causes that
aren't legal torts, he said.
   Commonwealth Edison Co. said it has agreed to settle two
class-action lawsuits stemming from power outages last summer
in Chicago for a total of about $4 million. The utility
didn't admit any liability, but settled to avoid protracted
litigation and legal fees. Consolidated Edison of New York
said it paid out a total of $2 million to settle more than
550 cases brought after a 1977 blackout in New York.
   ---
   JUDICIAL CANDIDATE wins fight to express views during
campaign.
   A federal judge in Philadelphia struck down a Pennsylvania
law that severely restricted what judicial candidates could
tell voters about their legal or political views. The law was
patterned after a model code of judicial conduct drafted by
the American Bar Association in 1972 that was adopted to
varying degrees by states that elect trial judges.
   Samuel C. Stretton, a lawyer and candidate for a seat on
the Court of Common Pleas of Chester County, challenged the
law as an unconstitutional violation of his right to free
speech. Mr. Stretton said the law prevented him from stating
his position on key political and social issues.
   The Disciplinary Board of the Supreme Court of
Pennsylvania -- represented by the state Attorney General's
Office -- contended that the law was valid because it
prohibited candidates from committing themselves on legal and
political issues that they might have to rule on as judges.
   U.S. District Judge Clarence C. Newcomer of Philadelphia,
however, ruled that the law's restrictions were too broad and
too vague. The ruling applies only to the Pennsylvania law,
although it may encourage challenges in other states. "There
are an array of less restrictive means to preserve the fact
and appearance of judicial impartiality which do not impose
an unconstitutional restriction upon a judicial candidate's
First Amendment rights," the judge said in his opinion.
   Judge Newcomer upheld the section of the law that bars
candidates from personally soliciting campaign funds.
   ---
   AIRPORT DISPUTE over landing fees is settled.
   The settlement of a class-action suit involving landing
fees imposed on small aircraft at Boston's Logan Airport will
provide plaintiffs with about $3 million.
   The dispute stems from a plan instituted by the
Massachusetts Port Authority in 1988 to reduce congestion by
inducing commuter airlines and private planes to switch to
other airports in the Boston area. The program prompted a
flurry of litigation brought by operators of small aircraft
arguing that the increased landing fees were discriminatory.
   The litigation was closely watched because other large
airports face problems similar to Logan's and because the
Port Authority's revised fees were based not just on
equipment weight, the traditional standard, but also on
operational costs.
   In late 1988, the U.S. Department of Transportation ruled
that the fees were unlawful, and that decision was upheld by
a federal appeals court. Some 20 commuter airlines and the
operators of six or seven thousand other airplanes that seat
fewer than 30 people will be entitled to refunds, according
to Raymond J. Rasenberger, of the Washington law firm
Zuckert, Scoutt &amp; Rasenberger, who represented the small
aircraft operators.
   Roscoe Trimmier, a partner at the Boston law firm Ropes &amp;
Gray, said that his client, the Port Authority, has an
"informal understanding" with major carriers that it will be
reimbursed for a portion of the settlement.
   ---
   UNEMPLOYED LAWYERS are offered extra training by a law
school.
   Fordham University School of Law, reflecting the
marketplace realities of the lean '90s, is cutting a special
deal for lawyers hit by the recent wave of layoffs. The law
school will charge lawyers only $25 for continuing legal
education courses, intended to help practicing lawyers keep
abreast of changes in various practice areas. Typically, the
fees for the courses range from $65 to $200.
   "The courses won't make them experts," said Ronne Kaplan,
director of Fordham's continuing legal education office. "But
outside of being trained in a firm, there really isn't a way
for a lawyer to learn a new discipline."
   ---
   NOTED: After delivering a 10-minute argument in a case
before the U.S. Supreme Court, Attorney General Dick
Thornburgh said he is "considering" whether to run for the
U.S. Senate seat formerly held by Pennsylvania Republican
John Heinz, who was killed in an air crash April 4.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
