ID: 193	RANK: 57	SCORE: 14.801782
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP881228-0231 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-12-28-88 1938EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u f AM-ForcedLanding 1stLd-Writethru f0195 12-28 0841</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Forced Landing, 1st Ld-Writethru, f0195,0863</SECOND>
<HEAD>Eastern Grounds One Plane After Safety Inspections In Wake Of Jet
Crack</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Leads with 17 grafs to UPDATE with more problems with Eastern
planes, FAA likely to order replacement of rivets in some 727s, more
detailed inspection planned by Eastern, Delta saying it will inspect
its 727 fleet. Picks up 8th graf pvs, `In Charleston ....'</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By RICHARD COLE</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>MIAMI (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Eastern Airlines on Wednesday said an inspection of
46 older Boeing 727s found one with a 3-inch fuselage crack in
roughly the same spot as a tear that forced a jet to make an
emergency landing in Charleston, W.Va.
   The plane was grounded at Boston's Logan International Airport,
and later Wednesday, Eastern maintenance workers in Miami found
apparent corrosion near rivets on another 727, company spokeswoman
Karen Ceremsak said. She said paint was being removed from the area
late Wednesday and no other details were available.
   Apparent cracks were found in an out-of-service Eastern DC-9 in
Atlanta, Ms. Ceremsak said. That discovery was not related to the
Boeing 727 inspection, but resulted from an earlier industrywide
directive from the Federal Aviation Administration and
McDonnell-Douglas, the manufacturers, to check all DC-9 aircraft
with 55,000 flights, she said.
   An FAA official said airlines soon will be asked to replace
rivets in more than 800 727s that were made with what is now
considered an outmoded bonding process.
   Darrell Pederson, an FAA assistant manager in Seattle, where
Boeing is based, said the agency was ``very close'' to issuing a
notice of proposed rule-making, which can be followed by an
airworthiness directive after some time for public comment.
   A similar directive was issued after a 20-foot section tore loose
from an Aloha Airlines 737 jet in midflight in April, sending a
flight attendant to her death, Pederson said.
   Under that directive, airlines had to replace more than 7,000
rivets on at least 100 older Boeing 737s at a cost of about $8
million. In addition, altitude and other restrictions were imposed
pending inspection for cracks.
   Eastern ordered its 727s to be checked visually as a precaution
after the emergency landing Monday morning. A 14-inch hole opened at
the rear of the cabin roof at 31,000 feet, causing the 22-year-old
Boeing 727 to lose pressure.
   The airline also plans a more sophisticated, electrical-current
inspection of its Boeing fleet. ``We'll use electrical current
seeking out any imperfections, beginning tonight,'' Ms. Ceremsak
said. ``This is on our own initiative.''
   The checks can be carried out during normal maintenance and will
be completed in about a month, without disrupting service, she said.
   A crack in a 24-year-old Eastern jet was discovered Monday,
Eastern said in announcing the visual inspections were completed.
The plane was one of the first 727s made.
   ``That plane was taken out of service for repairs,'' said carrier
spokesman Robin Matell. ``All the rest are flying normally.''
   National Transportation Safety Board inspectors arrived in Boston
on Wednesday to examine the plane.
   Ms. Ceremsak said the airline anticipates changes in its
procedures when the NTSB issues its findings on the emergency
landing of Monday's Rochester-to-Atlanta flight. Two people among
the 110 aboard suffered minor injuries.
   ``I'm sure we will be revising our maintenance program in keeping
with the findings, but it would be premature to say what changes we
will make,'' Ms. Ceremsak said.
   In Atlanta, Delta Air Lines said it plans to inspect the fuselage
of each of its Boeing 727 jets.
   Delta spokesman Jim Lundy said the ``assurance-type inspections''
are being conducted in consultation with Boeing and Eastern and are
strictly a precaution. Delta has experienced no similar problems,
and the airline's 130 Boeing 727 jets are all from the newer 727-200
series, with an average age of 11.76 years, he said.
   In Charleston, Eastern mechanics on Wednesday were set to repair
the 14-by-10-inch hole in the fuselage. Some material was to be
taken to NTSB headquarters in Washington for analysis.
   Some experts have speculated the tear was caused by metal
fatigue, but Ms. Ceremsak said Eastern would await the NTSB report.
She said the repaired plane was expected to be flown back to Atlanta
or Miami on Thursday.
   Some of the 104 passengers complained that their oxygen masks
failed to work when the cabin lost pressure, but Ms. Ceremsak said
many of those aboard had failed to pull down on the masks hard
enough to trigger the oxygen flow.
   ``We went back and tested the masks, and they all deployed,'' she
said.
   The emergency landing and grounded plane were just two incidents
in a string of Eastern problems this week.
   On Sunday, an Eastern A300 bound for Newark, N.J., had to return
to Miami International Airport because of an engine problem. On
Tuesday, a Fort Lauderdale-bound A300 turned back to New York's
LaGuardia Airport after a problem with a door prevented the plane
from being properly pressurized.
   Also Tuesday, an Eastern plane clipped a parked private plane at
the Key West airport while taxiing and passengers were put on
another flight.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
