ID: 193	RANK: 58	SCORE: 14.670195
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890310-0242 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-03-10-89 2326EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-EasternRdp 3rdLd-Writethru a0859 03-10 1333</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Eastern Rdp, 3rd Ld - Writethru, a0859,1366</SECOND>
<HEAD>Eastern To Restore Flights; Unions Charge Continental Crews Brought
In</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: Leads with 5 grafs to include element of strikers' pay frozen,
nonstrikers paid, quote from Machinists' attorney; picks up 4th graf pvs:
``We are ...</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto MH2</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By CATHERINE WILSON</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>MIAMI (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Eastern Airlines fought back against a crippling
strike Friday by packing its Northeast Shuttle with passengers at
$12 a head and announcing restoration of 80 flights a day, mostly
Latin American and top domestic routes.
   But thousands of angry and confused Eastern ticket holders trying
to get refunds or fly on other carriers learned they would have to
pay more or put in their claims in U.S. Bankruptcy Court, where the
carrier filed for Chapter 11 reorganization on Thursday.
   A judge in New York extended his order barring commuter railroad
workers from honoring any picket lines thrown up by Eastern's
striking Machinists union.
   On Friday, lawyers for the Machinists said they would ask the
bankruptcy court to unfreeze striking workers' final pre-strike
paychecks, since Judge Burton R. Lifland on Thursday allowed Eastern
to pay nonstriking employees.
   ``It seems not coincidental that the timing of the bankruptcy was
intended to deny these employees the wages for the work they
performed,'' said attorney Robert Clayman. The 8,500 Machinists are
owed about $7.5 million dollars.
   ``We are going to rebuild this airline in prudent, sensible
increments and get our men and women back to work so they can
support their families,'' Eastern President Phil Bakes said Friday.
``This is the beginning of a new smaller, restructured and viable
Eastern Airlines.''
   Eastern said the more than 140 daily flights, including 62
shuttle flights connecting Boston, New York and Washington, would be
operated with picket line-crossing employees who have been with the
company since before the start of the strike Saturday over Eastern's
demand for contract concessions.
   But strikers charged the crews on the restored flights beginning
Sunday and Monday will be from Eastern's sister carrier, Continental
Airlines, and vowed to extend pickets to that airline, treating
parent Texas Air Corp. as a single company.
   Eastern pilots honoring the picket lines also accused the company
of ``stepping up its campaign to threaten, coerce and otherwise
entice pilots to cross'' the picket line.
   ``This includes illegal offers of bonuses for second officers and
phone calls to pilots' homes, attempting to intimidate spouses, and
even their children, with threats that their breadwinner will never
be able to work again for Eastern,'' said Ron Cole, an Air Line
Pilots Association spokesman.
   More than 300 workers from around New Jersey rallied Friday in
support of the Eastern machinists, offering them money and help
walking picket lines.
   ``I have never ... seen this kind of solidarity,'' said Matthew
Adams, AFL-CIO regional representative from Washington, D.C.
   From the rally, workers went to Newark International Airport for
a demonstration outside the terminal used by Continental. Police
estimated 350-400 people rallied at the airport.
   At New York City's LaGuardia Airport, three of the region's
Democratic congressmen _ Thomas Downey, Gary Ackerman and Charles
Schumer _ joined strikers on the picket line outside the Eastern
shuttle terminal.
   Most of Eastern's pilots and flight attendants honored the
Machinists' picket lines and the airline's pre-strike schedule of
1,050 flights a day had fallen to 62 flights a day on its Northeast
shuttle and three a week to Latin America.
   That pushed the nation's seventh-largest carrier to file for
financial reorganization Thursday in the fifth-biggest Chapter 11
filing in terms of company assets. The strike is costing Eastern
about $4 million a day.
   Eastern management listed more than $4.5 billion in net assets,
$3.39 billion in liabilities and 15,696 creditors.
   In Washington, presidential spokesman Marlin Fitzwater was asked
if there was any chance President Bush might change his mind on
intervening in the Eastern strike. ``He's not rethinking it,''
Fitzwater said.
   Frank Borman, the former astronaut who once headed Eastern,
blamed the strike and the airline's decision to file for Chapter 11
on Charles Bryan, head of the International Association of
Machinists.
   Borman said Thursday in Las Cruces, N.M., where he lives, that
Eastern had good relations with the union before Bryan's 1980
election.
   ``We had the biggest profit-sharing program in the industry,''
Borman said, adding that Bryan terminated that program when he was
elected.
   The first Eastern shuttle to leave Boston for New York and
Washington with the new $12 one-way fare Friday had 92 people on
board, said a spokesman for the Massachusetts Port Authority, which
operates Logan International Airport.
   Although figures were not immediately available for passengers
who took advantage of the offer throughout the day, Eastern
spokesman Robin Matell said that demand had exceeded capacity.
   The previous weekend fare for the shuttle was $69, and the
original $99 weekday fare was lowered to $49. Spokesman Phil
Orlandella said previous shuttle flights during the strike carried
as few as seven passengers.
   Many holders of Eastern tickets learned they would have to pay
higher fares on most other carriers or join a long line of unsecured
creditors seeking refunds in U.S. Bankruptcy Court in New York.
   ``This has been one of those days that we all hope would never
happen,'' said Phil Davidoff, president-elect of the 23,000-member
American Society of Travel Agents.
   But a threat to the 320,000 commuters who use trains in the New
York City area eased when a federal judge, who had temporarily
barred commuter railroad workers from honoring picket lines,
extended his order indefinitely beyond a Friday midnight deadline
pending his decision on whether to allow picketing.
   A federal appeals court panel in Philadelphia issued a similar
ban for that area.
   Eastern intends to resume its profitable service between Miami
and 13 Latin American cities and restore flights linking Boston and
Washington; Miami and San Juan, Puerto Rico; Miami and New York; and
New York and Montreal, Eastern officials in Miami said.
   The exact number of non-union employees who will be recalled to
help had not been determined, they said. The carrier laid off 9,500
non-union employees this week and said it had 200 pilots available
before shutting most routes Monday.
   ``Those pilots will cover our new schedule,'' Eastern spokeswoman
Cory Zywotow said, adding that ``since the bankruptcy filing, pilots
have been calling in to report back to work.''
   But Machinists union officer Wally Haber charged Eastern has
brought 100 pilots and 60 mechanics from Continental to Miami to
wear Eastern uniforms and operate the restored flights, denying
Eastern pilots would cross picket lines.
   ``If we're successful he (Texas Air Chairman Frank Lorenzo) won't
build anything until we have some new management at Eastern. With
new management at Eastern, we can settle our differences in 24
hours,'' Haber said.
   J.B. Stokes, an 17-year Eastern pilot and spokesman for the Air
Line Pilots Association, said a retraining program was allowing
Eastern to expand its routes.
   ``They're going to be able to slightly augment the current
schedule, but they're just trying to maximize the available pool of
pilots,'' he said. ``They've moved them to different locations to
give the image of its expanded flight schedule.''
   Eastern employment stood at 31,200 before the strike was launched
March 4 but has shrunk to 1,500. Most of the 3,600 pilots and 5,900
flight attendants honored picket lines set up by the 8,500-member
Machinists union.
   About 3,200 Eastern workers have filed for 26 weeks of
unemployment benefits at a temporary office set up in Miami, and
another office is being set up strictly for job placement.
   ``My offices are really, really strained,'' said Marianne
Salazar, employment and training regional manager for the Florida
state Labor Department.
   Jose Marquez, a 10-year flight attendant, went to apply for
unemployment with his wife and 2-year-old son. ``I think senior
people might come back to work but not me,'' he said.
   Those are eligible for benefits will receive about half their
average weekly wages up to $200 for up to 26 weeks. They also must
actively seek employment.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
