ID: 193	RANK: 81	SCORE: 13.581752
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890310-0302 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-03-10-89 1308EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u f PM-EasternRdp 3rdLd-Writethru f0090 03-10 1270</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Eastern Rdp, 3rd Ld-Writethru, f0090,1305</SECOND>
<HEAD>Eastern Files For Chapter 11; Ticket Holders, Agents Left Confused</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: SUBS 2nd graf to UPDATE with judge extending ban on sympathy
strike; SUBS 6th graf to include number of pre-strike flights daily; SUBS
13th graf, `The first ...' with 2 grafs to UPDATE with plane capacity,
further details on judge's ruling today; Picks up 14th graf, `Angry and
...'</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto MH1</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By MARCY GORDON</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP Business Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>NEW YORK (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Eastern Airlines, one day after filing for
bankruptcy protection, said today it will resume 80 flights because
more pilots and flight attendants are crossing picket lines.
   Meanwhile, thousands of Eastern ticket holders scrambled to get
refunds or fly on other carriers. And a judge in New York today
extended his order barring commuter railroad workers from honoring
Eastern Machinists' picket lines.
   Beginning Sunday and Monday, Eastern will resume its profitable
service between Miami and 13 Latin American cities and restore
flights linking Boston and Washington; Miami and San Juan, Puerto
Rico; Miami and New York's LaGuardia Airport; and LaGuardia and
Montreal, said Eastern spokeswoman Karen Ceremsak in Miami.
   ``We have a number of pilots, a number of flight attendants, and
in fact they're coming back in higher numbers,'' Eastern President
Phil Bakes said in announcing the new flights on NBC's ``Today''
show.
   The exact number of employees who will be recalled to work the
restored flights has not been determined, Ms. Ceremsak said.
   Eastern has been flying 62 flights a day during the strike on its
Northeast shuttle linking Boston, New York and Washington, and three
a week from Miami to Buenos Aires and Santiago. Eastern had 1,040
flights daily before the strike.
   ``We are going to rebuild this airline in prudent, sensible
increments and get our men and women back to work so they can
support their families,'' Bakes said.
   A spokesman for the Machinists union, Wally Haber, charged that
Eastern had brought 100 Continental pilots into Miami and was
outfitting them with Eastern uniforms. He denied that Eastern pilots
were crossing picket lines.
   The bankruptcy action by the nation's seventh-largest airline,
announced Thursday on the sixth day of a punishing strike by
Machinists union over Eastern's demands for concessions, was the
fifth biggest Chapter 11 filing in history in terms of company
assets.
   The move sparked a new wave of denunciations by union leaders,
who called Eastern chief Frank Lorenzo a ``robber baron.''
   Machinists also called for a public boycott of Eastern's sister
carrier, Continental Airlines, set up pickets against Continental in
Houston, and said they would oppose Eastern's reorganization plan
and any sale of assets.
   No pickets were reported at Continental's area of New York's La
Guardia airport, but Continental's telephone lines there were jammed
as people sought alternate travel arrangements.
   The first Eastern Airlines shuttle to leave Boston for New York
and Washington today with a new $12 one-way fare in effect had 92
people on board, said a spokesman for the Massachusetts Port
Authority, which operates Logan International Airport. Phil
Orlandella said previous shuttle flights since the machinists strike
carried as few as seven passengers, on planes equipped to carry as
many as 177 passengers.
   In New York, U.S. District Judge Robert P. Patterson Jr. extended
a Friday midnight deadline indefinitely, until he rules on whether
it is legal for railroad workers to strike in support of Eastern
workers. A federal appeals court panel in Philadelphia has issued a
similar ban.
   Angry and confused passengers, meanwhile, confronted Eastern
ticket agents as well as travel agencies, often getting little
satisfaction as they learned they might have to wait on a long line
of unsecured creditors for a refund or pay higher fares on other
carriers.
   But many service people, as well as travel agents, were as
confused as the ticket holders about the effects of the action in
U.S. Bankruptcy Court in New York, which temporarily frees the
airline of the debt obligations.
   ``This has been one of those days that we all hope would never
happen,'' said Phil Davidoff, president-elect of the 23,000-member
American Society of Travel Agents.
   In Miami, ticket agent Marion Gordon and two co-workers at
Eastern's office could only respond to angry customers by saying
they had no money for refunds.
   ``I am an old lady and I'm stranded on Miami Beach,'' said Rose
Aolt of New York City. ``I have no money for another ticket.''
   ``You'll just have to wait and see,'' Gordon answered.
   Under the Chapter 11 filing, the bankruptcy court must approve
ticket refunds, said Ms. Ceremsak, adding that she did not know how
the process would work. The would-be passengers, who hold about $200
million worth of tickets, fall behind bigger, secured creditors in
priority in the eyes of the court.
   But chances remained good that if the passenger's destination
were a popular one, another carrier would honor the ticket, although
possibly at a higher price.
   In addition, passengers who bought tickets with a major credit
card probably won't have to stand in line at the courthouse since a
federal law protects consumers who make credit card purchases but
fail to receive goods or services.
   The best passengers could do was to trade Eastern tickets for
travel before March 15 for seats on its sister airline, Continental.
   ``But beyond next week, I don't know,'' Gordon told customers.
``We don't even know if we're going to get paid.''
   Eastern, meanwhile, said it will attempt to get as many planes
back in the air as possible in order to make ``old tickets good.''
The company also plans to renegotiate agreements with other carriers
to honor Eastern tickets.
   As late as Wednesday, Miami-based Eastern had insisted that a
Chapter 11 filing remained a last resort in its effort to survive
the strike, which is costing the airline about $4 million a day.
   Lorenzo, at a news conference Thursday, blamed ``the damage that
has been caused by the pilots' union'' for the decision to seek
protection. The machinists' strike, which started Saturday following
a 17-month dispute over wage concessions, has been honored by most
Eastern pilots and flight attendants.
   The 3,600 pilots are critical to Eastern's operations, and their
support of the 8,500 machinists forced the airline to shut down
virtually all its operations Monday and lay off some 9,500 non-union
employees.
   The airline faces a ``cash crisis'' that can only be averted and
stabilized by turning to the bankruptcy court, Bakes said.
   The bankruptcy filing is designed to give Eastern a reprieve from
debts and the threat of lawsuits by creditors while it tries to
restructure and extricate itself from the worst crisis in its
60-year history.
   Eastern management, listing more than $4.5 billion in net assets,
$3.39 billion in liabilities and 15,696 creditors, insisted it
intends to restore the company through the bankruptcy proceeding,
though in a smaller form.
   ``We intend to operate our airline: make no mistake about that,''
Bakes said.
   Lorenzo and Bakes pledged that all creditors would be paid in
full; shareholders would receive ``fair value''; passengers would be
protected; and as many employees as possible would return to work.
Eastern had 31,200 employees before the strike.
   The two Eastern officials avoided specific comment on reports
that Lorenzo rival Carl Icahn had been asked by Eastern strikers to
consider a buyout of Eastern.
   The Chapter 11 filing would still allow a takeover but would
force approval by the bankruptcy court as well as by creditors,
making such a transaction cumbersome. Unions would also have a say.
   Icahn, chairman of Trans World Airlines Inc., has said he would
consider requests to acquire Eastern only if Eastern allowed the
negotiations.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
