ID: 193	RANK: 84	SCORE: 13.455515
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900128-0003 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-01-28-90 2349EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-JetlinerCrash 4thLd-Writethru a0748 01-28 1236</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Jetliner Crash, 4th Ld-Writethru, a0748,1269</SECOND>
<HEAD>Local Controllers Weren't Told Plane Was Low On Fuel</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: INSERTS 3 grafs after 16th graf pvs, `The pilot...he said',
to ADD source saying some pilots reluctant to declare fuel
emergency, ADD locations of control centers. Pick up 17th graf pvs:
`A federal...</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By LISA GENASCI</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>COVE NECK, N.Y. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The crew of Avianca Flight 52 told
high-altitude air traffic controllers the plane was low on fuel and
needed a priority landing before it crashed, but that information
wasn't relayed to local controllers, officials said Sunday.
   The Boeing 707 crashed on Long Island Thursday night, killing 73
people and injuring 85.
   The pilot of the Colombian jetliner told controllers at New York
Center, who handle high-altitude traffic, that he was low on fuel
50 minutes before the plane crashed, said Lee Dickinson, a member
of the National Transportation Safety Board.
   When the New York Center controllers turned over control of the
flight to local controllers handling approaches to John F. Kennedy
International Airport, they apparently failed to mention the plane
was low on fuel, Dickinson said.
   The conversation between the crew and New York Center came after
the aircraft had been in a holding pattern for 46 minutes,
Dickinson said. At that point, controllers asked the pilot if the
Boeing could safely land at Boston's Logan Airport. The pilot said
he lacked fuel to get to Logan, said Dickinson.
   Shortly afterward, control of the aircraft was transferred to
local controllers _ Terminal Radar Approach Control, or TRACON _
who told investigators Sunday they never knew the plane was low on
fuel.
   One local controller learned about the fuel shortage, but only
after the plane had to abort an attempted landing, he said. After
that attempt the pilot twice told the local controllers he was
running out of fuel, Dickinson said.
   The latest information was discovered after investigators spoke
to six local controllers who either handled the aircraft or were
keeping track of it, he said.
   ``For whatever reasons, we don't know, the controllers at TRACON
did not know that,'' said Dickinson, referring to the fuel shortage.
   He said investigators on Monday will question at least four New
York Center controllers to determine if the information was relayed.
   Asked if there are rules requiring that fuel shortage
information be passed along among controllers, he said, ``There has
to be a handoff or an agreement ... one would expect that
information going to the center, that that information would be
passed on.''
   He said the controllers at TRACON and New York Center were
speaking to each other by telephone when control was handed off.
   Fuel receipts obtained by investigators indicate the aircraft
had 81,000 pounds of fuel on board, more than enough for a normal
flight from Medellin, Colombia, to New York. The flight originated
in Bogota, Colombia, with a stop in Medellin.
   The plane was delayed because of weather-related congestion
three times en route _ for 16 minutes over Norfolk, Va., for 27
minutes between Norfolk and New York, and for 46 minutes about 40
miles south of JFK.
   The crash, in an affluent Long Island community, occurred as the
plane circled back for a second landing attempt after an initial
approach was aborted because it was too steep, the NTSB said.
   The pilot told the high-altitude controllers at New York Center
he needed a priority landing, Dickinson said. But the word
``emergency'' was never used and for that reason perhaps the
severity of the situation wasn't relayed, he said.
   Both control centers are on Long Island, as is the airport.
TRACON, the local control center, is in Garden City, about 10 miles
from Kennedy Airport, and the New York Center is in Ronkonkoma,
about 50 miles from the airport.
   A source close to the investigation, who spoke on condition of
anonymity, said that many pilots are reluctant to declare a fuel
emergency because the Federal Aviation Administration strictly
monitors those cases.
   Should the FAA determine a pilot was unjustified in declaring an
emergency, he can lose his pilot's license.
   A federal official close to the investigation who spoke on
condition of anonymity said the information indicates the error
appears to lie with New York Center.
   Controllers told investigators that the night of the crash was
hectic at TRACON, Dickinson said.
   ``It was a night of intense energy, the weather was bad and
there was a shortage of controllers,'' Dickinson said. He couldn't
explain why or by how much TRACON was understaffed.
   He noted that an American Airlines flight that landed right
before Avianca's aborted attempt had just 14 minutes of fuel when
it landed.
   NTSB investigators Sunday again studied the jet's four engines
and fuel pumps.
   ``What they found was indicative of no fuel in the tanks,''
Dickinson said.
   Investigators earlier said the plane may have had up to 10,000
pounds of fuel upon impact, which would have left the Boeing with
only several minutes of flying time. However, they said Sunday that
figure could be wrong because they were unsure about the integrity
of fuel gauges they've examined.
   For example, a gauge that keeps track of all fuel on board
indicates the plane had between 1,100 pounds to 1,200 pounds of
fuel. Two other gauges for individuals fuel tanks, however, show
that those tanks each had between 2,300 and 2,400 pounds of fuel,
he said.
   Mike Benson, a spokesman for NTSB, said those figures have
temporarily been discounted until the gauges can be calibrated and
tested, probably within the next few days.
   Picking through the wreckage Sunday, investigators found four
more cockpit fuel gauges, bringing the total to six. There are
eight in all, one for each of seven tanks, and another showing the
overall amount.
   Officials again revised their casualty count, saying there were
85 survivors rather than 86, as previously stated.
   More than 20 remained in critical condition, hospitals reported.
   At Saint Dominic's church in Oyster Bay, near the crash site,
worshippers Sunday morning prayed for the victims and offered
solace to rescue workers struggling to cope with what they had
witnessed.
   Investigators were looking for cockpit logs that may show how
much fuel was taken on in Bogota, and again after a stop in
Medellin, the center of the cocaine trade. Officials in Bogota were
expected to fax other fuel-related documents to the NTSB.
   The NTSB is also looking into the effect the aborted approach
may have had on the fuel system, Benson said.
   An Avianca pilot in Colombia who asked for anonymity told The
Associated Press that a steep climb after an aborted landing may
force the fuel away from the engines, causing them to stall.
   ``We're looking at that, but we don't have anything specific on
that,'' Benson said Sunday. ``We know that gravity can potentially
have an effect on the fuel _ that's why there are fuel pumps. But
to what degree it has an effect, we need to take a closer look.''
   None of the four engines was running when the plane crashed into
a hillside, and there was no explosion, both early indications to
investigators the plane had run out of fuel.
   The NTSB expected to finish up its on-site investigation by
Monday or Tuesday, Dicksinson said. The plane would be removed
toward the end of the week, he said. The four engines were to be
returned to Boeing in the next two days, he said.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
