ID: 193	RANK: 86	SCORE: 13.194468
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910204-0023
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910204-0023.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Controller Error Seen as Possible Cause
   In Fatal Runway Crash in Los Angeles
   ----
   By Roy J. Harris
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/04/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4
</SO>
<CO>
   U SKYW
</CO>
<IN>
AIRLINES (AIR)
</IN>
<GV>
TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT (TRN)
</GV>
<LP>
   LOS ANGELES -- An apparent air-traffic controller blunder
drew early attention as a possible cause of the fiery runway
collision between a USAir 737 jetliner and a commuter plane
just after dark here Friday. But investigators began studying
a range of visibility and other factors that may have
contributed to the disaster, and made plans to restage a
portion of the incident.
   As many as 32 people may have been killed when USAir
Flight 1493, a newer Boeing 737-300 model landing at Los
Angeles International Airport, hit a SkyWest plane preparing
for takeoff on the same runway. All 10 passengers and both
crewmen on SkyWest Flight 5569, a Fairchild Metroliner
turboprop en route to Palmdale, Calif., were killed when the
smaller plane was pushed almost 900 yards and flattened under
the twin-engine 737, arriving from Columbus, Ohio.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The USAir pilot and one other person aboard the plane were
killed, and 18 people from the flight were listed as presumed
dead.
   James Burnett, a member of the National Transportation
Safety Board, said crash investigators would attempt to learn
more about the cause of the crash through a partial restaging
of the incident. Noting that the pilot of a nearby aircraft
reported take-off lights weren't illuminated on the SkyWest
turboprop, Mr. Burnett said investigators would place another
Metroliner on the runway to assess its visibility.
   Recorded airport tower communications suggested that the
controller who was handling both aircraft may have neglected
the SkyWest plane. The controller, identified only as a
woman, authorized it to position itself on runway 24-left at
just before 6:04 p.m., Los Angeles time. After some apparent
confusion, 72 seconds later she gave the USAir crew
permission for a westbound landing on the same runway. A
minute after that, the USAir plane hit the Skywest turboprop,
still waiting for permission to take off. A safety board
official described the one-minute interval between the
clearance to land and the collision as "tight and close."
   Investigators were seeking to interview the controller,
along with four other controllers and a supervisor in the
tower at the time. The Los Angeles tower is authorized to
have 38 controllers under Federal Aviation Administration
funding levels, but only 34 are currently in place.
   Controller workload, however, doesn't initially appear to
be a factor in the USAir accident. Federal officials
characterized the controller's workload that night as
"moderate." They said the controller was at "full performance
level," meaning she had completed the highest level of
training required, and that she had worked at several smaller
airports before coming to Los Angeles.
   Although it appears the controller simply forgot the
SkyWest airplane was positioned on the same runway where she
had cleared the USAir jet to land, investigators still must
answer other puzzling questions. For example, why didn't the
crews of either aircraft pick up on the fact that the
controller had radioed clearance for their aircraft to be on
the same runway at the same time? It is also unclear why the
USAir jet didn't see the SkyWest jet on the runway in time to
avoid a collision.
   In addition to questions of controller performance, the
crash also sparks new doubts about whether congestion at U.S.
airports dangerously cuts the margin for error on the ground,
as well as in the skies. The last major U.S. crash involved
two Northwest Airlines jets that collided at Detroit
Metropolitan Airport, killing eight.
   The safety board, which takes pains to avoid drawing
conclusions during its investigation, noted that other
questions had been raised about whether ground-traffic radar
was in operation at the time, and the amount of lighting on
the SkyWest plane. Mr. Burnett said the USAir plane's data
and cockpit voice recorders have been recovered, and a review
of their contents was to start yesterday.
   The SkyWest plane had some lights on, Mr. Burnett said,
and may have been in compliance with federal regulations,
even though it was on the runway without its bright takeoff
lights.
   Most of Mr. Burnett's Saturday evening briefing to
reporters here concentrated on the erratic nature of nearly
four minutes of tower communications that ended in a
still-unidentified male voice on the radio frequency
exclaiming, at 6:07 p.m., "What the hell]"
   The controller apparently failed twice over a two-minute
period to acknowledge USAir's communications about its
position approaching the airport before finally granting
permission to land a few seconds before 6:06 -- as the
SkyWest plane was in position on the same runway.
   While the controller was in communication with the two
planes, Mr. Burnett said, she was involved also with "a
somewhat difficult series of communications with an
Aeromexico flight, in which a number of transmissions had to
be repeated."
   Mr. Burnett said drug tests, requiring both urine and
blood samples, would be sought from all five controllers and
the supervisor. Pilots have complained about congestion in
the skies around Los Angeles for years. Los Angeles is on the
Air Line Pilots Association's "Black Star List" of what
pilots consider the 10 most dangerous airports in the U.S.,
largely because of night-time landing and takeoff procedures
used for noise abatement.
   The safety board said 68 of the 89 USAir passengers and
crew members escaped the Boeing 737's flaming hulk, 41 of
them without injury.
   ---
   Judith Valente contributed to this article.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
