ID: 193	RANK: 96	SCORE: 12.734932
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911112-0096
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911112-0096.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Travel:
   Rise in Commuter Plane Fatalities Sparks
   Call to Toughen Rules, Improve Training
   ----
   By Laurie McGinley
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
11/12/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
AIRLINES (AIR)
</IN>
<NS>
TRAVEL (TVL)
</NS>
<GV>
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)
TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT (TRN)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   This is the deadliest year in history for commuter
airlines.
   So far this year 71 people have been killed in six fatal
accidents. That's the highest death toll since the National
Transportation Safety Board began tracking commuter airlines
in 1977. And federal investigators are still scrambling to
find out why. "We aren't pushing the panic button," says
Susan Coughlin, the safety board's vice chairman. "The
information doesn't lead us to believe there are systemic
problems in the industry."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Others disagree. "There's no excuse for some of this
stuff. Somebody's not doing his job," declares John
Galipault, director of the Aviation Safety Institute in
Worthington, Ohio.
   What is puzzling is that the record deaths follow the
safest year ever for commuter airlines. All involve planes
with 30 or fewer seats, which carry 55% of commuter
passengers; larger commuter planes haven't had a fatality
since 1983.
   The increased accidents are fueling calls for a tightening
of safety rules for commuter carriers. But a look at this
year's major crashes shows no common cause. The accidents
include:
   -- A Continental Express Airlines crash on Sept. 11 near
Eagle Lake, Texas, that killed 14 people. The wrecked plane,
which had undergone routine maintenance the day before, was
missing 43 screws in the tail section, investigators found. A
ninefoot section of the plane's horizontal stabilizer,
located on the tail, apparently dropped off in flight.
   -- A July 10 crash involving a commuter plane of L'Express
Airlines that tried to land at Birmingham International
Airport in a severe thunderstorm but instead slammed into a
residential area. Thirteen people died. Wind-shear advisories
were in effect at the time, and a corporate jet ahead of
L'Express's plane broke off its landing approach twice before
finally landing safely.
   -- An April 5 crash near Brunswick, Ga., that killed
former Sen. John Tower and 22 other people -- the worst
commuter accident in U.S. history. This month federal
investigators will go to Brazil to conduct flight tests at
the manufacturer to try to determine whether a worn propeller
shaft rendered the Atlantic Southeast Airlines Embraer
uncontrollable. The Federal Aviation Administration has
ordered inspections of the propeller shafts on similar
planes.
   -- The Feb. 1 collision of a SkyWest Metroliner commuter
plane and a USAir 737 at Los Angeles International Airport
that killed all 12 people on the commuter plane. A distracted
air traffic controller apparently forgot about the SkyWest
plane and cleared the USAir jet to land on the same runway.
   The accidents are a blow to industry officials, who note
that commuter airlines have become a vital transportation
link for small and medium-sized cities that have lost service
from major carriers because of deregulation. Last year,
regional and commuter airlines carried more than 42 million
passengers in the U.S., up from 15 million in 1980, according
to the Regional Airline Association.
   "Clearly, we have had some human breakdowns," says John
Fredericksen, president of the trade group, which represents
74 regional and commuter carriers. "But the causes are so
divergent that it doesn't give me concern about the industry
as a whole."
   Certainly commuter-airline safety generally has improved
markedly over the last decade -- with a big exception in
1987, when 59 people died in 10 fatal crashes. The fatal
accident rate for commuter aircraft declined to 0.069 per
100,000 departures last year, when only four people were
killed, from 0.450 in 1980, according to the National
Transportation Safety Board. Federal aviation officials
attribute the improved commuter performance to better
training and a lower turnover rate among pilots. Turnover
peaked at 40% in the late 1980s but is probably half that now
because the major airlines aren't hiring, according to the
Regional Airlines Association.
   The FAA has also tightened its safety rules for commuter
airlines in recent years. It now requires that most commuter
aircraft be equipped with the "black boxes" used by
investigators to pinpoint the causes of accidents. It plans
to require the installation of devices that warn pilots when
they get too close to the ground. And as of 1995, commuter
aircraft will have to be equipped with collision-avoidance
equipment.
   Despite the progress, most consumer and safety advocates
believe that commuter lines -- at least those using planes
with 30 or fewer seats -- are riskier than major airlines.
While the 1990 fatal accident rate for commuter planes was
actually below that for the major carriers, the rate was
higher for every other year in the 1980s. And virtually every
other safety statistic shows that the big airlines are safer.
   Richard Livingston, head of the Airline Passengers
Association of North America, believes pilot experience -- or
the lack of it -- is one reason. "Commuter pilots are usually
less seasoned than those for major airlines," he says. He
frets that the turnover rate will pick up again as big
airlines lose pilots to retirement and once again turn to the
commuters for crews. Perhaps, he suggests, commuter pilots
should be required to stay at the smaller airlines for a
given period of time before moving up to the major airlines.
   Moreover, some commuter pilots are being worked to the
brink of exhaustion -- and beyond, contends John O'Brien,
safety director for the Air Line Pilots Association. Some
managers, he asserts, "are taking advantage of the loopholes
in the {flight and duty time} regulations to place very
burdensome schedules on pilots. You get fatigued and start
making mistakes."
   The pilots want the rules tightened and the maximum number
of working hours shortened. Under current regulations,
commuter pilots may fly 1,200 hours a year, compared with
1,000 hours for major-airline pilots. Anthony Broderick,
associate FAA administrator for regulation and certification,
says that he's willing to look at the issue but that the
longer hours were approved because commuter pilots, with
their shorter flights, spend more time taxiing on the ground
than do pilots for major airlines. The Regional Airline
Association says that the longer hours are appropriate
because commuter pilots don't change time zones as frequently
as pilots for major airlines so they don't have the same
jet-lag problems.
   Both the FAA and the National Transportation Safety Board
believe commuter pilot training needs improvement. One major
element centers on cockpit resource management, or CRM, which
most major carriers already use. CRM teaches crews how to
better respond to emergencies and divvy up their workloads.
The safety board is pressing the FAA to require CRM for
commuter crews.
   The safety board's Ms. Coughlin notes that while the
SkyWest commuter pilots involved in the Los Angeles collision
weren't blamed for the crash, the accident raised a
"situational awareness issue" about the commuter crew. The
pilots, who were sitting at the intersection of two active
runways for a few minutes, didn't query the controller about
their status and apparently didn't hear that the USAir flight
had been cleared to land on the same runway.
   Mr. Broderick says the agency is reviewing and updating
the commuter rules and will probably propose requiring
cockpit resource management. The agency is also considering
other changes designed to improve commuter-pilot training,
and to make it more similar to that used for pilots of major
airlines.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
