ID: 189	RANK: 14	SCORE: 17.987585
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP901116-0097 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NY-11-16-90 1342EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a PM-CNNTapes 3rdLd-Writethru a0586 11-16 0903</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-CNN Tapes, 3rd Ld - Writethru, a0586,1159</SECOND>
<HEAD>FBI Says it Obtained CNN Tapes; Network Demands Return</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: SUBS 4th graf, `The box...,' with 3 grafs to UPDATE with FBI
visiting CNN office. Picks up 5th graf pvs, `William Hinshaw...'.
SUBS 20th graf, `The box...', to remove now-redundant first
reference to Fernandez.</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By CAROLYN S. CARLSON</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>ATLANTA (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Cable News Network is demanding the FBI return a
box of recordings and papers related to the government's taping of
Manuel Noriega's jailhouse phone calls. The material was taken from
a hotel room where a CNN reporter stayed.
   Both an FBI official and CNN President Tom Johnson said today
they didn't know if the recordings were audio tapes or videotapes,
or if they were the phone calls between Noriega and his lawyers
that are at the center of a legal battle before the U.S. Supreme
Court.
   ``We just know that there were notes, work papers and tapes''
related to CNN's coverage of the Noriega story, Johnson said. ``But
in the process of working in an operation like this, you could have
all sorts of tapes, including (taped) air checks.''
   The box of material was given to the FBI on Thursday by security
guards at the hotel. CNN claimed the box was improperly removed
from the room of reporter Marlene Fernandez and that the FBI
obtained it without a warrant.
   CNN reported today that an FBI agent showed up at the CNN
Washington bureau looking for Fernandez and a producer, Kathy
Slobogan. Neither was present.
   Bureau officials told the agent that CNN would cooperate with
the FBI, but would not allow ``fishing expeditions'' through CNN
offices, the network said on a midday newscast.
   William Hinshaw, head of the FBI bureau in Atlanta, said today
that after a Thursday night meeting with CNN officials, he agreed
to seal the box and not take inventory of its contents until the
Justice Department orders him to do so.
   The FBI previously said agents would go through the box today.
   Hinshaw said he didn't know what materials were in the box. He
said he did see some cassettes in the box, but was uncertain if
they were audio or video cassettes, although he said ``one I saw
appeared to be a (audio) cassette.''
   The network has asked the U.S. Supreme Court to overturn a
federal judge's order, issued last week, barring it from airing
recordings of conversations between Noriega and the fallen
Panamanian dictator's legal team.
   In addition, a hearing was scheduled in Miami this afternoon to
determine whether Noriega, whose assets have been frozen by
prosecutors, should be declared indigent and appointed a government
defense attorney.
   Lead defense attorney Frank Rubino, saying it might be one of
his last acts in the Noriega case, today filed a motion to dismiss
the charges against Noriega, accusing the government of engaging in
a conspiracy to deny ``his right to a fair trial and the effective
assistance of counsel.''
   The motion accuses the government of misconduct by taping
Noriega's prison phone calls with his lawyers as well as illegally
freezing his funds. It also says an unidentified government witness
attempted to entrap the attorneys two months ago by soliciting a
bribe to change his testiony.
   Noriega is being held in a Miami jail, awaiting trial on charges
of taking $4.6 million in payoffs to protect the cocaine trade. The
FBI is investigating how CNN obtained seven tapes of his jail cell
phone conversations.
   FBI spokesman Scott Nelson in Washington said Thursday that
agents obtained the box without a warrant. ``We were made aware of
the tapes and merely picked them up for analysis,'' he said.
   Johnson said he protested the FBI's action ``in the strongest
terms'' to agency officials in Washington.
   CNN general counsel Steve Korn said today he'd written Joseph
Whitley, the U.S. attorney in Atlanta, ``demanding the return of
the tapes and that the materials in the box not be reviewed or
duplicated.''
   The New York Times today quoted an unidentified CNN official as
saying the actual Noriega recordings were not in the box.
   ``The FBI did not get the main course,'' the official said.
   The box was removed Monday from a room that had been occupied by
Fernandez, who has been working on the Noriega story.
   Her room was at the Omni Hotel, which is owned by CNN's parent
company, Turner Broadcasting, and is part of a complex that also
houses CNN's offices.
   Hotel manager Bill Thompson said hotel security officers thought
Fernandez had checked out when they removed a box containing papers
and at least one videotape.
   CNN's Johnson said today that Fernandez, who has been covering
the Noriega story, ``had not checked out of the room. But
apparently there was a mistake'' by the hotel that led to her room
being cleared out.
   After taking the box from the room, the hotel's security guards
saw that some of its contents were CNN property, he said. They
turned the material over to Turner security officers from whom the
FBI took the box, he said.
   He and Korn said it still unclear how the FBI was notified about
the box.
   ``I don't know who called who,'' Korn said.
   Turner Security, which provides security for the CNN Center
complex, ``had a discussion with the FBI inquiring about stolen
government property and Turner Security told them they had a box
that might fit that description,'' CNN spokesman Steve Haworth said
Thursday. CNN denied the material in the box was stolen.
   Haworth said Turner Security - a subsidiary of CNN's parent
company, Turner Broadcasting Systems Inc. - did not tell
appropriate CNN officials it had the box.
   CNN said agents took the box over the objections of a network
attorney who was present. Korn said the attorney ``asked for a
warrant and was not given an answer, and certainly not given a
warrant.''
   Meanwhile, CNN lawyers on Thursday asked Supreme Court Justice
Anthony Kennedy to set aside a judge's order barring broadcast of
the phone conversations.
   Kennedy, who handles such emergency matters from Florida,
referred the case to the full court. There was no word on when it
might act.
   CNN is challenging an order issued by U.S. District Judge
William Hoeveler in Miami on Nov. 8 that bars it from broadcasting
the tapes until Hoeveler can determine whether the broadcasts would
violate Noriega's rights.
   CNN refused to give up the tapes but agreed not to air any
attorney-client recordings until the Supreme Court decides the
matter. The network contends Hoeveler's order is an
unconstitutional prior restraint on free speech.
   Federal prison officials say inmates' phone calls routinely are
monitored, except when prisoners say they are talking to their
lawyers. But CNN said it has tapes that include conversations
between Noriega and his defense team.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
