ID: 189	RANK: 18	SCORE: 17.598995
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP901118-0066 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NY-11-18-90 1924EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r w AM-CNN-NoriegaTapes 4thLd-Writethru a0771 11-18 0893</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-CNN-Noriega Tapes, 4th Ld-Writethru, a0771,1020</SECOND>
<HEAD>Supreme Court Rejects CNN Bid To Broadcast Noriega Tapes</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: To UPDATE with comments from Noriega's attorney, inserts new
grafs 12-13: Noriega's defense ....</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By RICHARD CARELLI</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The Supreme Court refused by a 7-2 vote Sunday
to give Cable News Network permission to broadcast tape recordings
of conversations between Panama's Gen. Manuel Noriega and his
lawyers.
   The court rejected an emergency request by CNN that was aimed at
lifting a federal judge's order forbidding the broadcasts until he
could determine what the tapes disclose.
   The emergency request had called the Nov. 8 order by U.S.
District Judge William Hoeveler in Miami an unconstitutional
``prior restraint'' of free speech. But only two justices -
Thurgood Marshall and Sandra Day O'Connor - agreed with that
assessment.
   Voting against CNN were Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and
Justices Byron R. White, Harry A. Blackmun, John Paul Stevens,
Antonin Scalia, Anthony M. Kennedy and David H. Souter.
   The Justice Department had joined with Noriega's lawyers in
opposing the request.
   In addition to the emergency request, the court also turned down
a formal appeal filed by the cable network, in a one-sentence
order.
   CNN President Tom Johnson called the court's decision ``a loss
of a battle in a continuing war against censorship.''
   Johnson said the network would immediately turn the tapes in its
possession over to Judge Hoeveler. He said CNN is ``confident that
after he reviews them he will decide on the merits to deny the
prior restraint.''
   ``CNN is committed to establishing its full freedom to telecast
newsworthy information to the American people and it will pursue
this case vigorously in order to do so,'' Johnson said.
   Floyd Abrams, CNN's attorney in the case, said the court's
decison ``has left an opening through which defense lawyers and
prosecutors may try to muzzle news articles.''
   ``The refusal of the court to hear the case does seem to
countenance brief prior restraints of a few days duration based on
almost no showing of need at all by the courts,'' Abrams said.
   Noriega's defense attorney, Jon May, said CNN had opened a
``Pandora's box'' with its First Amendment challenge.
   ``We think its a correct ruling,'' May said. ``This is a case of
the messenger shooting itself. To whatever extent the media may
complain this is a significant adverse decision, CNN has only
itself to blame.''
   In a dissenting opinion for himself and O'Connor, Marshall said
``this case is of extraordinary consequence for freedom of the
press.''
   ``Our precedents make unmistakably clear that any prior
restraint of expression comes to this court bearing a heavy
presumption against its constitutional validity and that the
proponent of this drastic remedy carries a heavy burden of showing
justification for its imposition,'' Marshall said.
   ``I do not see how the prior restraint imposed in this case can
be reconciled with these teachings,'' Marshall said. ``Even more
fundamentally, if the lower courts in this case are correct in
their remarkable conclusion that publication can be automatically
restrained pending application of the demanding test established by
(a 1976 decision that severely limited the power of judges to
impose such restraints) then I think it is imperative that we
re-examine the premises and operation of (that decision).''
   Jane Kirtley, executive director Reporter's Committee for
Freedom of the Press, said she was ``stunned'' by the decision,
which she called ``truly unprecedented.''
   ``The fact that the court would be willing to tolerate a prior
restraint in these circumstances signals a new era in First
Amendment jurisprudence,'' Kirtley said. ``It will have a
far-reaching impact going beyond this case extending to many cases
in state and federal courts around the country.
   Bruce Sanford, an attorney for the Society of Professional
Journalists, said the court's decision is ``troublesome because it
seems inconceivable that Noriega's counsel would ever be able to
prove that his right to a fair trial was in jeopardy because of the
CNN tapes.''
   Walt Wurfel, a spokesman for the National Association of
Broadcasters, said his group was ``very disappointed'' with the
court's decision. ``We view the lower court's order as prior
restraint,'' he said.
   The Bush administration Saturday had urged the high court to
leave intact Hoeveler's order. Solicitor General Kenneth Starr, the
government's top-ranking courtroom lawyer, argued in written briefs
that the restraining order was justified to give the judge time to
determine whether seven tapes in CNN's possession might interfere
with Noriega's ability to receive a fair trial.
   Noriega, who is awaiting trial on charges of taking $4.6 million
in payoffs to protect cocaine trade through Panama, is being held
in a federal prison near Miami. Federal prison authorities monitor
and tape record all inmates' telephone conversations except those
between an inmates and their defense teams. But the CNN tape
recordings reportedly contain some conversations between the
deposed Panamanian leader and his defense lawyers.
   Sunday's high court order, issued without any explanatory
opinion, does not necessarily preclude the possibility that some
day the court will rule that Hoeveler's order did violate CNN's
free-speech rights.
   The court conceivably could have refused to help CNN because of
some procedural reason. The cable network might carry its legal
battle back to the court at some later date.
   But meanwhile, CNN is under court order not to broadcast those
portions of its tapes divulging Noriega's conversations with his
lawyers. If those conversations are broadcast, CNN could be cited
with contempt of court and fined heavily.
   The federal government lost a much-publicized battle over a
prior restraint in 1971 when the Supreme Court allowed The New York
Times and The Washington Post to publish the so-called Pentagon
papers detailing American involvement in Vietnam.
   In a key 1976 decision stemming from pretrial publicity in a
Nebraska murder case, the court ruled that forbidding the news
media from publishing or broadcasting information in its possession
almost never can be justified.
   The court in that decision called such prior restraints -
sometimes referred to as ``gag orders'' - the ``least tolerable''
measures of assuring fair trials.
   In seeking the prior restraint against CNN, Noriega's lawyers
argued that broadcasting the tapes would poison their client's
fair-trial rights in two ways: through pretrial publicity and by
compromising his relationship with his lawyers.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
