ID: 189	RANK: 51	SCORE: 15.419634
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910304-0089
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910304-0089.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   CNN Is Mapping Out Peacetime Strategy
   To Retain Viewers Gained During War
   ----
   By Daniel Pearl
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
03/04/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B5
</SO>
<CO>
   TBSA
</CO>
<IN>
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
</IN>
<LP>
   ATLANTA -- Cable News Network is setting out to ensure
that its victories from coverage of the Gulf war aren't
fleeting.
   With the conflict nearing a conclusion, the unit of Turner
Broadcasting System Inc. is expected to restore its prewar
programming today, and executives say they are already taking
steps to retain the viewers -- and ratings -- that CNN won
during the crisis.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The network's peacetime strategy is two-pronged: Expand
staff and facilities in world trouble spots to provide even
more coverage of breaking news, and fine-tune the programming
mix at home. If all goes according to plan, CNN estimates it
may wind up with a permanent 40% increase in audience share.
That could translate annually, through higher ad revenue,
into as much as $60 million in added operating profit for the
news division, which produced $134.4 million in operating
profit for Turner last year.
   "The decision's been made that now's the time to expand,"
says Ed Turner, executive vice president of CNN. "We thought
the Gulf costs and the economy were going to put a real crimp
in it, but Ted Turner {chairman and president of Turner
Broadcasting and no relation to Ed Turner} believes in
investing now while the interest is there."
   The network is trying to make some changes quickly, while
its new audience is still watching -- adding more sports news
and weekend news updates, for instance, and shuffling the
anchor schedule. Some features, such as viewer mail and a
weekly press-criticism show, may also be held over from the
war, Mr. Turner says.
   Bigger programming changes could emerge later this year as
Tom Johnson, who became president of CNN last August, gets
time to think about matters other than the Gulf crisis. For
now, though, CNN's regular programming -- a 24-hour-a-day mix
of newscasts, magazine-style features, interviews and panel
discussions -- will be little changed. Rather, says Mr.
Turner, the big investments will be overseas, where CNN plans
to buy more satellite time and open new bureaus in the Middle
East and elsewhere. The goal is to increase CNN's clout in
live coverage.
   The danger is that fickle viewers will, once again, tune
out until the next crisis comes along. "When we're back to
everyday news stories, they become just a regular news
network," says Michael Eisenberg, a vice president for
audience measurement at rival CBS. "They're not going to have
Peter Arnett live from Toledo."
   Television specialists think CNN will keep at least a
small part of its new viewership when the Gulf news dies
down. That would be a major achievement for the network,
which wasn't able to hold on to any new audience share after
events like the 1989 student uprising in China. But the
11-year old network hasn't covered an event as dramatic or as
drawn-out as the Gulf crisis.
   In the first week of the Gulf war, as CNN scored clear
scoops over its rivals, the network's ratings soared to
record heights, topping 10% of its potential audience at
times. As the pace of new war developments slowed, CNN
viewership dropped off, especially when rival newscasts were
on the air.
   Still, CNN kept an average daily rating of 3.3% of its
56.8 million households during February, more than four times
higher than its prewar average, according to A.C. Nielsen Co.
data supplied by CNN. Viewership shot up to more than 5% with
the launch and conclusion of the ground war last week. (Cable
ratings for the past three days aren't yet available).
   The Gulf coverage is expected to help Ted Turner's efforts
to internationalize CNN. For example, 1.5 million new
households in the European Community signed up for CNN in
recent weeks, an increase of 20%, according to Kay Delaney,
senior vice president of Turner Broadcasting Sales Inc. But
it will be difficult to track how many people continue to
watch because ratings systems in Europe are less
sophisticated than in the U.S.
   Domestically, CNN's new viewers are younger, on average,
than those who were watching before the war, according to
Lynn E. Gutstadt, CNN's director of research. That means
they're more attractive to advertisers -- but they also tend
to have a shorter attention span for news.
   It may take CNN many months to prove to advertisers that
it can deliver consistent audience levels, analysts warn. And
if ratings continue to bounce up and down with world events,
the network will have a hard time deciding what level of
viewership to guarantee its advertisers.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
