ID: 254	RANK: 18	SCORE: 6.161953
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910125-0097
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910125-0097.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   International:
   Mubarak Lists His Efforts to Avert War
   ---
   In Mexico, Deep Suspicions
   Of Americans' Motives
   May Affect Oil Policy
   ----
   By Matt Moffett
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/25/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A9
</SO>
<CO>
   MDEST LATAM
</CO>
<IN>
PETROLEUM (PET)
INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)
</IN>
<LP>
   MEXICO CITY -- Saddam Hussein is getting awfully good
press in this Latin American oil capital.
   Iraq's claim to be fighting to save the Palestinians
rather than to subjugate the Kuwaitis is accepted
unskeptically by much of Mexico's editorial-writing
intelligentsia. One columnist alleges that the U.S. tricked
Iraq into invading Kuwait so that the gringo army would have
a pretext to take over both Arab countries. Another writer
likens President Bush to the sadistic Roman emperor Caligula.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The benign attitude toward Saddam Hussein isn't confined
to inveterately anti-"yanqui" pundits. Radio call-in shows
reflect surprising pro-Saddam Hussein sentiment. There have
been sizable demonstrations at the U.S. Embassy, but none of
note outside the Iraqi Embassy.
   Why do so many traditionally pacific Mexicans manifest
sympathy for the "Butcher of Baghdad?" To many Mexicans, the
U.S. motive for going to war isn't so much creating "a new
world order" as defending an old one: First World
interventionism to secure Third World oil. And that touches a
raw nerve in Mexico, which has a lot of oil and a lot of
experience with U.S. intervention.
   The anti-American outpouring, one of the most vitriolic
public discourses in recent memory here, is likely to make it
harder for President Carlos Salinas de Gortari to liberalize
Mexico's nationalistic oil policy. Mr. Salinas took a
significant step last November by agreeing to allow U.S.
oil-service companies to operate openly here. That concession
came in return for a U.S. government pledge of loans to boost
flagging production at the state-owned oil monopoly,
Petroleos Mexicanos, or Pemex.
   But the widespread resentment of U.S. policy toward
another poor, oil-producing country, Iraq, will probably make
Mr. Salinas think twice before ceding further ground to the
gringos. "It makes it more likely that Salinas will take a
closed posture on oil, at least for now," says George Baker,
an oil analyst in Berkeley, Calif.
   Mexico has already wavered from its initial hard-line
stance against Iraq. Last autumn, Mr. Salinas said he was
willing to send Mexican troops to the Persian Gulf if the
U.N. backed the use of force. But Mr. Salinas later reversed
himself, evidently because his offer was widely criticized
here as going too far to please the Americans. Ultimately,
Mexico's response to the invasion of Kuwait was limited to a
condemnation of Iraq and a modest increase in oil exports to
the U.S.
   Mexican nationalism has been fueled by oil since the
country expropriated foreign oil holdings in 1938. That
accounts for the high-octane debate over the Gulf war.
   "If a producing country doesn't respond to the interests
of Washington, then the U.S. will do whatever it takes to
guarantee its energy security," wrote a columnist in the
business newspaper El Financiero. "That is the lesson of the
Persian Gulf war for all of the oil-producing countries,
among them Mexico."
   The populist Party of the Democratic Revolution, the
leading opposition to Mr. Salinas's ruling party, has called
on the government to suspend oil sales to the U.S. and other
combatants. It said the war was of a piece with previous U.S.
interventions in Latin America. "We cannot leave the fate of
humanity in the hands and the morals of the murderers of
Grenada and Panama," said leftist leader Cuauhtemoc Cardenas,
whose father was the Mexican president who nationalized
foreign oil holdings in 1938.
   The left's anti-war stance has put pressure on Mr.
Salinas's ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party. The party
issued a statement that raised questions about the motives
for the war and the lengths Mexico should go to support it.
The party called on Mr. Salinas to "keep us on the sidelines
of the . . . dispute for control over oil."
   (See related story: "Egyptian President Tries To Quench
the Anger Of His Arab Critics" -- WSJ Jan. 25, 1991)
</TEXT>
</DOC>
