ID: 254	RANK: 27	SCORE: 5.537776
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880914-0217 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-14-88 1012EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>a a PM-AnotherLook-SellingScandals ADV19   09-14 1229</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Another Look-Selling Scandals, ADV 19,1266</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv19</NOTE>
<NOTE>For Release Mon PMs, Sept. 19, and Thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>Women in Scandals Spell Success for Men's Magazines</HEAD>
<NOTE>With LaserPhoto</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By LINDSEY TANNER</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>CHICAGO (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Fawn Hall and Donna Rice didn't. Paula Parkinson,
Jessica Hahn, Rita Jenrette and Debra Murphree did.
   Getting scandal-entangled women to bare all is a major coup for
men's magazines, which pay hundreds of thousands of dollars to
titillate.
   Besides dangling six-figure fees, such magazines as Playboy and
Penthouse wine and dine these formerly obscure women and offer the
promise of nationwide publicity. The reason is simple: scandal
sells.
   ``Women, or even men who are at the center of a storm, of any
kind, are always best-sellers,'' said Penthouse publisher Bob
Guccione.
   When Indiana Sen. Dan Quayle was chosen as the Republican vice
presidential candidate, Penthouse and Playboy rushed to resurrect
features on Paula Parkinson, the comely blond lobbyist who
accompanied Quayle and two other politicians on a golf outing eight
years ago.
   Playboy's November issue includes new coments from Parkinson,
claiming Quayle propositioned her on the Florida weekend, and a
nude photograph of Parkinson taken in 1980.
   Penthouse's story, also for November, includes fresh remarks
from a 1981 interview about an alleged dalliance with Rep. Jack
Kemp, R-N.Y., as well as statements about Quayle.
   ``The idea behind this is to get somebody who's in the public
eye ... and show something about that person that you can't find
any place else,'' said Nat Lehrman, a former Playboy publishing
executive and now chairman of Columbia College's journalism school
here.
   Jessica Hahn, the former church secretary whose sexual encounter
with Jim Bakker led to the PTL evangelist's downfall last year, got
her second Playboy feature in the September issue.
   Her first spread appeared in Playboy's November 1987 issue,
featuring several nude photographs and Hahn's version of what
happened with Bakker. The issue sold more than 5 million copies at
newsstands, about 1.5 million more than usual.
   Hahn contends Penthouse offered her $12 million to appear. She
chose instead to tell her story to Playboy for a rumored $1 million.
   ``Playboy approached me and Penthouse (too) pretty much when the
story broke,'' Hahn, 29, said in a telephone interview from
Phoenix, where she's working in radio.
   Penthouse, she said, ``was making a lot of promises that they
could not keep. The money was endless. I mean it was ridiculous.''
   Playboy contends Hahn and an agent first approached the
magazine, which Hahn denies. Regardless of who made the first move,
Playboy acknowledges she was a big catch.
   ``If there is another magazine out there that we feel
competitive with ... we try to get our offer on the table first,
and I think there was probably some of that that went on with
Jessica Hahn,'' said Jeff Cohen, managing photo editor for Playboy.
   Penthouse struck it rich with its July issue, featuring the
woman at the center of the scandal involving televangelist Jimmy
Swaggart. The magazine includes explicit photos of Debra Murphree
showing the things she contends Swaggart asked her to do in a motel
room.
   The Murphree issue sold out in five days, selling more than 4
million copies, double the normal newsstand sales, according to
Penthouse officials.
   Guccione and an attorney for Murphree declined to reveal how
much she was paid, but it was rumored to be $75,000 to $100,000.
   Murphree, jailed in Louisiana on an unrelated prostitution
charge, was not available for comment. Her attorney Tom Weymann,
explained her motivation.
   ``Primarily, she was trying to get out of the life that she had
found herself in. There was the motivation of not only the money,
but also to set the record straight of exactly what happened,'' he
said.
   Scandals, especially those involving sex, are guaranteed hits
for magazines because the public wants ``to see the naked woman who
played Delilah to whatever Samson of the moment,'' said Barry
Blackman, a New York photographer. Blackman's photographs of
Elizabeth Ray, the non-typing secretary and ex-mistress of former
Ohio Rep. Wayne Hayes, wound up in Hustler magazine.
   Nude photos of Ray also appeared in Penthouse and Playboy.
   But capitalizing on scandals can be tricky, said Nancie S.
Martin, editor in chief of Playgirl magazine. ``You have to get to
people at the right time. You have to pay them a lot of money. You
have to hope it's still a scandal when the magazine comes out.
   ``There's always the concern that it might be exploitive, that
you might be taking somebody involved in a sex scandal and giving
them more limelight than they deserve,'' she said.
   Often, posing nude is a way for women linked to scandal to
create or advance careers, said Martin. But why would someone like
Rita Jenrette, ex-wife of former South Carolina Congressman John
Jenrette, want to bare her body to millions?
   ``I thought it would be a hoot, a funny thing to do,'' said
Jenrette, 38, who appreared in Playboy in April 1981 after her
husband's bribery and conspiracy conviction in the FBI Abscam
investigation.
   ``People caught in the midst of turmoil, you do a lot of
uncharacteristic things,'' said Jenrette, now living in New York
and pursuing an acting career. ``I never anticipated the
criticism.''
   She said a Washington reporter and his wife persuaded her to
pose, and Playboy says it willingly agreed.
   ``There is a curiosity about these people that the other news
media pick up. Rita Jenrette was everywhere,'' Cohen said. ``(But)
we had her story, and we had glamorous nude photographs of her.''
   The issue featuring Jenrette sold a little more than 6.2 million
copies, more than a million over normal sales of the time.
   ``It was one of our biggest sellers,'' Cohen said.
   Jenrette says she doesn't think Playboy exploited her troubles
to make a buck.
   As far as men's magazines making money off the scandal, she
said, ``What else is there? It sells. ... The sensational grabs
people.''
   That's why Playboy and Penthouse, offering six-figure payoffs,
hotly pursued Donna Rice, whose relationship with former Colorado
Sen. Gary Hart doomed his presidential hopes, and Fawn Hall, the
blond National Security Council secretary who helped Oliver North
shred and alter documents about arms deals in the Iran-Contra
scandal.
   ``Donna Rice I think we were close to making a deal with at one
point,'' said Playboy's Cohen. ``Nudity was discussed. She just
walked away from it. There were several conversations with her,
lunches ... but no deal was made. Why she turned us down, I don't
know. ...
   ``Fawn Hall ... would have certainly been a cover (story), would
have sold well,'' Cohen said.
   Playboy would not disclose their offers, but Guccione said
Penthouse offered Rice about $350,000 and Hall $250,000 ``because
anybody in the country would want to read'' about them.
   Hall's attorney, Plato Cacheris, said he understood the interest
in his client.
   But ``the money did not tempt her,'' he said. ``She's too much
of a lady ... and she's not going to try to capitalize in any
unseemly way.''
   Rice could not be reached and her Miami attorney, Thomas
McAliley was vacationing and unavailable to explain why she
rejected the offers.
   Should she or Hall have second thoughts, it may be too late.
   ``The timing is all-important,'' said Cohen. ``Right now, I
don't think either of them have much value.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Mon PMs, Sept. 19</NOTE>
</DOC>
