ID: 254	RANK: 7	SCORE: 10.635990
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910118-0124
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910118-0124.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
   A Crucial 100 Years in History
   ----
   By David Plott
</HL>
<DATE>
01/18/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A7
</SO>
<LP>
   Between the covers of William K. Klingaman's "The First
Century: Emperors, Gods, and Everyman" (Harper-Collins, 402
pages, $24.95) is a better book than he has written. This
isn't because Mr. Klingaman's richly detailed panorama of 100
years of Roman, Jewish and Chinese history fails to bring to
life a period of tremendous political, religious and economic
ferment. It is merely because in tackling so vast a canvas,
he brings the reader to the threshold of some very
fundamental questions about civilization and its discontents,
without ever clearly posing those questions. The book, in
this respect, is history without a shepherd; the precise
opposite, in fact, of say, Paul Kennedy's "The Rise and Fall
of the Great Powers," where the unfolding of events is guided
by a controlling idea.
   What Mr. Klingaman does achieve in this crisply written
book, however, is a wonderful rendering of an extraordinary
period in the march of Eastern and Western civilization.
Written largely for nonspecialists, it consists of 32 sharply
focused chapters that move briskly from assassinations in
Rome to insurrections in China and Judea, capturing all the
while the enduring sense that the individual conduct of great
men and women, for better or worse, can cast shadows over
continents.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Mr. Klingaman builds his narrative of the first century
around the lives of some 20 people, including Roman and
Chinese emperors, Jewish princes, imperial generals and
provincial rebels, Stoic philosophers, men of letters,
visionaries and prophets. His chapters on Augustus are
particularly colorful, offering a vivid portrait of this
prudish emperor, who appalled Rome with his sweeping list of
puritanical laws and banished that poet of unbridled
pleasure, Ovid, to the Black Sea.
   Who would inherit the empire after his death? That was the
great worry consuming the aging, heirless Augustus as the
century began. Mr. Klingaman shows considerable skill
describing the persistent threat to the empire from marauding
German tribes, rebellious Roman generals, as well as the
perilous challenges at home from ambitious rivals. Betrayal
was never far from the surface of Roman political life, nor
its stepchild, paranoia. And in this interplay of substance
and shadow, assassinations and executions became a periodic
means of calming the imperial mind along with other flagrant
exercises of power. Caligula, for one, understood this well.
"This beautiful throat will be cut whenever I please," he
liked to whisper, nuzzling the necks of his lovers -- often
the wives of his dinner guests. Alas for him, what went
around came around: Conspirators finally "fell upon him with
their swords, stabbing him repeatedly, taking extra care that
some of their blows pierced his genitals."
   Mr. Klingaman's tales of China are less intensely focused
on key historical players, an exception being the rise and
fall of Wang Mang. Born into the poorer branch of a noble
family during the Han dynasty, he worked his way to the top
of the imperial bureaucracy, serving as minister of war and
gaining a reputation for austere discipline. Wang Mang
probably would have enjoyed a frugal dinner with Augustus.
But once enthroned, Wang Mang's idealism gave way to personal
ambition and delusion. As rival armies gathered outside his
palace at Chang-An just before slicing him to pieces, Wang
Mang reorganized his harem and dyed his hair and beard (the
first recorded instance of hair coloration in Chinese
history, notes Mr. Klingaman).
   He brings the same eye for detail to the chapters on
Judea, which include the life and death of Jesus, the reigns
of Herod, Herod Antipas and Herod Agrippa, the destruction of
the Temple in Jerusalem, and the rise of Christianity, while
rarely losing sight of the region's volatile mix of political
and religious conflict. Nowhere is that impact more ironic,
Mr. Klingaman shows, than in the rise of Herod Agrippa, who
used his friendship with Caligula to oust his uncle Herod
Antipas as political leader of the Jewish world, only to find
himself struggling afterward to curb Caligula's own hatred of
Jews.
   The chapters on the life of Jesus, however, are awkward,
as though Mr. Klingaman weren't quite comfortable treating as
history what he knows many of his readers will view as
sacred. Mr. Klingaman's gift as a writer is for describing
events, not convictions. Viewed strictly as an event in the
first century, after all, the death of Jesus is merely one of
many crucifixions. Its full importance to history becomes
manifest only much later.
   Although largely well-written, "The First Century" does
suffer from occasional eruptions of awful phrasing.
Describing, for instance, the trial of Jesus, he comes up
with this clunker: "Still Jesus, who was clearly in a no-win
situation, refused to say anything." Or, in a passage on a
Vietnamese revolt against the Chinese empire: "It took nearly
two years for the empire to strike back."
   Still, as an overview of a turning point in history, Mr.
Klingaman's book makes for entertaining and often-instructive
reading.
   ---
   Mr. Plott is a correspondent for AP-Dow Jones in Zurich.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
