ID: 254	RANK: 97	SCORE: 3.411050
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900725-0178 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-25-90 2144EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-Souter-Cases 1stLd-Writethru   07-25 0920</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Souter-Cases, 1st Ld-Writethru,a0709,850</SECOND>
<HEAD>Souter Supported Obscenity Case, Voted to Allow Hospital Abortions</HEAD>
<NOTE>EDs: SUBS antepenultimate graf, which is 3rd bullet graf:
``_Successful defense,'' to CORRECT ``with parole'' to ``without
parole''</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By JOHN KING</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>CONCORD, N.H. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   As New Hampshire's attorney general,
Supreme Court nominee David Souter supported obscenity cases
against Penthouse magazine, its local distributor and a pharmacy
that sold its July 1976 ``Bisextennial'' issue.
   Court records show Souter's office successfully fought an
attempt by Penthouse and other defendants to quash the indictments
on jurisdictional grounds and also defended a state law that
included any touching of a person's buttocks in its definition of
sexual conduct.
   The Penthouse case was one of dozens the state argued before New
Hampshire's supreme court during Souter's two years as attorney
general. The records, reviewed Wednesday, show that Souter's office
supported a tough law-and-order approach and positions on evidence
rulings favorable to prosecutors.
   On another subject Wednesday, Concord Hospital said that in
February 1973 Souter was a member of the board of trustees that
voted to allow the hospital to perform abortions.
   The subject of abortion, perhaps the most emotional and divisive
the Supreme Court addresses each year, is expected to figure
prominently in senators' questioning of Souter at confirmation
hearings in September.
   Concord Hospital President Richard Warner had said Tuesday that
abortion never came before the board when Souter was a member and
later its president.
   But on Wednesday, Warner said through a spokeswoman that while
reviewing minutes of meetings held before he came to the hospital
in 1975 he came across the minutes of the 1973 meeting.
   Doctors had requested adoption of the policy statement because
of the month-old Supreme Court decision legalizing abortion, Roe
vs. Wade. Included in the statement, and still in effect, was a
stipulation that hospital employees could refuse to assist with
abortions.
   Dean Williamson, who was among the 45 trustees at the time, said
Wednesday he recalls only a brief discussion of the issue and said
he believed it was adopted on a voice vote without dissent.
   ``I don't recall any emotional debate,'' he said. Williamson
said he had no recollection of Souter speaking on the issue.
   Another trustee, Marily Wilson, also said she could not recall
Souter speaking.
   ``This was a medical procedure vote, not a social issues vote,''
she said. ``It was not over he rights or wrongs of abortion but
rather about our responsibility as a medical facility in light of
the law.''
   On another issue Wednesday, The Union Leader in Manchester
reported that in a 1976 college commencement speech, Souter, then
state attorney general, attacked rigid federal affirmative action
guidelines as ``affirmative discrimination'' and added, ``There are
some things government cannot do.''
   As for the Penthouse issue, the obscenity case was brought by a
county prosecutor against Penthouse International, its New
Hampshire distributor and a Manchester pharmacy.
   Penthouse and the pharmacy challenged the indictment on grounds
the state had no jurisdiction to charge them because their parent
corporations were not based in New Hampshire. The distributor,
Manchester News, mounted a separate challenge on grounds the
state's obscenity law was unconstitutional.
   The trial judge rejected those challenges and his rulings were
appealed to the state supreme court where, by law, the attorney
general represents county prosecutors in all appeals.
   Souter was listed on the state briefs in the high court cases.
He did not personally argue the cases but approved the positions
taken by his office.
   The court refused to throw out charges against Manchester News
but did declare unconstitutional the portion of the state obscenity
law that included ``any touching of the genitals, pubic areas or
buttocks of the male or female or the breasts of the female'' in
its definition of sexual conduct.
   Souter's office had filed a legal brief supporting that law.
   In the end, charges were brought to trial only against
Penthouse, and the trial ended in a deadlocked jury.
   A quick review of the cases Souter's office argued before the
New Hampshire Supreme Court turned up none that he argued
personally. But the positions taken by the office were endorsed by
him and often mirrored approaches he took later as a judge on the
state's Superior and Supreme Court.
   Among the cases were:
   _Successful opposition by Souter's office to an appeal of an
assault conviction by a man who argued that graphic slides showing
the 16-month-old victim's injuries were too prejudicial to be
allowed as evidence.
   _A successful argument by Souter's office that a murder
conviction should not be overturned on grounds prosecutors failed
to tell the defense the state had promised the key prosecution
witness a new name after the trial.
   _Successful defense of state laws setting mandatory sentences of
life without parole. In one 1978 case, two convicts had challenged
the laws on grounds that he state Legislature lacked the authority
to pass them and that such penalties amounted to cruel and unusual
punishment prohibited by the U.S. Constitution.
   _An unsuccessful attempt to bring state charges to trial against
a man who had been acquitted of federal bank robbery charges after
two hung juries. The high court said the state attempt amounted to
double jeopardy.
   _A lost appeal in a case in which two men committed to
psychiatric facilities after being charged with sex offenses
challenged judges' orders extending their commitments. Souter's
office argued such findings were sufficient to keep the men in the
institutions, but the court ruled the state needed to prove the men
posed a danger to society.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
