ID: 174	RANK: 1	SCORE: 14.946970
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910128-0152
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910128-0152.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Theater: Sing a Song of Presidenticide
   ----
   By Melanie Kirkpatrick
</HL>
<DATE>
01/28/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A9
</SO>
<LP>
   New York -- For his new musical comedy, Stephen Sondheim
has chosen a preposterous and perverse subject -- the
assassins of presidents of the United States. More
specifically, "Assassins," which opened last night at
Playwrights Horizons, presents the stories of nine assassins,
four successes and five wannabes.
   This isn't the first time, of course, that Mr. Sondheim
has delighted in gruesome material. His "Sweeney Todd"
revolves around a murderous barber who has his victims baked
into meat pies. "Into the Woods" is a wicked treatment of
fairy tales. Even "West Side Story," whose lyrics Mr.
Sondheim wrote when he was a veritable Broadway baby, is the
brutal story of rival street gangs.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   All of Mr. Sondheim's best work has a malicious humor that
is to musicals what Gary Larson's "The Far Side" is to
cartoons. In "Assassins," the macabre Larson lurking inside
Mr. Sondheim shows his fangs more than ever, and right from
the start. In the opening scene, a carnival barker urges
folks to step right up to a game of "Shoot the President."
   If turning John Wilkes Booth and John Hinckley into merry
song-and-dance men sounds distasteful, well it is. The black
humor reaches squirm-in-your-seat proportions, however, only
when Lee Harvey Oswald makes his entrance late in the show.
Before that, "Assassins" is carried along by three enormous
assets: beguiling music, often hilarious comic turns, and
superb workmanship on the part of every member of the cast.
   Mr. Sondheim's score counterpoints its characters' ghastly
doings with lovely music. Several songs draw heavily on
traditional American folk tunes. Three ballads, performed by
Patrick Cassidy, a glorious Irish tenor, sound as if they had
been written in 19th-century Appalachia. And "Unworthy of
Your Love" is a heart-rendingly sweet love song in the manner
of a Carol King or Bob Dylan hit of the '60s.
   These melodious songs contrast eerily with the evil
weirdness of their singers' lives. "Unworthy of Your Love,"
for instance, is a duet sung by Ronald Reagan's assailant
John Hinckley (Greg Germann) and Squeaky Fromme (Annie
Golden), the Charles Manson follower who tried to kill Gerald
Ford. The lovers for whom the singers are pining are Manson
and Jodie Foster, the movie star Hinckley pursued with love
letters around the time he shot at Mr. Reagan.
   In another scene, President James Garfield's assassin
Charles Guiteau (Jonathan Hadary) prances up and down the
stairs of the gallows where he will be hanged, all the while
singing a spirited Gospel tune about "going to the Lordy."
The scene ends with Guiteau hanging from a noose. Similarly,
Abraham Lincoln's killer John Wilkes Booth (Victor Garber)
breaks into song in the burning barn where he will shoot
himself. And William McKinley's assassin Leon Czolgosz croons
"The Ballad of Czolgosz" from the electric chair.
Undoubtedly, Mr. Sondheim is striving for the musical
equivalent of gallows humor, but his splendid melodies and
crafty lyrics are vastly out of tune with his subject.
   By far the weakest part of the score is the play's
signature song, "Everybody's Got the Right." This is
especially unfortunate since it is the song that opens and
closes the show. In both cases, the assassins, arranged in a
kind of zombies' parody of a Broadway chorus line, earnestly
belt out the lyrics, "Everybody's got the right to be
different. Everybody's got the right to their dreams." This
is meant, I think, as a satiric comment on the American dream
gone berserk, but it ends up sounding trite and mildly
didactic.
   Mr. Sondheim does better with the failed assassins than
with those who, to adopt the script's tone, bagged their
Prez. The bunglers are all fruitcakes, and, happily, Mr.
Sondeim and his scriptwriter, John Weidman, dispense with the
psychoanalysis that weighs down their treatment of Booth,
Guiteau and Czolgosz and concentrate instead on the bunglers'
nuttiness.
   The actors ham it up deliciously. Lee Wilkof makes a manic
Samuel Byck, the man in a Santa suit who hijacked a plane
that he intended to crash into Richard Nixon's White House.
Debra Monk is brilliant as Sara Jane Moore, the terminally
bored housewife who brought along her small son when she
tried to shoot Gerry Ford. And Ms. Golden makes a marvelous
Squeaky Fromme, the spacy flower child who can't remember why
her father threw her out of the house -- was it because they
were fighting over her eye makeup or the war in Cambodia?
   For the first 75 minutes, then, the captivating music and
zany comedy create an appealing entertainment. Jerry Zaks's
snappy direction and Loren Sherman's inventive turntable sets
add to the pleasure. With the appearance of Lee Harvey
Oswald, however, in the penultimate scene, a shadow falls
over the stage, and the show never recovers. It's as if
Shakespeare had tacked on the fearful ending of "King Lear"
to "As You Like It."
   The setting is, of course, the Dallas Book Depository. The
time is just after noon, on Nov. 22, 1963.
   By this point, I'd grown a little fond of the gang of
assassins and their assorted quirks. But now the gang, led by
Booth, turns into Team Mephistopheles, urging a sullen Oswald
to follow their example and earn his place in history by
killing Jack Kennedy.
   Mr. Sondheim gave himself an insoluble problem: how to
force one of the great evildoers of our time into a musical
comedy. I suppose we should be grateful he did not attempt a
"Ballad of Lee Harvey Oswald" to match the ballads he gives
the other successful assassins. He might have had Oswald
dance a jig or burst into song as Jack Ruby shoots him down.
That would have been even worse than the straight ending Mr.
Sondheim actually settled for. Sincerity and sanctimony end
up spoiling -- or should I say, assassinating? -- what
started off as an impertinent and amusing show.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
