ID: 174	RANK: 35	SCORE: 8.549705
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910708-0086
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910708-0086.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Republican Trustbusting Leads to Disaster
   ----
   By George Bittlingmayer
</HL>
<DATE>
07/08/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A6
</SO>
<IN>
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
</IN>
<GV>
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Despite the good news from the leading economic
indicators, the economy is not out of the doldrums. The
question asked last summer, namely whether by raising taxes
George Bush was repeating the policy mistakes of Herbert
Hoover, has only been deferred, not answered. One parallel
between the two presidents is a stiffening of antitrust
policy after years of leniency.
   The Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission
filed relatively few antitrust actions under Coolidge. His
antitrust authorities substituted consultation for
litigation, in particular by providing for advance clearance
of mergers and trade association agreements. Although its
legality was then questionable, pre-clearance of mergers is a
sound idea that was finally written into law in 1975. Until
then, merging parties did not know where they stood until a
suit was filed, which often occurred five or 10 years after
the merger. With antitrust's loose cannons safely tied down,
the 1920s, like the 1980s, were marked by a merger boom and
economic growth.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But on Friday, Oct. 25, 1929, the Hoover administration's
attorney general, William Mitchell, announced in an address
at the American Bar Association's annual banquet that the
Department of Justice would deal "vigorously with every
violation of the antitrust laws." He also revealed that the
department had not given clearance to a single proposed
merger since the administration had been inaugurated in
March, and that it would abandon the practice altogether. The
Dow Jones average, which had fallen 6% on the preceding
Wednesday, dropped another 13% on the Monday and 12% on the
Tuesday following Mitchell's speech.
   Mitchell's tough talk was soon backed up with lawsuits,
both against large mergers, notably in the film industry, and
against a string of trade association agreements that had
been approved by the Coolidge antitrust authorities.
High-profile cases in early 1930 against a group of major oil
companies and against a patent cross-licensing agreement
between RCA and Westinghouse helped certify the Hoover
administration's anti-big-business credentials. The economy,
which had already begun to slump, slid into an ever deeper
recession that was aggravated by banking panics and misguided
Fed actions beginning in the fall of 1930.
   The Hoover administration was making a classic Republican
mistake. Teddy Roosevelt's politicized antitrust crusade
against Standard Oil, Du Pont and other large firms coincided
with the Panic of 1907. Publicly, Roosevelt dismissed
widespread charges that his policies could have been
responsible for the Panic, and disingenuously wondered "why
there should be this belief on Wall Street that I am a
wild-eyed revolutionist." But the agile hero of San Juan Hill
soon recognized that the better part of valor was caution,
and he suspended his aggressive antitrust policies as the
1908 election approached.
   Roosevelt's hand-picked successor, William Howard Taft,
took up the antitrust cudgel in 1910, when he attempted to
dismember U.S. Steel and other large companies. Business
again complained that antitrust was killing the economy. The
guileless Taft admitted that enforcement of the Sherman Act
"may make business halt," but vowed to "enforce that law or
die in the attempt." The words were prophetic. Roosevelt
entered the 1912 presidential contest as the pro-business
candidate, and the Republicans -- badly split between
Roosevelt and Taft -- handed the White House to Woodrow
Wilson, the first Democratic president in 20 years.
   Richard Nixon followed the Hoover pattern. The Dow peaked
after the Democrats lost the 1968 election, but it fell
steadily over the next 18 months amid threats by antitrust
officials of a sustained increase in the number of antitrust
lawsuits. In the election year of 1972 Mr. Nixon's Antitrust
Division broke the record set by FDR's trustbusters in 1941
and filed 72 cases. Mr. Nixon's attack on Big Business
included lengthy and expensive cases against the major cereal
companies, IBM, AT&amp;T, Xerox, ITT, Du Pont and General Foods.
   Those Republican presidents who adopted a less stringent
policy, were rewarded handsomely for it. Antitrust
enforcement has reached low-water marks three times in the
hundred years since the Sherman Act was signed in 1890:
during the presidencies of McKinley, Coolidge and Reagan.
Inflation-adjusted per-capita GNP grew at 2.5% over those 19
years, as compared to an average of 1.6% in the other 81
years of the century.
   Mr. Bush is under pressure to imitate the examples of
Taft, Hoover and Nixon rather than McKinley, Coolidge and
Reagan. While he has held fast on some fronts, he has caved
in on others. For example, the House of Representatives
strongly endorsed a bill last spring that would have
undermined the ability of manufacturers to control how their
products are distributed. Mr. Bush threatened to veto the
bill. His threat had the long-term interest of consumers on
its side. Companies like Apple Computer are eager to keep
their products out of mail order and discount channels
because their ability to compete depends on a well-developed
network of dealers who provide customer support.
   The Bush administration's hostility to mergers, on the
other hand, shows that Mr. Bush can't kick all the old, bad,
Republican habits. The ostensible reason for blocking some
mergers is the threat of monopoly and high prices from
increased concentration, but it's clear that Pabst's
complaints and not consumer interests lay behind efforts to
block Coors' acquisition of Stroh's. Not one sliver of
evidence exists that the permissive Reagan merger policies
hurt consumers. Even the airline industry, which might be
trotted out to give mixed support for tighter merger
enforcement, is a flawed example: A ban on mergers would
simply have led to restructuring by the bankruptcy of some
airlines and the internal growth by others.
   The jury is still out on the effects of mergers and
restructurings on efficiency, but it would be foolhardy to
imagine that interference with an active market in corporate
assets on the part of the two antitrust agencies on
Pennsylvania Avenue will help matters.
   Historically, merger waves and good times go together, but
it would be risky to say which was cause and which was
effect. "Be strong" is cheap advice. Mr. Bush has shown that
he can wage war, but if he wants to cash in his military
victory in next year's election, he also needs to show that
he's a winner in peacetime. A century of Republican
experience with antitrust suggests that he should keep his
antitrust hounds on a short leash.
   ---
   Mr. Bittlingmayer teaches economics and finance at the
Graduate School of Management of the University of California
at Davis.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
