ID: 174	RANK: 38	SCORE: 8.520072
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP881010-0206 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-10-10-88 1333EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>a p AM-Veeps'Leaps Adv12   10-10 1150</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Veeps' Leaps, Adv 12,1181</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv12</NOTE>
<NOTE>For Release Wed AMs, Oct. 12, and Thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>Every Veep for 60 Years Has Leaped Higher _ And Flopped</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By W. DALE NELSON</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   ``It is the tradition of our politics, and a
very poor tradition, that the vice-presidency is a shelf,'' Henry
Cabot Lodge wrote to Theodore Roosevelt. ``It ought to be, and
there is no reason why it should not be, a stepping stone.''
   Pretty slippery stepping stone.
   Roosevelt did not get to put Lodge's theory to the test. After
being elected vice president in 1900 he was catapulted into the
White House by the assassination of President William McKinley.
   Every vice president who has had the chance to in the last 60
years, however, has tried for the presidency while holding the No.
2 position.
   So far, they have all failed.
   Alben Barkley, Harry Truman's vice president in 1952, could not
even win his party's nomination. He was forced to withdraw in the
face of labor opposition.
   Richard Nixon, as Dwight Eisenhower's vice president in 1960,
captured the Republican presidential nomination easily but lost to
John F. Kennedy, in a campaign in which he got little help from
Eisenhower. He had to wait eight years to win the White House on
his own.
   The candidate he defeated was Hubert H. Humphrey, running while
serving as vice president under Lyndon B. Johnson at the height of
the unpopular Vietnam war.
   Now George Bush is trying it. If he wins on Nov. 8, he will be
the first vice president to succeed to the presidency by election
since Martin Van Buren followed Andrew Jackson into the White House
in 1836.
   Political scientists and professional political strategists say
that although Bush is doing better than most, vice presidents face
formidable problems when they try to become No. 1.
   ``There is the burden of defending an incumbent administration
plus the fact that the job is, in a way, a wimpy job,'' said Leo
Ribuffo, a specialist in political history at George Washington
University.
   ``A vice president, for better or for worse, is defined in large
part by the public's view of the president he serves,'' said Frank
J. Donatelli, President Reagan's chief political aide.
   ``The fact that we have to hear talk about the Reagan-Bush
administration, as we once had to about Eisenhower-Nixon, is
nonsense,'' said Stephen Hess, a senior fellow at the Brookings
Institution who was an aide in the Eisenhower White House. ``It's
not the Reagan-Bush administration; it's the Reagan
administration.''
   Ryan Barrileaux, a professor at Miami University in Oxford,
Ohio, is a member of a new school of political scientists who
regard the vice presidency as an important post. But even he agreed
that ``a lot of vice presidents have the problem that they are
regarded by people as being generally insignificant.''
   ``I think what happens is that they tend to regard him as
nothing more than a senior presidential aide,'' said Barrileaux.
``They don't really think of him as an independent politician or as
someone with a standing in his own right.''
   Scholars say that during much of U.S. history, vice presidents
were not regarded as presidential contenders, except for those like
Theodore Roosevelt or Andrew Johnson who became president when an
incumbent died.
   ``During most of the 19th century, with a couple of exceptions
such as John Calhoun, vice presidents were nonentities,'' said
Ribuffo.
   ``It was other offices that were regarded as breeding grounds
for presidents,'' said Barrileaux. ``For much of American history
the secretary of state was regarded as a sort of potential
president.''
   For more than a century after Van Buren, no vice president ran
for president, according to ``Presidential Also-Rans and Running
Mates, 1788-1899,'' compiled by Leslie H. Southwick.
   The last one who passed up a shot at it, however, was Charles G.
Dawes in 1928. When President Calvin Coolidge announced that he did
not choose to run, Vice President Dawes did not choose to run
either.
   In each of the next four presidential elections, 1932 through
1944, the incumbent was running for re-election, so there was no
realistic chance for the vice president to step in. In 1948, with
Truman filling out Roosevelt's term, there was no vice president.
   Then came Barkley's abortive try in 1952. In 1956, Eisenhower
was on the ticket. In 1964 the vice presidency was again vacant. In
1972, 1976, 1980 and 1984, incumbents were on the ballot for
president _ first Nixon, then Gerald Ford, Jimmy Carter and Reagan.
   Which brings up 1988 and Bush.
   ``This is different, not only to the degree that Reagan is
anxious to do something to help Bush on the stump as a campaign
speaker, but also to the degree that he seems almost to have turned
over major decisions of government to Bush, where Bush cared to
involve himself,'' said Hess.
   As examples, the Brookings scholar cited Reagan's veto of a
defense authorization bill and his decision to allow a trade bill
to become law without his signature instead of vetoing it, even
though it contained a plant-closing amendment that he stoutly
opposed. Both actions were favored by Bush although opposed by some
other Reagan advisers.
   Other examples, said Hess, are Reagan's appointment of Secretary
of the Treasury Nicholas Brady and Attorney General Dick
Thornburgh, both Bush allies, and the choice for education
secretary of Lauro F. Cavazos, an Hispanic from politically crucial
Texas.
   ``Also, the country is at peace and feeling prosperous,'' he
said. ``In 1960, we were coming out of a recession. In 1968 there
was a war. We are not talking about so many cases that we can
crunch them through a computer. We are talking about a couple of
cases, and each one is a little different, but this one is very
different.''
   Hess and other scholars agreed that Reagan has given Bush more
work to do as vice president than most previous presidents have,
although he did not make a key adviser of him as Carter did of his
vice president, Walter Mondale.
   Bush was ``not as important as Mondale, but certainly more
important than, say, Lyndon Johnson was in the Kennedy White
House,'' said Barrileaux.
   Although Reagan has often pointed to Bush's accomplishments as
vice president, Barrileaux said, ``I guess many people didn't think
of these things as terribly important.''
   ``When you mention things like the Task Force on Regulatory
Relief, that sounds very enigmatic to many voters, I would
imagine,'' said the Miami University scholar.
   Ribuffo, who is writing a book on Carter, said that Carter
``really did include (Mondale) in policy discussions and used him
extensively as a Capitol Hill lobbyist.''
   ``I don't get the impression that Reagan used Bush nearly so
much or included him so much,'' the political historian said.
   However, he added, ``It doesn't seem to have hurt much so far.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Wed AMs, Oct. 12</NOTE>
</DOC>
