ID: 297	RANK: 32	SCORE: 12.469977
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP901128-0106 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NY-11-28-90 1452EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-NoriegaTapes Bjt   11-28 0811</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Noriega Tapes, Bjt,0980</SECOND>
<HEAD>Judge Lifts Ban on Broadcast of Noriega Tapes</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By RICHARD COLE</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>MIAMI (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   A federal judge Wednesday lifted a ban on
broadcasting tapes of Manuel Noriega's prison telephone calls,
defusing a confrontation between the rights of the media and those
of a criminal defendant.
   While CNN hailed the decision as a victory over censorship,
Noriega's defense and constitutional specialists said the case
showed the U.S. Supreme Court was willing to accept at least
temporary restrictions on the press.
   U.S. District Judge William Hoeveler's decision ended a
three-week legal battle between Noriega and the network, which
aired some of the tapes before the judge ordered CNN to stop.
   CNN President Tom Johnson said the decision would allow the
network to pursue its story on the government's taping of the
ousted Panamanian leader's conversations.
   ``CNN's coverage of this possible misconduct was delayed by this
judicial prior restraint on press freedom,'' he said. ``Despite the
unfortunate delay, CNN's reporting of government taping of Noriega
phone conversations will continue.''
   The judge ruled after he and the attorneys reviewed transcripts
of seven tapes the network submitted to the court last week
following the Supreme Court's refusal to overturn Hoeveler's
initial ban.
   At Wednesday's hearing, Noiega defense attorney Frank Rubino
told the judge he would withdraw his request to stop the
broadcasts. He said the only tape that appeared to violate
lawyer-client privilege already had been broadcast.
   ``The problem today is that the tape's out, it's been published
to the world,'' Rubino said.
   ``It does no good to close the barn door after the horse is
out.''
   Federal prosecutors said they had no objections to lifting the
ban, once again insisting that Noriega's rights were never violated
by the routine prison taping.
   Rubino said outside the courtroom that the case has already left
its mark in the balancing of First Amendment protections for
freedom of speech and Sixth Amendment guarantees of a fair trial.
   ``The Supreme Court has upheld prior restraint and ordered CNN
to turn the tapes over to the court, and CNN complied with the
court,'' Rubino said. ``Prior restraint is in full force and
effect.''
   Rodney Smolla, a William and Mary law professor who heads the
school's Institute of Bill of Rights Law, also said the case has
left a legacy, in part because the Supreme Court refused to halt
the ban.
   He said it would have been better had the issue returned to the
high court for a final resolution.
   ``It casts its shadow, and the shadow is negative,'' said
Smolla. ``Other lawyers will aggressively pursue these sorts of
strategies against news organization. The battle isn't over yet.''
   Jane Kirtley, head of the Reporters Committee for Freedom of the
Press, said the ruling showed the gag order should never have been
issued in the first place, but she added she was worried about the
precedent set.
   ``The unfortunate effect of that is that a new organization has
been unconstitutionally constrained for several weeks from bringing
information lawfully obtained to the attention of the general
public,'' she said. ``That damage cannot be rectified.''
   CNN's legal problems haven't ended, Noriega's defense attorneys
contend. They want the judge to find CNN in contempt of court for
airing one of the tapes even after the judge's initial ban, and
fine the network $300,000 per violation. The judge has not said
whether he will schedule a contempt hearing.
   Such a hearing could reopen the issue of whether the prior
restraint was permissible, said William Greenhalgh a law professor
at Georgetown University.
   ``Now, it's much ado about nothing,'' he said. ``We've avoided
the constitutional issue - but if there is a contempt proceeding,
then we would really get into it.''
   The tape that touched off the dispute was between Noriega and
one of Rubino's investigators, with the lawyer's Spanish-speaking
secretary serving as an interpreter. In the conversation, Noriega
is asked about two recently arrested Panamanians, and speculates
that prosecutors intend to use them as witnesses against him.
   Rubino went into court Nov. 8 and Hoeveler ordered CNN not to
broadcast any tapes that interfere with attorney-client privilege.
The network aired the tape later that day, but withdrew it the
following day when the 11th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals backed
Hoeveler.
   The Supreme Court then refused to intervene on a 7-2 vote,
forcing CNN to submit the tapes to the judge for review.
   The government has acknowledged routine taping of prisoners'
phone calls at federal prisons, including the Metropolitan
Correctional Center, where Noriega is being held on drug-smuggling
charges. Noriega signed a release acknowledging his calls were
being monitored, but the defense said that release does not apply
to conversations with his attorneys.
   Hoeveler on Wednesday ordered the Bureau of Prisons to cease
sharing Noriega's tapes with other government agencies unless he
approves.
   Following the hearing, the judge returned the tapes to CNN's
attorneys. The judge's clerk said the tape transcripts remained
sealed at the request of the network.
   Rubino has accused President Guillermo Endara's government in
Panama of giving the tapes to CNN after obtaining them from the
U.S. government, ridiculing an ongoing FBI probe of the leak.
   Gregory Craig, an attorney for Panama in that nation's $6.5
billion racketeering lawsuit against Noriega, submitted an
affidavit in that case Tuesday indicating he had received
``information'' from the tapes, including items never broadcast by
CNN.
   Craig strongly denied Wednesday that he had heard the actual
tapes, however, but refused to say whether his information came
from the Panamanian government.
   Noriega is charged with drug trafficking in a February 1988
indictment accusing him of accepting $4.6 million in bribes from
the Medellin drug cartel to protect cocaine shipments to the United
States.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
