ID: 297	RANK: 55	SCORE: 10.721717
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910121-0069
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910121-0069.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Marketing &amp; Media:
   TV Affiliates
   Of 3 Networks
   Turn to CNN
   ----
   By Kevin Goldman
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/21/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4
</SO>
<CO>
   TBSA GE CCB CBS
</CO>
<IN>
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
</IN>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- Cable News Network typically reaches only 60%
of the nation's homes. But as allied jets struck Iraq last
CNN widened its audience by untold millions by getting help
from unlikely partners: stations affiliated with the three
major broadcast networks.
   There are 130 stations affiliated with the ABC, CBS and
NBC networks that are also affiliated with CNN, a unit of
Atlanta-based Turner Broadcasting System Inc. And, to the
chagrin of network news division officials, many of these
stations pre-empted the major networks in favor of CNN's
coverage of the war in the Persian Gulf.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "I'm doing it right now," Bob Campbell, news director of
WHTR, the NBC affiliate in Indianapolis said yesterday
afternoon after a Iraqi Scud missile attack over Dhahran,
Saudi Arabia. "NBC just doesn't have the pictures. What we're
trying to do is get the freshest news and pictures and many
times, it's CNN that has both."
   Indeed, local news directors interviewed yesterday said
they switched away from their network's coverage to CNN
because the 11-year-old upstart service was faster at getting
breaking news on the air than the more-established networks.
   Neither Turner officials nor the ratings service supplied
by the A.C. Nielsen Co. had exact figures of how many network
affiliates switched to CNN or how many viewers this added to
CNN's record-setting audience.
   A spokeswoman for ABC News said that any affiliate that
pre-empts its coverage "risks losing the right to cover ABC
News programming. . . . We feel (a pre-emption) is
inappropriate." Anthony C. Malara, president of CBS affiliate
relations, said in an interview that "a network can't just
sit around and say this is normal procedure." He said he was
investigating which affiliates pre-empted and for how long.
An NBC News spokeswoman declined comment.
   Stations affiliated with the major networks, particularly
with NBC, a unit of General Electric, had similarly done this
in October 1989 during the San Francisco earthquake. NBC was
criticized by its affiliates for slowness in responding to
the breaking story. Last week, the initial scoop of having
CNN anchor Bernard Shaw and correspondents Peter Arnett and
John Holliman file dramatic live coverage from Baghdad on the
first night of the war, pushed the pre-emptions to
unprecedented levels.
   CNN also has 84 independent stations in addition to 32
affiliated with Capital Cities/ABC Inc., 45 affiliated with
CBS Inc. and 53 with National Broadcasting Co. In fact, at
least one network-owned station, WTVJ, the NBC-owned station
in Miami, pre-empted NBC on Wednesday night.
   At times, television screens looked like a CNN-dominated
show. In Atlanta, for instance, the three network affiliates
dropped network coverage in favor of CNN, and two independent
stations beamed to Atlanta cable systems showed CNN.
   "It's nice," Ed Turner, CNN executive vice-president,
said.
   Jim Overbay, news director of KCTV, CBS's television
affiliate in Kansas City, said that several times during the
coverage "CBS wasn't in a competitive advantage to deliver
pictures when we needed them."
   Network officials stressed that the local stations
pre-empted their coverage for only minutes at a time. But Mr.
Overbay said his station dropped out of CBS News coverage for
periods of 20 minutes each.
   In the mid-1980's, network news divisions expanded
overnight and early morning programming to blunt affiliate
defection during those hours. However, because of severe
budget cuts, each network subsequently significantly reduced
such programming.
   There are signs the networks now may have to rethink their
strategies. NBC News, for instance, this month began an
overnight affiliate news service, but it only provides
footage, as opposed to taped reports with NBC News
correspondents. ABC News had planned a Washington-based
overnight newscast, but shelved it when the advertising
market crashed. And CBS News is exploring the possibility of
a new format for its two-hour overnight program "Nightwatch."
   John Culliton, news director of the CBS affiliate in
Minneapolis, which is considered to have one of the strongest
local news divisions in the country, said he didn't expect
CBS would be upset by his decision last week to pre-empt the
network and anchor Dan Rather several times. "They're
professionals," he said, "and I hope they understand that our
goal at that time is not so much loyalty to the network, but
to serving the viewers."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
