ID: 239	RANK: 19	SCORE: 4.447016
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910919-0144
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910919-0144.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Film:
   Medieval Fantasy in Modern Manhattan
   ----
   By Julie Salamon
</HL>
<DATE>
09/19/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   Partway through "The Fisher King," Terry Gilliam's
engaging new film, the rush-hour crush in Manhattan's Grand
Central Terminal is transformed into a lyrically romantic set
piece. The crush of commuters, tourists and homeless people
suddenly breaks into a dizzying waltz, under the glow of the
elegant chandeliers. Instead of pressing ahead to the
individual concerns propelling them forward, these people are
all swept up in the fantasy that is implied in the grandeur
of the architecture. Instead of avoiding one another --
afraid of facing yet another beggar -- the crowd gracefully
moves together in a glittering dream.
   The moment passes and they are no longer revelers but
commuters, tourists and homeless people once again. It's a
great scene -- beautiful and a little nutty, the kind of
thing one would expect from Mr. Gilliam, a director who
specializes in the phantasmagorical ("Time Bandits,"
"Brazil," "The Adventures of Baron Munchausen").
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Elsewhere in "The Fisher King" Mr. Gilliam has restrained
himself, perhaps reacting to the criticism that his films
rely too much on the spectacular, too little on "real"
character and emotion. So he devotes much more screen time to
his characters and less to the brilliant set pieces he stages
so well.
   The result is a movie whose rhythms are uneven: You feel
as if Mr. Gilliam is trying to conform to somebody else's
conventions (this is the first time he's directed a movie
that wasn't his idea from the start). Sometimes the pictures
strains to make its points about humanity and true happiness,
and slides into sentimentality. But Mr. Gilliam's
imagination, with its mix of mischief and melancholy, gives
the movie a satisfying spark, enough to overcome its pat
message of upbeat poignancy.
   It's easy to see what drew the director to Richard
LaGravenese's dark fable about a powerful, foul talk-radio
host named Jack Lucas who drops out of the business and
becomes a drunk worker in a video store after a listener he'd
egged on goes out and commits mass murder. Jack, who has
remained an arrogant cynic even after he's gone off the air,
stumbles into a homeless man who holds the secret to his
redemption. The homeless man, who calls himself Parry, was a
college professor driven mad by a horrible tragedy. Parry is
obsessed by the legend of the Fisher King, who forgot the
meaning of life until the court jester reminded him of it
(love, not power).
   Mr. Gilliam plays out the theme with a darkly romantic
vision. He's constructed the story visually as a medieval
fairy tale set in a contemporary Manhattan that's part
Gothic, part Gershwin. When Parry and his homeless friends
rescue Jack from a couple of thugs, they top their act by
singing "I Love New York in Spring." In fact, more than
anything, the movie reminds me of a great Broadway musical,
without the music (except for a second grand set piece, in
which Michael Jeter, a skinny man, pays homage to Ethel
Merman with delirious perfection).
   Jeff Bridges has the guts not to make Jack the ex-deejay
endearing. The actor has played variations on this kind of
man before, and he's perfected that brand of hip
discouragement. There isn't much to like about him. He's a
whiner when he's up and he's a whiner when he's down.
   Robin Williams gets to pull out all his tricks to play
Parry. He can be the wild man who talks to invisible people,
the sentimentalist and the moralist. There's a deep, sad
strain there that's entirely believable; he's one of few
actors today who could tell the legend of the Fisher King
(while lying naked on his back in Central Park at night) and
get away with it.
   This eccentric love story includes women, and Mr. Gilliam
has chosen two of the better eccentric actresses. Mercedes
Ruehl plays Anne, the video-store owner who took Jack in
after he gave up his talk show. With Ms. Ruehl around,
fireworks are beside the point. She's a walking visual and
emotional display. You want to hug her one minute and put her
behind glass the next. Yet she's the girl next door compared
with Lydia, the klutzy girl of Parry's dreams, played sweetly
bizarre by Amanda Plummer.
   ---
   "Livin' Large" is a lively spoof about a young black man
who accidentally becomes a local newscaster then sells his
soul to his ambitious executive producer to become a star.
   Terrence "T.C." Carson is Dexter Jackson, an amiable kid
with a video camera whose heros are newsmen. He's on hand
when a field correspondent gets shot while reporting a
"hostage situation," and goes on camera and impresses the
Atlanta station's executives with his prowess under pressure.
The executive producer, a woman with short blond hair and a
glint in her eye, spots Dexter's ambition and signs him on.
   Michael Schultz, a black director who was working before
black directors became trendy (his work includes "Greased
Lightning" and "Which Way Is Up") has a nice, breezy style.
Though the film doesn't purport to carry any big message,
William Mosely Payne's script is actually quite astute on the
slide of local news into sleaze. He takes the position -- not
entirely fair -- that blacks and women have advanced only
because they're willing to emphasize murder and mayhem to
enhance ratings. As their careers advance they fall into
moral decline.
   The movie is especially cynical (and funny) in its view of
the white women who succeed. The producer Kate, played with
nasty precision by Blanche Baker, has sacrificed everything
-- judgment, a personal life, ethics -- for ratings. The
weather woman, played by Julia Campbell, is no less ruthless
but has rigged a kind of personal life by using sex to
advance her career.
   Dexter goes along with Kate's plans for a while, but
starts to panic when his version of the portrait of Dorian
Gray starts staring at him from his television screen
(instead of eternal youth, he gets to be white).
   ---
   The actor Sean Penn has directed and written his first
film, "The Indian Runner." This story of two brothers, one
good and one bad, takes place in a small Nebraskan town and
reveals a serious intent unaccompanied by a clear idea of how
to bring a story to life on film.
   Mr. Penn has encouraged his actors (he doesn't play a
part) to precede almost every line of dialogue with a pause.
Even the grunts are preceded by pauses. He does understand
how to compose a visually interesting scene, but the scenes
don't connect. The movie is a collection of poses and
emotional vignettes.
   ---
   VIDEO TIP: Mr. Gilliam's films generally divide people
into two distinct camps: love 'em/hate 'em. Whichever group
you fall into you will have to admit these movies contain
some of the most exciting images ever put on film. Try "Time
Bandits," "Brazil," "The Adventures of Baron Munchausen."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
