ID: 239	RANK: 45	SCORE: 3.613614
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911017-0139
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911017-0139.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Film:
   Jodie Foster on the Other Side of the Camera
   ----
   By Julie Salamon
</HL>
<DATE>
10/17/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A20
</SO>
<LP>
   Time magazine took the occasion of "Little Man Tate,"
Jodie Foster's directing debut, to put the actress on its
cover. This puts rather too heavy a burden on this nice
little film. Ms. Foster herself was far more unpretentious in
her undertaking than the hoopla surrounding it would imply.
If anything, this promising start to her second career is too
restrained.
   "Little Man Tate" is the story of a child genius trying to
find his place. He's never known his father. His mother,
Dede, a spirited woman working as a cocktail waitress, hasn't
quite found her place either. Word of his brainpower has made
the rounds in his hometown of Cincinnati, and he is being
sought by the founder of an institute for gifted children.
The founder, a former gifted child, wants to rescue him (and
all young geniuses) from the ordinary world so they won't
suffer feelings of alienation as she did.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Telling the story from Fred Tate's -- the little man's --
point of view, Ms. Foster has tried to adopt the droll,
knowing tone that the great French film makers used so
successfully in movies about adolescence. She's succeeded in
many ways, and failed in others. The camerawork (by Mike
Southon) is artful yet unselfconscious, and Mark Isham's
score adds a jazzy elegance. Scott Frank's screenplay
contains within it a good story. So the film is pleasant to
watch and to listen to.
   But Ms. Foster has carried understatement to an extreme.
Fred Tate, who narrates, tells his story as a series of
events, not all of them directly related. There should be
some emotional connection, however, and it's never made
obvious. Subtlety is fine, but Ms. Foster has approached the
material a little too hesitantly, too earnestly, without the
touch of naughtiness it needs to touch off a spark.
   Part of the problem comes in her leading man, Adam
Hann-Byrd, a nine-year-old non-actor. He has a great face --
dreamy but not pretty -- but he's too much a cipher.
Everything is filtered through him, and he doesn't react.
   That feeling of distance permeates the film. The adult
actors, experienced and talented, are vague as well. Ms.
Foster the director decided not to let Ms. Foster the actress
(she plays Fred's mother) dominate the screen. Since the film
is presented from Fred's viewpoint, you'd expect to see her
as he does, as a major figure. But the audience isn't really
clued into what seems to be Fred's romanticized, protective
vision of his mother. She's either smiling bravely or
erupting in mild bursts of anger or looking worried, and
these activities don't begin to explore the breadth of Ms.
Foster's acting range.
   Dianne Wiest plays Jane Grierson, the uptight gatherer of
gifted children. She and Fred's mother are competing for the
two poles of Fred's soul: his brain and his heart. Bored by
regular school, and lonely, he's read all of Jane's books and
is eager to join her, though he doesn't want to hurt his
mother.
   Though Ms. Wiest has been placed in sterile environments,
she doesn't seem the opposite of warm and nurturing, with her
honeyed voice and crinkly eyes. Neither the script nor the
direction give her much room to overcome her appearance of
niceness and warmth. So the tension that is supposed to exist
in the struggle between Jane and Dede, Fred's mother, doesn't
present itself, in any form.
   The movie comes most to life when Jane takes Fred and some
other little geniuses on a three-week "Odyssey of the Mind,"
sort of a traveling quiz show. On the trip Fred meets Matt
Montini, "the Mathemagician," played with wise-cracking
finess by Michael Shulman. The cynical awareness of this
aging child genius is welcome after all the restraint
exercised by everyone else, including the director.
   ---
   Terrence McNally's popular play, "Frankie and Johnny in
the Clair de Lune," was a funny, sentimental piece about the
romance between a short-order cook and a waitress who meet in
the New York diner where they work. Kathy Bates, the actress
best known to movie audiences as the crazed fan in "Misery"
and not as a glamour girl in the traditional sense, played
Frankie, the waitress.
   Frankie is well into her 30s, has sworn off men and eats
too much (and shows it). Director Garry Marshall decided the
perfect person to play her on film was the svelte beauty
Michelle Pfeiffer, a decision that reportedly made Ms. Bates
"laugh and laugh."
   In "Frankie and Johnny" -- the title as well as the
leading lady was trimmed for Hollywood -- Ms. Pfeiffer is
actually quite wonderful as the tough, neurotic waitress. She
has great comic timing and is quite touching in the sad parts
-- though the only time her persistent snacking is at all
credible comes when she starts spooning peanut butter into
her mouth and chokes. You can believe she can't get food to
go down that beautiful slender throat.
   Al Pacino is her Johnny, and he is romantic and poignant
opposite Ms. Pfeiffer, and keeps it up, long after the movie
has established its premise and repeated it many times. Mr.
McNally, the playwright, wrote the screenplay, heavily soaked
in schmaltz and audience-pleasing one-liners. The repartee
among the diner employees (notably Kate Nelligan's sassy
waitress) is especially amusing. Mr. Marshall, the director
whose credits include "Pretty Woman" and "Nothing in Common,"
knows exactly what to do with this kind of sentimental
comedy, and he does it to the hilt.
   ---
   VIDEO TIP: "Frankie and Johnny" didn't give Mr. Pacino his
first chance to stare at Ms. Pfeiffer with those big doggy
eyes. That happened in Brian De Palma's "Scarface," in which
Ms. Pfeiffer played the ice queen wife to Mr. Pacino's heated
Cuban mobster.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
