ID: 239	RANK: 49	SCORE: 3.519490
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880617-0253 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-06-17-88 1557EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>s e BC-APArts:RogerRabbit Adv19   06-17 1030</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-AP Arts: Roger Rabbit, Adv 19,1054</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv19</NOTE>
<NOTE>For Release Sunday, June 19, and Thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>Bugs, Daffy, Dumbo and Betty Boop Star in Private-Eye Caper</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By BOB THOMAS</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>LOS ANGELES (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   It was a goofy, daffy idea, a Mickey Mouse
notion if ever there was one, to combine cartoon characters with
human actors in a big budget film.
   The Walt Disney Co. is taking a gamble that might have given
pause to even its risk-taking founder. ``Who Framed Roger Rabbit''
reaches the nation's screens Wednesday after three years of
planning and production and an estimated $40 million in costs.
   It's a project that combines a 1940s private-eye caper with just
about every cartoon character in film history.
   The movie stars Bob Hoskins, Christopher Lloyd and Joanna
Cassidy, plus Mickey Mouse, Bugs Bunny, Dumbo, Daffy Duck, Betty
Boop, Donald Duck and two cartoon newcomers, the comic Roger Rabbit
and his sexpot wife, Jessica.
   In the film, a down-at-the-heels detective (Hoskins) is hired by
a cartoon studio boss to uncover why his star, Roger Rabbit, is
unable to perform. Hoskins discovers the star's voluptuous wife is
being blackmailed as part of an elaborate scheme to take over the
cartoon studio to make way for real estate development and a
freeway.
   The project originated from a book by Gary K. Wolf, ``Who
Censored Roger Rabbit,'' which an earlier Disney regime bought for
a feature film. A rising young director, Robert Zemeckis, read the
script in 1982 and was interested in making the film. But the
Disney company, beleaguered by flops and takeover threats, was
unable to mount the production.
   Four years later, Zemeckis had already directed the hits
``Romancing the Stone'' and ``Back to the Future,'' and Disney had
been revitalized by new management. The company enlisted Steven
Spielberg as a partner, and he showed the script to Zemeckis in the
winter of 1985.
   ``The first thing we had to do was decide whether in fact we
could make the movie,'' said Zemeckis, who resembles an overgrown
kid at 37. ``It had never been done before.
   ``So we asked Disney for permission to do a test, a 30-second
obstacle course for Roger. Richard (Williams) animated it, and ILM
(Industrial Light and Magic) did the optical work. When it was
finished, we were all astounded, and there was no doubt that we
were going forward.
   ``One of the prerequisites that I laid down to do the movie was
that it really needed all the cartoon characters from the other
studios.''
   Spielberg was the spark plug in acquiring the clearances.
   Zemeckis bypassed the Disney animation department and hired
Williams, a Canadian, as animator. Williams had made a number of
imaginative films, including the 1971 Academy Award-winning ``A
Christmas Carol,'' and done the ``Pink Panther'' animation.
   ``Bob told me he wanted the Disney articulation, Warners
characters and (Tex) Avery humor _ but not so brutal,'' Williams
said. Avery was the gifted animator of Bugs Bunny and other far-out
characters.
   ``In other words, we should aim for believability but it could
be zany.'' Williams and his staff faced the challenge of developing
the title character. After all, rabbits had already been cartoon
stars, from Walt Disney's Oswald of the 1920s to Bugs Bunny.
   ``There's an awful lot of Oswald in Roger,'' said Williams. ``He
has the little overalls, and he's a white rabbit. Oswald was
shorter, so we had to stretch him out. With the red overalls, white
rabbit and blue bow tie, he became like an American flag.''
   Originally, scenes including both humans and animated characters
were to occupy 40 minutes of the film. The final amount was 58 out
of the 103-minute running time.
   ``We knew we had to have great actors; that was the key to it,''
Zemeckis said. ``That's why it was important to cast someone like
Bob Hoskins, who is first and foremost a great actor. He had not
only to do his performance but simultaneously imagine the cartoon
performance, plus all the technical things: eye-lines, marks and
the pantomime that he had to do.''
   Hoskins was aided by Charles Fleischer, a stand-up comic who
played Roger Rabbit's voice.
   ``Charlie stood off-camera and gave me Roger's lines,'' said the
British actor. ``That was a big help. So was playing with those
little dolls they dreamed up.''
   Zemeckis provided the actors with character-size dolls to act
with, and had extensive storyboards to illustrate how the scenes
would look. At the end of each completed scene, another ``reference
take'' was filmed as an aid to animators who would draw in the
characters.
   The exterior live action of ``Roger Rabbit'' was filmed in Los
Angeles beginning in December 1986. Interior sets were built at
London's Elstree studio, many of them 10 feet off the stage floor
to accommodate puppeteers working with robot arms and wires.
Zemeckis edited the film scene by scene and handed the material
over to Williams and his animators.
   Previewers have marveled at how masterfully the live actors
combine with the cartoon figures.
   ``We did it by violating the rules,'' Williams explained.
``Fortunately I never knew the rules. ...
   ``The old way of doing it was to lock the camera and light the
live actors flat because the animation would be flat. Why? Just
before `Roger Rabbit,' I did a couple of Fanta soft drink
commercials for overseas, using Disney characters. I shot the live
action myself, running the camera through a bunch of kids playing
football. Then I animated Mickey and Donald running with the ball
through the kids' legs. It wasn't supposed to work, but it did.
Totally.
   ``It was a little more work to make the animated characters
compensate for the perspective. I told Bob just to shoot his scenes
with wide-angle cameras, and we'd just draw in the characters to
fit the space. We tried it and it worked 100 percent.''
   Having devoted three years of his life to ``Roger Rabbit,''
Zemeckis plans to vacation this summer. He plans to take his wife
and son to Hawaii and spend the rest of the time at home.
   His next movie?
   ``A nice film with live actors and no special effects,'' he said.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv</NOTE>
</DOC>
