ID: 239	RANK: 64	SCORE: 3.288346
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910718-0162
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910718-0162.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Film: Black Youth; White Middle Age
   ----
   By Julie Salamon
</HL>
<DATE>
07/18/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A9
</SO>
<LP>
   There are so many new films appearing this year about
black life in America that the general public is probably
having a hard time telling the difference between Spike Lee,
John Singleton, Robert Townsend, Bill Duke, Matty Rich,
Charles Burnett and Mario Van Peebles. All these young film
makers are benefiting from the fact that, for the time being,
black directors are in vogue in Hollywood. But they are
otherwise quite different in talent and style -- and their
films are highly personal and shouldn't be seen as
interchangeable.
   Still, it's hard not to make some comparisons because
there is a great deal of overlap of subject matter. This is
not surprising, since like most young artists these directors
have drawn on their own experience for their beginning work.
So, if Spike Lee is accepted as the most significant
contemporary film maker to emerge from New York's black
middle class (and he should be), then it's almost a sure bet
that one day the 23-year-old writer and director John
Singleton will be regarded as Mr. Lee's Los Angeles
counterpart.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Mr. Singleton's debut feature, "Boyz N the Hood," a film
about growing up black in L.A., shows remarkable confidence
and film-making savvy. The film-school graduate has said he's
been influenced by the generation of movie makers who came of
age in the 1970s, directors like Steven Spielberg. It's
obvious that Mr. Singleton, whose film was financed by
Columbia Pictures, isn't merely paying lip service to the
industry. He's paid attention to the men he says he admires
-- you can see it in this talented novice's assurance with
the camera and with his actors.
   Strangely, this strong, sad picture, which has been sold
to the public as a violent action film, in many ways reminds
me of the George Lucas film "American Graffiti," that earlier
hymn to California boyhood. Both films tell about a group of
teenagers coping with their conflicting desires for rebellion
and conformity. Like Mr. Lucas's characters, Mr. Singleton's
worry about whether to go to college, about sex, about
asserting their independence.
   In both movies youngsters flirt with death. The critical
difference, however, is that Mr. Lucas's kids had to seek
danger. They went drag racing. For Mr. Singleton's boys in
the hood (the neighborhood), danger is part of normal life.
Every night, as they go through their teenage routine -- do
their homework on their computers, play video games in their
living rooms, talk on the telephone -- they hear the pop pop
of gunfire and the sounds of police helicopters overhead.
   Like many of the emerging black film makers (as well as
many established white directors), Mr. Singleton wants to
instruct as well as entertain. His movie opens with the
information that one in every 21 black males will be
murdered. Though much of the movie that follows is bouncy and
funny, that chilling statistic lurks behind everything that
happens. Every time one of the characters does or says
something that pulls you closer, the thought flits through
your mind -- Oh, no] Will he be the one? These kids all seem
a little tense, even when they're kidding around. They've
been denied the luxury of youth, of thinking life will
stretch on forever and ever.
   Mr. Singleton's main character, Tre, is the son of
upwardly mobile parents who live apart from one another. At
age 10 he goes to live with his father, played with quiet
strength by Larry Fishburne. He's called Furious, and with
good reason. Though the neighborhood of neat, single-family
homes where he lives with his son looks placid, it isn't.
There are drugs and there are guns, in abundance. Tre is
aware from earliest childhood that he can't afford to make a
misstep. If he doesn't do well in school, or if he gets a
girl pregnant, he'll be trapped for life -- and that life
could be very short.
   Mr. Singleton is a very good storyteller, but every once
in a while he stops his story cold with speeches. You can
feel the audience lose interest, as though a commercial has
suddenly popped onscreen. There is already a powerful
anti-violence message in the story itself, though his movie
includes a scene of violent revenge. The respectful Times
Square crowd I saw the picture with Saturday night was
sympathetic throughout, but the moment that elicited the
strongest and most immediate response -- strictly verbal --
was the violent revenge. How could it not, when the summer's
big hit is "Terminator 2," a movie whose anti-violence
message says, "Don't kill 'em, just maim 'em"?
   ---
   Mr. Singleton's fresh voice contrasts sharply with the
comatose moan of Mike Nichols. In his new film, "Regarding
Henry," the experienced director ("Carnal Knowledge," "The
Graduate," "Working Girl") has lost contact with every
emotion except nastiness. That would be OK if there were more
nastiness and less fake warm-heartedness in this lame picture
about an ambitious, coldhearted New York lawyer who gets shot
in the head and becomes a nice guy -- addled, but nice.
   I don't think Mr. Nichols believed in this story for an
instant. Every moment meant to show warmth and generosity of
spirit rings about as true as a declaration of undying love
from Warren Beatty. (Here's hoping he's turned over a new
leaf now that Annette Bening, who plays Harrison Ford's
sweet-sop wife in "Henry," is carrying their first child in
her so-called real life.) Only when Mr. Nichols touches on
the crass values of the rich does the movie show flickers of
life.
   But Mr. Nichols seems bent on pretending he isn't a mean
guy, or maybe he thought he'd like to cash in on the success
of movies about the purity of foggy brains, movies like "Rain
Man" and "Awakenings." Maybe he didn't see that the schmaltz
in those films was at least sincere. So he chose the
uninspired script by Jeffrey Abrams about a soulless lawyer
who finds the (noble) child within him after a mugger's
bullet numbs his brain. (Who started this myth, that
underneath every rotten, scheming adult lies a warmhearted
child? Most rotten adults I know hit their stride in
elementary school.)
   Perhaps the conceit could have worked if Mr. Nichols had
directed this picture as a fairy tale, and used a little
logic in figuring out the story. But nothing explains why or
how Henry does anything, and nothing in Mr. Ford's game
performance makes the puzzle worth solving. Ms. Bening, the
firecracker con woman from "The Grifters," could be doomed to
play cheery wives if she doesn't avoid scripts like this one.
My advice: Disregard Henry.
   ---
   VIDEO TIP: In 1975, Mr. Beatty starred in "Shampoo," the
movie about the libidinous Beverly Hills hairdresser whose
passionless bed-hopping seemed to epitomize the freewheeling
sex of the 1970s. It's been said that he played the part so
well because he'd been practicing for years. Maybe fatherhood
will end Mr. Beatty's chasing around, but those who need to
think of him that way can always watch "Shampoo" on video.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
