ID: 239	RANK: 83	SCORE: 3.114074
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910228-0171
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910228-0171.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Film: Relighting Jim Morrison's Fire
   ----
   By Julie Salamon
</HL>
<DATE>
02/28/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10
</SO>
<LP>
   "The Doors," Oliver Stone's woozy portrait of Jim
Morrison, the lead singer of the '60s rock group, comes to
life toward the end. But this is an exceedingly long movie
(two hours, 17 minutes), and by then Val Kilmer's Morrison is
no longer the sensualist whose blend of insolence, eroticism
and druggy transcendentalism made him a rock 'n' roll cult
figure.
   Overweight and completely zonked, he writhes and moans as
he sings to the crowd of screaming rock fans, who are equally
zonked. Naked women and men prance onto the stage to pay
homage to their hero. When Morrison stops to accost his fans
with confused, hostile patter, they boo and scream
obscenities at him. Just as quickly they start cheering
again, when he resumes singing and then further titillates
the onlookers by exposing himself. Policemen assault the
singer, people from the audience join the scuffle and the
whole thing degenerates into a muddled roar.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   This noisy, frantic scene captures the hedonistic, ugly
side of a turbulent decade when everything seemed up for
grabs. It is the kind of unsubtle pounding Mr. Stone puts
together quite effectively. Like them or not, his films --
"Born on the Fourth of July," "Platoon," "Talk Radio" -- have
a riveting force. Mr. Stone is self-important, pretentious
and unsubtle, but he knows how to drive a point home.
   Here, the film maker doesn't shy away from the nasty,
destructive side of Morrison's music and his profanity, both
fueled by his obsession with drugs. But he made a critical
error in his decision to tell the story from what seems to be
Morrison's point of view -- the addled perspective of a man
immersed in psychedelic drugs and booze. The story line is
incoherent, the film is doused in orange and the visual
accompaniment to the Doors' music contains much trite
mystical imagery.
   Watching this movie is much like listening to a stoned
friend tell a story when you are straight: You can see that
he seems to be having a marvelous time. But it's impossible
to discern the apparently wonderful internal adventure he is
having from the incomprehensible thought fragments pouring
out of his mouth. What seems exhilarating and revelatory to
him, in his drug-induced trance, quickly becomes boring to
you.
   Mr. Stone, who co-authored the script as well as directed,
avoids the usual pitfalls of what Variety calls "biopic." He
doesn't tell the story of the clean-cut kid who makes good
and then is destroyed by fame. He's telling the story of a
man inspired by drugs, then destroyed by drugs -- without
dropping a clue about the man apart from drugs.
   The other '60s icons who show up in the film (Andy Warhol,
Truman Capote, Ed Sullivan) look as though they were
constructed out of papier-mache (especially the Ed Sullivan
imitator). And Mr. Stone once again demonstrates his complete
inability to create a woman character whose function goes
beyond her ability to swing her naked breasts in front of the
camera and perform other sexual chores.
   There is a deliberate absence of traditional narrative, so
the movie becomes an extended video montage. Doors' music
plays throughout the picture; some in its original form and
some with Mr. Kilmer's amazingly keen Morrison imitation
synchronized with the Doors' instrumental tracks. Much of the
movie simply illustrates the lyrics, with crude, literal
imagery.
   There is scant detail about Morrison: He had a compelling
voice, he was almost always stoned one way or the other, and
he suffered from recurring sexual impotence (which he
overcame through small acts of violence that seemed to arouse
him). He's said to have been influenced by Rimbaud and Blake
(Mr. Stone flashes a couple of book covers onscreen to make
the point), but most of the time he seems quite incapable of
reading anything at all.
   Mr. Kilmer's imitation is astonishing; he looks like
Morrison and sings the way he did. But what he's imitating
seems empty, a cipher watching the freaky world around him
through bleary eyes.
   ---
   "The Doors" shouldn't be confused with "Open Doors," a
quiet, thoughtful Italian movie that questions the morality
of the death penalty. Director Gianni Amelio has adapted
Leonardo Sciascia's novel about a government functionary
living in fascist Italy, in 1937, who kills the man who fired
him, the man who replaced him, and his wife -- after he rapes
her.
   His trial is meant to be pro forma but the judge turns
things upside down by trying to find some way to avoid the
death sentence: Maybe it was a crime of passion. Maybe the
man was insane. He was neither -- just a remorseless killer.
The judge -- quietly and introspectively -- presses on. Mr.
Amelio tells this story of a man determined to do the right
thing contrary to public opinion with such deliberate
understate ment even his beautifully composed images can seem
somewhat airless. Yet Gian Maria Volonte's dignified
portrayal of this quietly determined judge has great,
restrained power.
   ---
   A friend of mine said that "He Said, She Said" is like a
Doris Day film without the wit, a pretty accurate summary.
Ken Kwapis and Marisa Silver directed this picture about a
television debating team who are also lovers; Mr. Kwapis
telling their story from the male point of view and Ms.
Silver telling the same story from the woman's. The movie has
the insouciant trappings of Doris Day movies -- cute titles,
bouncy music and appealing actors (Elizabeth Perkins and
Kevin Bacon). However, the writing is flat, perhaps because
writers no longer have to think of clever ways to avoid the
real subject, which was sex. Now the characters can have sex,
so they do, and then talk endlessly about their relationship.
   ---
   APOLOGIES: In last week's review of "Scenes From a Mall,"
I said the movie's perfect L.A. mall was built on a sound
stage in Astoria, N.Y. I failed to mention that much of the
film was also shot on location at the Stamford Town Center in
Stamford, Conn. Writers always make choices and clearly I
made the wrong one, since a great many citizens (and even
former citizens) of Stamford have let me know how wrongheaded
they thought the omission was.
   ---
   VIDEO TIP: Punk rocker Sid Vicious was never hallowed the
way Jim Morrison was, but he led a life that was at least as
dissipated. "Sid and Nancy," Alex Cox's portrait of that
nihilistic life was spare and powerful yet compassionate, and
a remarkable contrast to Mr. Stone's approach with "The
Doors."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
