ID: 180	RANK: 18	SCORE: 7.378758
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911126-0032
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911126-0032.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Looking to Latin America for the Next Big Art Boom
   ----
   By Alexandra Peers
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
11/26/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C1
</SO>
<CO>
   BID U.CHR
</CO>
<MS>
FINANCIAL (FIN)
</MS>
<IN>
DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, CREDIT INSTITUTIONS (FIS)
</IN>
<RE>
ARGENTINA (AG)
COLOMBIA (CL)
CENTRAL AMERICA (CME)
EUROPE (EU)
MICHIGAN (MI)
MEXICO (MX)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
SOUTH AMERICA (SM)
GREAT BRITAIN (UK)
UNITED STATES (US)
VENEZUELA (VE)
WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)
</RE>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- Art dealers and auction houses are trying to
turn Latin American art into the next big-boom market,
capitalizing on the economic rebound in Latin America.
   Eighteen months ago, no painting by a Latin American
artist had sold for a million dollars. Now, five have cracked
the million-dollar barrier at auction in the U.S., including
three paintings sold just last week.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   A 1942 Diego Rivera portrait of a Mexican woman burdened
with a huge basket of flowers brought a record $2.9 million
at Christie's International PLC's major Latin American
auction in New York, and record prices were paid for works by
more than a dozen other Latin American artists.
   The interest in Latin American art comes at a time when
the auction houses are eager to find a new "hot market" amid
the slump in Impressionist and other traditional art markets.
While the auction houses have been phenomenally successful in
selling collectibles lately, toys, rock n' roll memorabilia
and comic books only fetch so much.
   Latin Americans have been active buyers at auctions of
jewelry and European paintings and furniture, and it is only
logical to target them as a major buying force. Christopher
Davidge, managing director of Christie's, says the
London-based auction house is targeting the Latin American
market because "the industrialization of third world
countries throws up great personal wealth."
   But Latin Americans at last week's series of auction sales
in New York proved to be no Japanese. The powerful, brooding,
expressive paintings of Latin American artists such as
Rivera, Rufino Tamayo and Roberto Matta still have a narrow
market. And despite the record prices, the sales were a mixed
bag.
   At Sotheby's Holdings Inc.'s evening sale of Latin
American art last week, 28% of the paintings didn't sell, but
several paintings sold for multiples of the prices that the
auction house expected. Fidelio Ponce de Leon's 1941 portrait
"Five Women," once owned by director Alfred Hitchcock, sold
for $104,500, about five times what Sotheby's had expected.
   Altogether, Sotheby's raised about $12 million at its
three Latin American sales in New York, a tidy sum
considering that sales from Sotheby's flagship department,
Impressionist paintings, totaled $33 million this fall.
   But the next evening at Christie's, buyers' appetite for
Latin American art slacked off. About 58% of the Latin
American art failed to sell, and few works sold for higher
than expected prices. There were even audible groans when
some works by name artists were marooned on the auction
block, including two sculptures by Fernando Botero and two
surrealist works by Matta; the Mattas were estimated by
Christie's relatively inexpensively at less than $100,000
each.
   A Botero sketch of oversized, fattened pears -- one of 20
Botero works that hit the auction block over the three-day
period -- received no bids whatsoever. The sketch was
estimated to sell for about $150,000.
   Despite the uneven market, collectors agree that
20th-century Latin American art, at its best, is comparable
to top-quality European and American works. At the top of the
Latin American art market are works painted by early
20th-century masters Diego Rivera, a muralist best known for
his paintings of Mexican workers, and Frida Kahlo, whose most
famous works are her intense and compelling self-portraits.
Later in the century, Roberto Matta and Wilfredo Lam, both
surrealist painters, dominated the Latin American paintings
field, along with Rufino Tamayo, a Mexican painter heavily
influenced by European cubists. Better-quality paintings by
these artists routinely fetch six figures.
   In contemporary art, the leading Latin American artists
include Claudio Bravo, whose "Self Portrait," a painting of
leather boots and blue jeans, sold for $495,000 last week at
Sotheby's, tripling his previous record. The Latin American
artist who is perhaps one of the best known in the U.S. is
Colombia's Botero. His gargantuan, fat-faced figures are in
many U.S. museum collections, and last week one of his works
fetched $1 million at auction.
   With the surge in the Mexican stock market and economic
recovery in some Latin American nations, the auction houses
are trying to make the paintings of top Mexican, Venezuelan,
Argentinian and Colombian artists status symbols for wealthy
Latin American collectors.
   Meanwhile, as Americans and Europeans discover the
economies and stock markets of Latin America, "the world is
discovering the artistic traditions of the region at a time
when people are looking for fresh art," says Robert D.
Hormats, vice chairman of Goldman Sachs International.
   Ironically, only last April, Sotheby's saw the Latin
American market as so moribund that the auction house
canceled its spring sale of Latin American paintings and
strongly considered shutting down its Latin American art
department.
   However, Sotheby's changed its mind after Christie's made
money at its spring Latin American sale. "Let's face it, the
dollar is what counts, and we rang up about $12 million,"
says Lisa Palmer, head of Christie's Latin American art
department.
   Sotheby's realized it had some apologizing to do. Diana D.
Brooks, president of the company's Sotheby's Inc. auction
unit, went on two separate business trips to Latin America
last month. In Mexico, her five-person entourage included the
former No. 2 person in the firm's Impressionist paintings
department. On her second visit, Mrs. Brooks went to Rio de
Janiero, Sao Paulo and Buenos Aires in a visit that some in
the art world dubbed the "eat crow" trip.
   "The decision we made was not to whitewash it, but to tell
our clients we made a mistake," Mrs. Brooks says.
Fortunately, "the Latin American clients are very forgiving."
   In each city, Sotheby's threw elaborate parties for
clients. At the final reception, held a week ago in New York
on the eve of the Sotheby's major Latin American paintings
sale a week ago, 300 people were expected, and 1,200 showed
up; the auction house ran out of clean glasses halfway
through the evening.
   The auction houses are getting help in trying to generate
excitement about Latin American art. Madonna owns a few
paintings by Frida Kahlo, the Mexican artist who has recently
achieved near cult status in the art world; the rock star has
said in interviews that she has commissioned a screenplay in
which she would star as Kahlo.
   Moreover, the auction houses have timing on their side.
The approaching 500-year anniversary of Christopher
Columbus's voyage to America, plus the Olympics in Barcelona,
"are going to make 1992 very much a Latin year," said
Goldman's Mr. Hormats.
   But, now, amid the record prices, there's concern that
strength in the market for at least some Latin American
artists is a fad. "I'm not saying we're going to be `in'
forever," says Mary-Anne Martin, one of the leading dealers
in the field, who paid a record price for a Kahlo in 1990.
"But if there is any worth in these {artworks}, they'll
manage to survive the fad. There are some very good things in
this market, and people see real value there."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
