ID: 223	RANK: 75	SCORE: 8.030029
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP881227-0044 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-12-27-88 0552EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a BC-Theater 1stLd-Writethru a0662 12-27 1015</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-Theater, 1st Ld - Writethru, a0662,1031</SECOND>
<HEAD>`Legs Diamond,' A New Musical, Opens on Broadway</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: ADDS four grafs with other reviews; No PMs planned. Hystery
cq
5th graf.</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By MICHAEL KUCHWARA</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP Drama Critic</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>NEW YORK (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Alive but not quite kicking, ``Legs Diamond''
finally opened Monday on Broadway, and the results are a mixed bag
of musical tricks.
   The much anticipated and already much maligned Peter Allen
musical is not the disaster some had feared. But the show, which
premiered at the Mark Hellinger Theater after nearly two months of
preview performances, is not exactly memorable either.
   One trouble with ``Legs'' is its star, Peter Allen, who also
wrote the music and lyrics for this $5 million extravaganza about
the famous New York gangster. Allen is a galvanizing performer, an
OK dancer and a croaky but appealing singer. But he's not an actor,
and you need someone with a sense of character to inject life and,
more important, believability into the spineless book by Harvey
Fierstein and Charles Suppon.
   That's another of the show's missteps _ the skimpiest story this
side of ``Starlight Express.'' Fierstein and Suppon reportedly have
pared the book to a fraction of what it once was. They must have
taken out all the jokes, because the laughs are pretty meager.
That's a deadly prospect for a show which insistently trumpets
itself as ``a big new Broadway musical.''
   Entertain is what ``Legs Diamond'' most desperately wants to do.
Sometimes it actually does.
   From the moment the curtain rises, you know you are looking at a
frivolous and expensive show. There's Allen, strutting on a catwalk
high above the stage, singing about ``When I Get My Name in Lights''
while what looks like every light bulb in Times Square flash the
show's subtitle _ ``The Almost Totally Fictitious Musical Hystery of
Legs Diamond.''
   The number pretty much tells the story of the show. This mobster
is not a killer, but a song-and-dance man, and he'd rather star in
his own nightclub act than take over the city's bootleg operations.
He eventually succeeds, but his climb to show biz success seems
predictable from the start.
   Still, ``Legs Diamond'' does a lot to camouflage this lack of
suspense. For one thing, it never stops moving. It's almost as if
director Robert Allan Ackerman and choreographer Alan Johnson were
afraid to have the musical slow down. If it did, it might not be
able to start up again.
   Johnson has devised several frantic, lavish and time-killing
dances for a line of chorus cuties. The numbers recall ``The Carol
Burnett Show'' on an off-night.
   Still, the dances give costume designer Willa Kim a chance to go
wild. Somehow she manages to put the girls in reindeer antlers and
even kewpie doll hats. For the show's more than 300 costumes, Kim
seems to have cornered the market on all the sequins, feathers,
spangles and even bananas in New York.
   Set designer David Mitchell also makes sure the momentum never
flags. His gargantuan settings include two different and lavish
nightclubs, Pennsylvania Station, a long prison cell block and a
boulevard of skyscrapers that hug the top of the Hellinger's ornate
ceiling.
   Allen's score, particularly the ballads, exerts a lot of charm.
It successfully bridges pop and musical comedy, something rare among
the current crop of Broadway's musicals. Several of the songs would
seem to be able to have a life outside the show, particularly
Allen's finale, ``All I Wanted Was the Dream.'' The show should make
a fine original cast recording.
   The story also includes several unconvincing love affairs for
Diamond. His love life includes an archetypal dumb blonde named
Kiki, played in fine squeaky-voiced style by Randall Edwards and
Flo, a tough-talking older woman, played by the terrific Julie
Wilson.
   Miss Wilson, a musical comedy veteran, wrings some honest emotion
from a torch song called ``The Music Went Out of My Life,'' the
closest thing the musical has to a showstopper.
   There is one stunning production number, called ``Only Steal From
Thieves,'' in which Diamond muscles in on the territory of his chief
rival, Arnold Rothstein, played by Joe Silver. In it, the battle
between the gangs is waged behind a giant scrim and the hijacking of
a train, ship and truck is seen in silhouette.
   The other male performers have a hard time of it in ``Legs
Diamond'' and are given little opportunity to shine. The gangsters
in such musicals as ``Guys and Dolls'' and ``Do Re Mi'' were funny,
brash, even rakish characters. Here, they are nearly anonymous
buffoons, despite the game try by such excellent character actors as
Silver, Raymond Serra, Christian Kauffmann and Jim Fyfe.
   Still, the success of this show rests on the success of the
performer who plays its title character, not the supporting players.
And Peter Allen doesn't quite deliver.
   ``Legs Diamond'' is a musical in search of a leading man.
   In other reviews:
   ``The creators of `Legs Diamond' could not even come up with the
riotous larger-than-life fiasco of which theatrical legends are
made,'' wrote Frank Rich in The New York Times. ``The script, so
confusing I lost its thread before the end of the first number, is a
series of song cues that never crystallizes into a story. ... As for
Mr. Allen's songs, they are so derivative they make Andrew Lloyd
Webber's scores sound idiosyncratic.''
   Howard Kissel wrote in the Daily News: ``Allen's score seldom
goes beyond the pleasant, though it has been attractively
orchestrated and there are several engaging choral numbers. ... His
talent is supperclub size _ likeable, soft, intimate. Neither as a
songwriter nor as a performer can he fill a Broadway stage. As a
gangster, even a singing and dancing gangster, he is hopeless.''
   ``Most of the music appears to take unmemorability to the point
of clinical amnesia, and you go out humming a headache,'' wrote
Clive Barnes in the New York Post. ``The lyrics have little
originality or fancy, while the book ... seems to take the sobriquet
`Legs' so literally that the show's narrative becomes a pedestrian
walkway.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
