ID: 294	RANK: 61	SCORE: 18.657225
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP881001-0077 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-10-01-88 1134EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a PM-SpaceShuttle 3rdLd-Writethru a0534 10-01 1084</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Space Shuttle, 3rd Ld - Writethru, a0534,1120</SECOND>
<NOTE>Eds: LEADS with 8 grafs with metals experiment, student letter
read, picks up 2nd graf pvs, `The astronauts,'' trimming below to
tighten and deleting 13th graf pvs ``Only a''</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By HOWARD BENEDICT</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP Aerospace Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Discovery was ``operating just
super'' today as its five astronauts photographed landmarks on
Earth, melted titanium, and read a letter of inspiration from a
Brooklyn high school student.
   Only a few minor problems had arisen as the first
post-Challenger flight reached its midpoint, and a flight director
at Mission Control Center in Houston reported the five crewmen were
``having a ball.''
   During a television program from 184 miles up, mission
specialist John M. Lounge sent electrical heat through four glass
tubes containing titanium wires to determine if heating the metal
in weightlessness could strengthen it.
   The experiment, proposed by Lloyd Bruce, a senior at the
University of Missouri, was selected from thousands submitted to
NASA in its student involvement program. Bruce, a high school
student at the time he made the proposal, watched on TV at the
Johnson Space Center in Houston and will analyze test results after
Discovery returns.
   Following the experiment, commander Frederick H. Hauck appeared
on the screen and read a letter he had received several months ago
from Phillip J. Morgan, a Brooklyn high school student who was 14
at the time he wrote it. He said the letter was especially
meaningful to his crew.
   The letter read in part: ``I feel that some of America's future
is riding on you and your crew's shoulder. I give you all the
inspiration I can give you because your ride this fall means so
much to me.''
   Hauck said he had talked with Phillip and his mother by phone
and that the youth told him he had some ``concerns about the future
of America and whether we are still capable the things that make us
a great country.''
   ``I thought it was a particularly good letter and really sent
home to us how much the experiences we have here in space can have
an effect on the youngsters of America,'' Hauck said.
   The astronauts read a teletype message radioed to them overnight
congratulating them for ``another super job yesterday,'' and giving
baseball scores and the news of the shakeup in the Soviet
government.
   The message also said, without explanation, there was ``no
update on the sinks'' at pilot Richard O. Covey's house and said
the wives of the crew ``send their greetings and report they
represented you well at the Outpost.''
   The Outpost is a bar that is a favorite of the astronauts near
the Johnson Space Center in Houston.
   The astronauts were very quiet in the hours after wakeup today
as they went about the business of experiments and spacecraft
checks.
   They photographed a crater in Oman, forest preserves in India,
an Indonesian volcano chain and a lake in Egypt. Pictures taken of
the Earth's horizon at sunrise and sunset could help develop better
horizon sensors for satellites.
   The astronauts were awakened promptly at 4:37 a.m. EDT, this
time by a mock version of a Beach Boys tune, with lyrics saying:
   ``'Round, 'round. We orbit 'round. And we're going to town.
   ``Well, we're racking up the miles with a whole lot of power.
We're going seventeen thousand, five hundred an hour.''
   The loud tune piped up by Mission Control in Houston prompted
crew member George D. ``Pinky'' Nelson to radio back, ``Don't stop.
Good morning, Houston. Great tune.''
   Nelson and his four crewmates _ Hauck, Covey, and mission
specialists Lounge and David C. Hilmers _ then began about an hour
of exercising before having breakfast and setting about their
chores for the day.
   Television pictures from space showed the astronauts obviously
pleased as they floated about the cabin in weightlessness. But they
also were businesslike as they conducted a series of experiments
and tested spacecraft systems, many of them new and the rest unused
for more than 32 months.
   Today's planned experiments included growing crystals in
weightlessness, photographing the horizon at sunrise and sunset and
testing an infrared communications system.
   The communications test called for the astronauts to try to talk
with one another using the kind of invisible infrared light that
remotely controls home television sets. They were to use their
regular communications headsets to convey messages by these
lightwaves through a series of transmitters and receivers.
   One use of such a system would be as a secure communications
loop inside an orbiting spacecraft. Unlike radio frequency signals,
infrared signals will not pass through a shuttle's windows.
   Several classified military flights are planned on the shuttle
in coming years.
   Later today, Hauck was to don one of the pressure suits the
astronauts will wear during the descent to Earth on Monday in case
they have to make an emergency bailout while trying to land at
Edwards Air Force Base in California.
   Nelson was to practice installing a telescoping pole in the
cabin. For an emergency bailout the crew would blow out the cabin
hatch, extend the pole outside and slide down it to clear the
spaceship wing before opening parachutes.
   The practice was to see how long the preparations take in
weightlessness.
   The escape system would be of use only if the shuttle were in
stable, gliding flight. It was added after Challenger exploded 32
months ago, killing seven astronauts, but would not have helped
then because the explosion occurred too early into the launch.
   Flight director J. Milton Heflin attributed the astronauts'
relative silence Friday to the many new orbiter systems the crew is
checking. A total of 210 were introduced following the Challenger
explosion.
   An antenna became stuck and had to be remotely stowed back in
the cargo bay by radio control, reducing the number of television
broadcasts from space. When the same thing happened on a flight
four years ago, the antenna was repaired by an astronaut during a
spacewalk.
   The crew also had to contend for the first two days with a cabin
temperature of 84 degrees because of a lingering malfunction in a
cooling system, but the problem was cleared up by today.
   ``The orbiter is great, the systems on board the orbiter are
doing quite well ... it's operating just super,'' Heflin said
Friday.
   Back at Cape Canaveral, the redesigned booster rockets that
powered Discovery toward orbit were towed into port, and looked
``absolutely clean,'' said John Thomas, the NASA engineer who
directed their redesign.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
