ID: 294	RANK: 79	SCORE: 17.444708
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880930-0154 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-30-88 1639EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-SpaceShuttle 1stLd-Writethru a0707 09-30 1085</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Space Shuttle, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0707,1070</SECOND>
<HEAD>After Excitement of Launch, Astronauts Settle into Quiet Routine</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Inserts flight director's quotes after graf 1, inserts 3
grafs after graf 4, updating TV and temperature problems.</NOTE>
<NOTE>With LaserPhotos</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By HARRY F. ROSENTHAL</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Discovery's astronauts, having
consigned the world's most sophisticated communications satellite
to its 22,300-mile-high outpost, turned their attention to science
Friday as they whirled around Earth in their stockinged feet.
   ``They are having a ball,'' said a flight director.
   Back at Cape Canaveral, the redesigned booster rockets that
powered the first post-Challenger launch toward orbit Thursday were
towed into port and, divers who inspected them said they appeared
in perfect condition.
   The five astronauts were quickly proving to be a quiet,
businesslike crew as they looked down from their 184-mile perch at
interesting ocean currents, observed soil erosion in Mexico caused
by Hurricane Gilbert, watched how solutions separate in space and
did just plain sightseeing over the blue globe below.
   Conversations were confined to essentials, with little banter.
But when a television link with the ground failed to work _ the
antenna refused to move into usable position _ Commander Frederick
H. Hauck offered to help, saying ``We'll enjoy using our mechanical
talents.''
   The antenna problem persisted but its effect on the flight was
minimal. When the same thing happened four years ago, the repair
was performed by an astronaut who was taking a spacewalk anyway. No
such action was contemplated on this flight.
   The crew also had to contend with a temperature of 84 degrees in
the cabin, caused by a lingering malfunction in the cooling system.
A cumbersome fix was available, but Hauck passed it up, saying
``we're in good shape.''
   ``The orbiter is great, the systems on board the orbiter are
doing quite well,'' said J. Milton Heflin, a flight director in
Houston. ``We've talked about two or three problems today but, my
goodness, out of all the hardware aboard is operating just super,
and I can detect that in the voices of the crew. They are having a
ball.''
   The astronauts surprised Mission Control by playing the music of
``I Heard it Through the Grapevine'' as they were eating lunch. It
was a rejoinder to the day's wake-up call from the ground:
``G-o-o-d Morning, Discovery!'' Robin Williams, who perfected his
deejay routine in the movie, ``Good Morning Vietnam,'' prepared the
tape.
   In a televised science lesson from space, astronauts George D.
Nelson and David C. Hilmers demonstrated an experiment involving
cell separation in weightlessness. Hilmers explained it could have
medical applications such as separating malignant from
non-malignant cells.
   In Earth's gravity, when materials like the astronauts are
testing are mixed, the lighter one tends to float to the top.
Hilmers said in zero gravity it was more like a yolk floating
inside the egg white.
   The crew also was asked to photograph ``some of the natural
phenomena of the planet Earth'' _ including Pacific thunderstorms,
a volcano lava flow in Ethiopia and coastal erosion damage from the
Hurricane Gilbert on the Yucatan Peninsula.
   The astronauts all have been in space before and there were none
of the gee-whiz expressions that have been a staple of the shuttle
program.
   The worrisome booster rockets that carried the shuttle
flawlessly at the start of its journey, were towed into Port
Canaveral, near the launch site, apparently showing no sign of the
leaks that doomed the Challenger 32 months ago.
   ``The divers report the boosters are in perfect condition,''
said Rocky Raab, spokesman for booster manufacturer Morton Thiokol.
   He said the divers, who fished the rockets from the Atlantic for
inspection and refurbishment ``would see evidence if the joint were
leaking. They would see soot and the weather seals would be blown
off.''
   ``There was none of that,'' he said.
   Since Challenger, the boosters had undergone a major redesign to
ensure that the joints between segments would no longer allow hot
gases to escape: a problem on nine previous flights and the
malfunction that caused the space shuttle's destruction with its
loss of seven lives.
   The weather seals are inch-thick blankets _ made like electrical
tapes that prevent pipes from freezing _ to keep the joint seals
pliable at 75 degrees.
   Raab said it will be two weeks before the rocket shells are
taken apart for a minute inspection of the seals.
   The 2{-ton Tracking and Data Relay Satellite released by the
crew from Discovery's cargo bay late Thursday, was in its proper
orbit after a journey of 22,000 miles, and Mission Control told the
crew their launch was ``with considerable precision.''
   ``We're there. We're on orbit. We're very, very happy,'' said Ed
Bangsund of Boeing, manufacturer of the rocket stage that sent the
satellite to its final orbit. The TDRS will join another on orbit
since 1983 to give NASA communications contact with future shuttles
85 percent of the time.
   It also will serve as an orbital switchboard for up to 24
satellites, including some that will transmit coded military
information.
   The successful deployment was a major boost for NASA's TDRS
program, which has had trouble from the start. The first satellite
almost didn't make it when the Boeing rocket lost its steering
ability. In an almost miraculous rescue, controllers inched it to
its high orbit over a two-month period by using small steering
thrusters the size of a garden hose nozzle.
   In 1985, NASA removed a second TDRS from its shuttle cargo
schedule for redesign because of problems with one in orbit. The
next attempt to launch the satellite was in 1986. It was in the
cargo bay of the Challenger when it exploded after launch.
   NASA and the Pentagon considered the satellite so important it
was scheduled as the cargo for the first post-Challenger mission.
Another is set for launch in January.
   ``The launch and us getting back to space is something that
really means a lot to me,'' Richard Truly, the NASA shuttle chief
who supervised the post-Challenger recovery, said Friday. ``And
looking at today's front pages, I think it means a lot to the
country.
   The second day's flight plan was deliberately conservative to
enable the crew to carefully check the scores of system
modifications made in the spacecraft since the Challenger
explosion. ``We're not breaking any new ground,'' pilot Richard
Covey said before the launch.
   Discovery's four-day mission is to end with a landing on the
desert runway at Edwards Air Force Base in California at 12:33 p.m.
EDT on Monday.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
