ID: 212	RANK: 15	SCORE: 9.217664
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890925-0180 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-25-89 2111EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-Cambodia 1stLd-Writethru a0587 09-25 0763</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Cambodia, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0587,0784</SECOND>
<HEAD>Departing Soldiers Jam Highway; Return Begins Tuesday</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: INSERTS two grafs after 9th pvs `The Cambodian...' with Washington
comment on pullout. Picks up graf 10 pvs, `On Monday ...'</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By JOHN POMFRET</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   HIGHWAY 1, Cambodia (AP) _ Thousands of Vietnamese soldiers
jammed the main highway in Indochina on Monday night as they snaked
toward the border on the eve of Vietnam's pledged exit from a
nearly 11-year-old war.
   Soviet-made armored personnel carriers, American-made trucks,
jeeps and artillery and Chinese ``Liberation'' troop transport
vehicles clogged the 20-foot-wide stretch of highway for 120 miles
from Cambodia's capital, Phnom Penh, to the Vietnamese border.
   Traffic on the road that Vietnam used as one of its main
invasion in December 1978 came to a standstill.
   Soldiers, stripped to their undershorts, hung hammocks under
trucks, cooked rice by the side of the road, and draped their
laundry from anti-aircraft guns on the final night before the
border crossing begins.
   ``I am very happy to be returning home to my family,'' said one
soldier from Thai Binh province. ``I have been in Cambodia for 10
years and seen my wife only three times.''
   Peasants gathered by the side of the road and waved to the
troops, whose uniforms were decorated with flowers and medals.
Speakers set up for the occasion blared the Vietnamese-Cambodian
``friendship'' song and patriotic speeches, which were prepared for
the government-orchestrated ceremony.
   Starting Tuesday, Vietnamese troops will return home overland,
by ferry on the Mekong River and via the Gulf of Thailand.
   Vietnam says it is withdrawing the last 26,000 of its troops in
Cambodia and ending its occupation of its Southeast Asian neighbor.
   The Cambodian resistance movement calls the pullout a sham, but
already Khmer Rouge guerrillas have attacked a town in western
Cambodia in an apparent attempt to challenge the Cambodian army, no
longer aided by Vietnamese troops.
   In Washington, State Department deputy spokesman Richard Boucher
said Monday that although the Vietnamese occupation is apparently
ending, ``We believe that Vietnam cannot evade its responsibility
to help achieve a comprehensive political solution in Cambodia.''
   As for the prospect of a return to power by the communist Khmer
Rouge, Boucher said this problem can best be dealt with through
negotiations and a comprehensive political solution.
   On Monday, Khmer Rouge radio broadcasts monitored in Bangkok
claimed the guerrillas had seized a ``strategic position'' on the
road from the western town, Pailin, to the provincial capital of
Battambang.
   Cambodian officials acknowledged recently that Khmer Rouge
guerrilla forces occupy parts of the gem-rich area near Pailin. But
Premier Hun Sen predicted that the rebels would be unable to hold
their ground.
   Cambodian officials and a Soviet military observer said the two
sides were throwing their best divisions at each other in Pailin.
They said the Khmer Rouge was raining up to 2,000 mortar shells a
day on the town.
   The battle has raised fears that Cambodia will slide into civil
war after Vietnam's soldiers are gone. Many Cambodians say they are
worried the government army will be unable to stand up to the Khmer
Rouge.
   Cambodians have begun stockpiling rice in some cities for fear
that guerrilla forces may cut supply lines, sending the price of
rice up at least 200 percent.
   Ethnic Vietnamese, who fear persecution under the Khmer Rouge,
also have reportedly begun fleeing back to Vietnam.
   The Khmer Rouge seized power in 1975 from American-backed Gen.
Lon Nol after a civil war. It ruled Cambodia from 1975 to 1978 and
killed hundreds of thousands of people in practicing an
ultra-radical form of agrarian communism.
   Vietnam invaded Cambodia in December 1978 and ousted the Khmer
Rouge, replacing it with a government to its own liking.
   Since then, the conflict has been stalemated.
   China supplies the Khmer Rouge with weapons, and Thailand allows
the guerrilla group to use its territory. The Soviet Union and
Vietnam supply Cambodia with arms. Peace talks failed in Paris last
month.
   Earlier Monday, thousands of Vietnamese soldiers in personnel
carriers and tanks rolled past the Royal Palace in Phnom Penh as
the Vietnamese army made what it said was its last exit from the
capital.
   School children were brought to the central square to bid the
Vietnamese invaders farewell.
   Soldiers rolled by in American-made equipment captured from the
United States during the Vietnam War. A long line of Dodge buses,
``Saigon Express'' written on their sides, led the convoy.
   Heng Samrin, president of the Vietnamese-installed government,
thanked the commanders of two departing divisions and hailed ``the
revolutionary friendship of the Cambodian and Vietnamese peoples.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
