ID: 212	RANK: 19	SCORE: 9.129851
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900726-0060 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-26-90 0728EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i PM-Cambodia-USMIAs 1stLd-Writethru a0484 07-26 0709</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Cambodia-US MIAs, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0484,0725</SECOND>
<HEAD>Remains Believed To Belong To Americans Flown Out</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: To CORRECT numbers found in provinces and in Choeung Ek, SUB
one graf for 13th, `Four were ... late 1978.</NOTE>
<DATELINE>PHNOM PENH, Cambodia (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   With a blessing by Buddhist monks,
six sets of human remains were flown out of Cambodia today for
tests to see whether they are the bones of Americans missing from
the Vietnam War.
   It was the first time since the end of the war in 1975 that
communist Cambodia has allowed the repatriation of suspected
remains of those missing in action, or MIA.
   A somber American military honor guard escorted six flag-draped
aluminum caskets on board a U.S. Air Force C-141 that took off for
Hawaii, where the remains will undergo forensic examination to try
to identify them.
   Buddhist monks chanted prayers during a 15-minute memorial
service conducted before an altar covered with flowers and burning
incense. The six caskets sat behind the altar, and a monk sprinkled
holy water to bless the dead.
   ``The United States appreciates the support of the Phnom Penh
authorities for this undertaking,'' said Air Force Lt. Col. Thomas
Boyd, spokesman for the repatriation team. ``We consider this an
important humanitarian undertaking which, if successful, will help
to alleviate the suffering of American families.''
   The team had flown to Phnom Penh earlier today from Bangkok,
Thailand, to join the group of military experts who had examined 28
sets of remains collected by the Cambodians and chose six for
further tests.
   In Hawaii, the remains will be analyzed and identified by the
Joint Casualty Resolution Center and the Army Central
Identification Laboratory.
   The remains were given an initial examination by a six-man
military team in Phnom Penh on Tuesday and Wednesday _ the first
such MIA mission to Cambodia since the 1975 communist takeover.
   ``We came and did our work and the cooperation was everything we
asked for,'' Lt. Col. Joe Harvey, the U.S. team leader, told
reporters Wednesday after meeting with Dith Munty, first deputy
foreign minister of the Vietnamese-backed government.
   Harvey's team examined 28 sets of remains in a tiny laboratory
at Cambodia's only medical college. The teak caskets contained
bones, skulls and at least two sets of military identification
``dog tags.''
   A Cambodian Foreign Ministry spokesman said his government paid
$2,000 for the return of some remains from remote provinces.
   Harvey said six sets warranted further analysis in Hawaii.
   Two were found in outlying provinces and four were from Choeung
Ek, an area southwest of Phnom Penh that was used as a mass
execution ground by the fanatical Communist Khmer Rouge who ruled
from 1975 to 1978. The Khmer Rouge were ousted after Vietnamese
forces invaded Cambodia in late 1978.
   It was unclear if the remains found in Choeung Ek dated from the
period when the Khmer Rouge held power.
   Eighty-three American servicemen and eight U.S. civilians are
listed as missing in action in Cambodia from the Indochina war.
   The U.S. mission broke a long political stalemate between
Washington and successive communist governments in Phnom Penh over
the MIA issue.
   Boyd said past U.S. efforts to examine remains in Cambodia had
been ``either ignored or politicized.''
   He said Washington would consider sending another team to
examine more remains, but added that this was not discussed during
his group's visit.
   The United States does not recognize the Phnom Penh government.
But a week ago, it announced it was withdrawing recognition of the
Khmer Rouge-dominated guerrilla coalition that is fighting the
Phnom Penh government, and would open talks with Vietnam on ending
the Cambodian civil war.
   Cambodia's Deputy Interior Minister Khim Ponn, head of a newly
formed MIA commission, said he wanted to discuss normalization of
diplomatic relations. But the Americans limited talks to MIAs.
   Most of the Americans missing in Cambodia are airmen whose
planes were downed during bombing raids from 1969 to 1973 on the Ho
Chi Minh Trail, the major supply route for the North Vietnamese
into South Vietnam that wound through the mountains of eastern
Cambodia.
   A total of 2,300 Americans are officially listed as missing in
action in Indochina. Aside from those in Cambodia, 1,678 are
missing in Vietnam, 533 in Laos and six in China's coastal waters.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
