ID: 212	RANK: 36	SCORE: 8.479357
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910221-0047
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910221-0047.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   What's News --
   World-Wide
</HL>
<DATE>
02/21/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<LP>
   BUSH DETAILED conditions Iraq must meet to end the war,
aides indicated.
   The conditions were included in a letter to Gorbachev in
response to the Soviet leader's peace proposal. The
president's reply, coupled with the imminent return of Iraq's
foreign minister to Moscow for more talks, provided evidence
that the Soviet peace effort is still alive. Meanwhile,
American helicopters attacked a group of bunkers in Iraqi
territory, forcing hundreds of soldiers to surrender. In
another clash, Iraqi artillery fire hit a U.S. unit, killing
one American and wounding seven.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The White House said it remains confident that more than
$41 billion pledged by foreign governments to cover the cost
of the conflict will be forthcoming, although only $9.4
billion is expected to be available by the end of this week.
   ---
   YELTSIN WAS CENSURED by Soviet lawmakers for his attack on
Gorbachev.
   In a stormy Parliament session, legislators accused
Yeltsin, the president of the Russian republic, of declaring
civil war by demanding the Kremlin leader's resignation. They
overwhelmingly adopted a resolution charging that Yeltsin's
televised statement Tuesday breached the constitution and
created an "extreme situation." Separately, Gorbachev's
ex-foreign minister, Shevardnadze, urged Yeltsin and
Gorbachev to resolve their "war of presidents."
   The Parliament gave Georgia's leaders three days to take
steps to end a separatist conflict in the republic or face
imposition of a state of emergency.
   ---
   Albania's president appealed for calm after protests in
which crowds toppled statues to the late Stalinist dictator,
Hoxha. Alia said he planned to set up a caretaker body to run
the nation until multiparty elections next month. The
government also said it would bow to demands by students to
drop Hoxha's name from a university's title.
   ---
   A Michigan appeals court struck down a statewide ban on
publicly funded abortions for poor women, ruling that the
state's constitution guarantees a right to abortion that
can't be denied on the basis of a person's ability to pay for
it.
   ---
   Slovenia's Parliament voted to begin the small
non-Communist republic's secession from Yugoslavia. Of 176
legislators present, 173 approved a resolution declaring that
Yugoslavia should dissolve into two or more separate
countries. In addition, the lawmakers adopted an amendment
that annuls all federal laws in the republic.
   ---
   A plane carrying U.S. tourists crashed into a channel near
the southern tip of Chile, according to officials for the
Chilean airline LAN. Authorities reported that at least 19
people died out of the 72 who were aboard the chartered
plane, adding that the American tourists were en route to a
cruise vessel bound for the Antarctic region.
   ---
   The Supreme Court upheld the power of federal judges to
protect the rights of illegal alien farm workers seeking
amnesty to remain in the U.S. The 7-2 ruling, in a case from
Florida involving Haitian immigrants, is a defeat for the
Bush administration, which said federal courts interfered
improperly with U.S. immigration officials.
   ---
   The U.S. death rate from strokes fell 33% between 1978 and
1988, but strokes remain the third leading cause of death and
may be increasing in women, the American Heart Association
said. About 150,000 Americans died from strokes in 1988 and
60% of that number were women, the association said.
   ---
   Bush unveiled a "national energy strategy" with a
combination of increased production and conservation intended
to reduce oil imports by 7.2 million barrels a day by 2010.
Environmentalists and some lawmakers blasted the plan for
relying too little on conservation to reduce import demand.
   ---
   The U.S. released $400 million of loan guarantees to
Israel for construction of housing for Soviet Jewish
immigrants, apparently ending a dispute between the two
nations. The U.S. had held up the guarantees for over a year
to get assurances the money wouldn't be spent on Israeli
settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
   ---
   Ethiopian officials expressed willingness to grant
Eritrean insurgents a broad measure of autonomy but ruled out
independence for the Red Sea province on the eve of today's
scheduled U.S.-sponsored peace talks to end the nation's
civil war.
   ---
   Salvadoran rebels attacked two military bases in eastern
El Salvador as U.N.-sponsored negotiations to end the
country's 11-year-old civil war resumed in Costa Rica,
military officials said.
   ---
   Died: Louis Kelso, 77, an investment banker who helped to
pioneer the stock buy-outs that allow employees to own the
companies where they work, Sunday, in San Francisco, of a
heart attack.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
