ID: 212	RANK: 4	SCORE: 10.427137
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900725-0157 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-25-90 1903EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-Cambodia-MIAs     07-25 0657</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Cambodia-MIAs,0676</SECOND>
<HEAD>U.S. Team to Repatriate Six Sets of Remains from Cambodia</HEAD>
<DATELINE>PHNOM PENH, Cambodia (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   U.S. military officials said
Wednesday they are returning to the United States with six sets of
human remains collected by Cambodians that are believed to be of
American MIAs from the Vietnam War.
   It marks the first time since the end of the war in 1975 that
Communist Cambodia has allowed the repatriation of suspected
remains of Americans missing in action.
   A 14-member U.S. repatriation team was scheduled to arrive in
Phnom Penh early Thursday by an Air Force C-141 cargo plane.
   A military honors ceremony was planned for Thursday at the Phnom
Penh airport, and immediately afterward, the remains will be flown
to the Joint Casualty Resolution Center and the Army Central
Identification Laboratory in Hawaii, agencies that account for
America's wartime missing.
   Since Tuesday, a six U.S. military experts have been in Phnom
Penh to examine sets of remains collected by Cambodians in recent
years _ the first such MIA mission to Cambodia since the 1975
Communist takeover.
   ``We came and did our work and the cooperation was everything we
asked for,'' Lt. Col. Joe Harvey, the U.S. team leader, told
reporters after meeting with Dith Munty, first deputy foreign
minister of the Vietnamese-backed government.
   Eighty-three Americans are listed as missing in action in
Cambodia from the war. A military spokesman earlier said 82 were
missing in Cambodia, but later raised the number to 83. The
confusion apparently concerned an aircraft that crashed near the
Cambodian border, leaving a GI missing.
   At least eight American civilians are also listed as missing in
Cambodia, according to U.S. officials.
   On Tuesday and Wednesday, the U.S. team examined 28 sets of
remains in a tiny laboratory at Cambodia's only medical college.
The teak caskets contained bones, skulls and at least two sets of
military identification ``dog tags.''
   A Cambodian Foreign Ministry spokesman said his government paid
$2,000 for the return of some remains from remote provinces.
   Harvey said six sets of remains warranted further analysis at
the military laboratories in Hawaii to reach a positive
identification.
   Four were found in outlying provinces and two were from an area
southwest of Phnom Penh known as Choeung Ek, which was used as a
mass execution ground by the fanatical Communist Khmer Rouge when
they ruled the country from 1975 to 1978. The Khmer Rouge were
ousted after Vietnamese forces invaded the country in late 1978.
   However, it was unclear if the remains found in Choeung Ek dated
from the period when the Khmer Rouge held power.
   The U.S. mission broke a long political stalemate between
Washington and successive Communist governments in Phnom Penh over
the MIA issue.
   Lt. Col. Thomas Boyd, a team spokesman, said past U.S. efforts
to examine remains in Cambodia had been ``either ignored or
politicized.''
   He said Washington would consider sending another such team to
examine more remains, but added that this was not discussed during
his group's visit to Phnom Penh.
   The United States does not recognize the Phnom Penh government.
But a week ago, Washington announced it was withdrawing recognition
of the Khmer Rouge-dominated guerrilla coalition that is fighting
the Phnom Penh government, and would open talks with Vietnam on
ending the Cambodian civil war.
   Cambodia's Deputy Interior Minister Khim Ponn, head of a newly
formed MIA commission, said he wanted to discuss normalization of
diplomatic relations, but the Americans limited talks to the issue
of missing Americans.
   Most of the Americans missing in Cambodia are airmen whose
planes were downed during bombing raids from 1969 to 1973 on the Ho
Chi Minh Trail, the major supply route for the North Vietnamese
into South Vietnam that wound through the mountains of eastern
Cambodia.
   A total of 2,299 Americans are officially listed as missing in
action in Indochina. Aside from those in Cambodia, 1,678 are
missing in Vietnam, 533 in Laos and six in China's coastal waters.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
