ID: 212	RANK: 56	SCORE: 8.041630
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911115-0001
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911115-0001.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   What's News --
   World-Wide
</HL>
<DATE>
11/15/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<LP>
   TWO LIBYANS WERE INDICTED in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am
Flight 103.
   The intelligence officers were indicted on charges of
planting the bomb that destroyed the jumbo jet over
Lockerbie, Scotland, killing 270 people. The U.S. indictment
is expected to lead to a renewed American crackdown on Libya.
Similar charges were filed in Britain. The two agents are
believed to be in Libya, which won't voluntarily turn them
over, and prosecutors conceded they didn't know when the
defendants might stand trial. The 193-count indictment
indicates Libya was deeply involved in planning the bombing.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   In a decision that is certain to stir controversy,
prosecutors announced they have no evidence linking Syrian,
Iranian or Palestinian terrorists to the destruction of
Flight 103.
   ---
   PRINCE SIHANOUK RETURNED to Cambodia after 13 years in
exile.
   Tens of thousands of flag-waving Cambodians lined the
streets of Phnom Penh to cheer the 69-year-old former king.
Sihanouk, who arrived on a flight from Beijing, will head an
interim council composed of Cambodia's four warring parties.
Still widely revered, Sihanouk was instrumental in hammering
out a political compromise acceptable to the factions. The
result was a treaty, signed last month, that calls for a
U.N.-monitored cease-fire and elections by 1993.
   The Sihanouk-led council includes the Phnom Penh
government and three guerrilla factions -- two non-Communist
groups and the Khmer Rouge, detested for its reign of terror
in the 1970s.
   ---
   The House approved its third jobless-aid measure this
year, but the bill was the first to win Bush's blessing, thus
virtually assuring that more than a million
longtime-unemployed workers could receive checks by the
holidays.
   ---
   An FDA panel recommended unanimously that silicone-gel
breast implants remain available to women despite finding
that safety information submitted by four manufacturers was
inadequate. The panel recommended that more safety data on
the devices be gathered.
   ---
   Baker traveled to Beijing today for meetings focusing on
China's human-rights policy, trade issues and North Korea's
nuclear arms plans. The secretary of state's proposal for a
conference of Japan, China, the U.S.S.R., the U.S. and the
two Koreas to ease tension on the Korean peninsula met a cool
reception.
   ---
   Salvadoran rebels announced a unilateral truce, calling
off all military action until a U.N.-brokered peace accord is
signed with El Salvador's government. Leaders of the leftist
Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front said they believe
an accord to end the nation's 12-year-old civil war is near.
Peace talks are under way in Mexico City.
   ---
   Scientists pinpointed how sunlight causes a common form of
skin cancer, the strongest evidence yet linking the
environment directly to a cancer. The researchers found that
the sun's ultraviolet rays disable a particular gene known to
control cell growth.
   ---
   Ex-Ku Klux Klan leader Duke trailed former Democratic Gov.
Edwards as they headed toward tomorrow's runoff election in
the Louisiana governor's race, according to a new poll. Duke
is running as a Republican although national GOP leaders and
Bush have disavowed him.
   ---
   AIDS cases would almost double in the U.S. under an
expanded definition of the illness being proposed by the
Centers for Disease Control. Currently, almost 196,000
individuals are classified by the agency as having AIDS; the
new definition, if adopted, would increase that number by
160,000.
   ---
   A Soviet economic report stated that the country is out of
hard currency and warned of bankruptcy if republics don't
contribute revenue to central authorities. But
representatives of the republics, meeting to sign an accord
on a new union structure, seemed far from convinced.
   ---
   Iraq's agricultural minister said his country's farm
output has fallen 75% since the Gulf War and thousands of
children and elderly people will starve unless U.N. economic
sanctions are lifted soon. Abdul-Wahab al-Sabagh noted that
only 15% of the Iraqi population currently can afford to
purchase food on the free market.
   ---
   Argentine President Menem addressed a joint session of the
U.S. Congress, urging lawmakers to resist efforts to curb
imports from Argentina. Menem also met with Bush and signed a
treaty to protect investors' profits and assets in the two
countries. The pact is the first of its kind between the U.S.
and a South American nation.
   ---
   Britain boosted its police force in Northern Ireland after
the Irish Republican Army acknowledged killing four men in
the worst night of violence in the province this year. Peter
Brooke, Britain's Northern Ireland minister, announced that
the police force would total more than 13,000 with the
addition of 400 officers.
   ---
   Fighting flared thoughout separatist Croatia as the
European Community's chief mediator said all sides in
Yugoslavia's civil war agreed that peacekeeping forces should
be called in to stop the clashes.
   ---
   Aristide will meet with Haitian lawmakers in Colombia to
discuss his possible reinstatement as Haiti's president,
according to officials in Port-au-Prince. No date has been
agreed upon for the talks, set up by an Organization of
American States delegation that has urged the return of
Aristide, ousted by the military on Sept. 30.
   ---
   U.S. Catholic bishops urged Americans to campaign for the
environment and children's rights while rejecting "safe sex"
as a way to combat AIDS. The bishops, ending a meeting in
Washington, also criticized mandatory birth-control programs
used to curb the Third World's population growth.
   ---
   A fired postal worker went on a shooting spree in a Royal
Oak, Mich., post office, killing three people and wounding
six. The 31-year-old gunman was in critical condition after
shooting himself in the head.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
