ID: 212	RANK: 68	SCORE: 7.890991
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890927-0016 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-27-89 0223EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r i PM-Cambodia-Future     09-27 0935</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Cambodia-Future,0968</SECOND>
<HEAD>War Continues But So Does Pressure for Diplomatic Solution</HEAD>
<HEAD>With PM-Cambodia-Vietnam, Bjt ^AP News Analysis</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By PETER ENG</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>PHNOM PENH, Cambodia (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   As Vietnamese soldiers nearby packed
their bags to return home, a dozen Cambodian troops were loading
crates of Soviet-made mortar rounds onto a truck bound for the
distant mountains.
   Just down the dirt road, bare-chested Kan Kun, one of the
country's tens of thousands of village militiamen, showed off his
AK-47 automatic rifle and two magazines.
   ``All the men who can, use a gun to fight Pol Pot,'' he said,
referring to the shadowy figure believed to still lead the Khmer
Rouge guerrillas.
   It was an ominous portent of Cambodia's future, these scenes
that reporters stumbled upon along the Tonle Sap lake in
northwestern Siem Reap province.
   What Hanoi said were its last soldiers in Cambodia returned home
Tuesday, 10 years and nine months after Vietnam invaded, ousted the
fanatical Khmer Rouge and sparked a civil war.
   Like the Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan, Vietnam's purported
pullout likely will improve the international standing of the
former occupier but condemn the country it occupied to a new phase
of fighting.
   Since peace talks again have failed, the Vietnamese-installed
Phnom Penh government will now face guerrillas alone as the
Soviet-installed government in Kabul has done since the Red Army
went home in February.
   But Kabul still stands, despite widespread predictions of a
quick collapse, and Phnom Penh's position is even stronger, said
many diplomats, including a Soviet Embassy official and Ngo Dien,
Vietnam's ambassador to Phnom Penh.
   Unlike Kabul, Phnom Penh controls most of the country's
territory, they said. The Afghan resistance can recruit from 6
million refugees in Pakistan, while the Cambodian guerrillas have
just 300,000 in Thailand.
   The Afghan guerrillas have much wider international backing, and
support from the people within Afghanistan.
   The Khmer Rouge, the largest Cambodia guerrilla group, is widely
hated and cannot survive without Chinese and Thai support _ and
that is wavering.
   ``In the not too far away future, I don't think Thailand will go
on supporting the Khmer rouge, and China also,'' Ngo Dien said.
   The Communist Khmer Rouge killed hundreds of thousands of people
in during its nearly four-year rule as it tried to turn the country
into a primitive agrarian commune.
   Just as in Afghanistan, superpowers continue supplying the means
to kill. Chinese shipments continue. So do Soviet arms to Phnom
Penh, Soviet Ambassador Rashit Khamidouline said, although they
were not increased with Vietnam's pullout because ``we don't want
to escalate the war.''
   The Khmer Rouge siege of Pailin, near its sanctuaries in
Thailand, has been compared with the Afghan guerrillas' siege of
Jalalabad, near the Pakistan frontier. The Cambodian guerrilla
attempt to create a ``liberated zone'' has intensified with
Vietnam's retreat, and is seen as a crucial test of whether pure
firepower can resolve the war.
   Most analysts say neither army can win in Cambodia.
   The key then will be whether there can be talks between Phnom
Penh's Premier Hun Sen and guerrilla leader Prince Norodom
Sihanouk, who heads the coalition joining his forces with the Khmer
Rouge and the Khmer People's National Liberation Front.
   ``In the coming dry season ... the guerrillas will launch
attacks to test the strength of the Phnom Penh government. After
that, both sides may become more flexible,'' said Khieu Kanharith,
a prominent newspaper editor in the Cambodian capital.
   If genuine, the Vietnamese pullout would weaken Phnom Penh
militarily but perhaps more crucially, it would erode the
guerrillas' international position.
   The guerrillas call the troop movement a fake, but many
diplomats believe Vietnam has withdrawn at least the bulk of its
army. That weakens the key guerrilla charge: that Phnom Penh is
merely a Vietnamese puppet.
   The guerrillas may also lose morale if they see they are now
only killing fellow Cambodians.
   Anticipating this, the guerrillas recently stepped up charges
that Vietnam is controlling the country with 1.25 million
Vietnamese settlers.
   Phnom Penh wants a political settlement because otherwise most
non-Communist countries will not end diplomatic and economic
embargoes that have hurt impoverished Cambodia.
   But it sees a good second option in hints that even without a
settlement, a few countries like Australia and Thailand may
recognize Phnom Penh after a general election expected early next
year.
   There are no signs of progress on breaking the central impasse
in talks: the future of the Khmer Rouge.
   Hun Sen repeated Sunday that he will make no concessions on his
demand that the Khmer Rouge army and political organization be
dismantled. Sihanouk says the Khmer Rouge will continue fighting
unless it is allowed into a transitional coalition government.
   However, the claimed Vietnamese pullout will focus greater
attention on resolving this question. And more than ever, the Khmer
Rouge is being pressured by its two strongest backers, China and
Thailand.
   For the first time since Vietnam's invasion, three Chinese
officials visited Cambodia for economic talks earlier this year, an
indication Beijing is keeping its options open.
   And at Pailin and elsewhere, the Thai army has halted artillery
support for the Khmer Rouge and cleared out some of its military
bases and secretive civilian camps, officials said.
   Hanoi hopes its pullout will end the Western economic blockades
that have made Vietnam worse off than the country it occupied.
   Its retreat from Cambodia coincides with declining Soviet
influence in both countries and could begin a strategic realignment
favoring the non-Communist world, diplomats say.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>___</NOTE>
<TEXT>
   EDITOR`S NOTE: Peter Eng is news editor in Bangkok, where he has
worked for the past five years, making a number of trips into
Indochina.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
