ID: 212	RANK: 78	SCORE: 7.810640
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911119-0058
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911119-0058.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
   Wild Men of the Civil War
   ----
   By David Shribman
</HL>
<DATE>
11/19/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A18
</SO>
<LP>
   One was named by his parents for a Shawnee statesman who,
in one of history's great ironies, tried to create an Indian
federation stretching across the continent that the Civil War
rent apart. The other was named in battle, for his fortitude
during the first conflict at Bull Run.
   One was reluctant to engage in total war but warmed to the
notion swiftly, eventually finding it a military and
political imperative. The other was a church deacon and a
slaveholder, an awkward, poor teacher but a brilliant,
natural, almost possessed warrior. One died after living as
an icon for decades, the other died in battle -- but both as
heroes.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   In ordinary times William Tecumseh Sherman and Stonewall
Jackson might have been colleagues, soldiers and strategists
joined in a common purpose. But the Civil War, the great
continental divide in American history, transformed them into
ferocious rivals for the hearts of Americans, a people
themselves saddened and divided by what they were doing to
each other and to themselves.
   The trick of Charles Royster, the T. Harry Williams
professor of American history at Louisiana State University,
was to bring the two men together, to unite them between the
covers of "The Destructive War: William Tecumseh Sherman,
Stonewall Jackson, and the Americans" (Knopf, 523 pages, $30)
and, ultimately, to place them in the American social,
cultural and military tradition. It is an adroit literary
device, and the result is an illuminating interpretation of
the Civil War period.
   These were the wild men of the war. They conducted
campaigns unrivaled in their mobility and their destruction.
They took no prisoners, neither in battle nor in debate. They
inspired their men -- and they inspired legends. "These men,"
writes Mr. Royster, "epitomized the waging of successful war
by drastic measures justified with claims to righteousness."
   Jackson -- so devout that he was offended by Sunday mail
delivery, but convinced of the notion that the Confederacy
could only be redeemed through war -- was an evangelist for
swift and destructive shows of military force, a proselytizer
for invading the North to take the war to the cities and
towns of the Union. As the first Confederate military leader
to lead men into Maryland, he, like Sherman, touched
civilians on both sides of the war.
   And so, when he died at Chancellorsville, Northerners were
swift to mark him a traitor -- a soldier who, as the Chicago
Tribune put it, "prostituted his talents, and employed the
acquirements his country bestowed upon him, to compass the
ruin of the best Government the world has known." But some
voices of praise rang out: "Stonewall Jackson was a great
general, a brave soldier, a noble Christian and a pure man,"
wrote John W. Forney, editor of the Washington Chronicle.
   For his part, Sherman truly was what Harriet Beecher Stowe
described as the "war-prophet." Horrified by secession, he
predicted it would lead to "civil war of the most horrible
kind." At first he ordered his soldiers: No pillaging. By
November 1863 he was arguing, "It is none of our business to
protect a people that has sent all its youth, and arms and
horses, and all that is of any account to war against us . .
. The people have done all the harm they can, so let them
reap the consequences."
   Sherman saw the war and the destruction he and his armies
wrought as a defining gesture in the nation's history. The
theory: All this destruction would force Southerners to think
again about their actions and reaffirm the determination of
the North. Sherman's infamous campaign was what we have come
to call, in this era of truly big government, a demonstration
project. "Sherman's marches across the South were an exercise
in reshaping people's perception of the U.S. by demonstrating
what those who believed in the country's permanence could do
to confirm their belief," Mr. Royster writes. It worked. One
woman wrote that she thought the very sight of a Union
soldier would kill her.
   Jackson's death elevated him to heights he never reached
while alive, leading to the conclusion -- fanciful but
fiercely held -- that the South would have prevailed if only
Stonewall had lived. The war's end elevated Sherman, too,
making him a giant on the American landscape and the
Republicans' dearest (and vain) hope for the elections of
1876, 1880 and 1884.
   Mr. Royster calls his book "a long essay," and in fact it
is less a dual biography than a discourse on the Civil War,
its political and social effects, and an exploration of how
it shaped American perceptions for generations. "Americans
defined their war's promised effects according to the ills
they saw in antebellum society, which they expected war to
cure," he writes.
   In truth both sides were hellbent for destruction. The
Southerners calculated that widespread devastation would tire
the North, producing what Jefferson Davis expected, even
before the war began, would be "starving millions" who would
sue for peace rather than suffer further. The North felt no
differently. Sen. Benjamin Wade of Ohio talked about "making
the South a desert."
   And so, as Lincoln put it, the war came. At its midpoint
Stonewall Jackson lay dying. Though there is more than one
version of his death soliloquy, there's agreement it went
something like this: "Let us pass over the river, and rest
under the shade of the trees." The truth is that in the shade
of history's trees, we still look back in horror and awe at
Stonewall Jackson, at William Tecumseh Sherman, and at what
Charles Royster calls the destructive war.
   ---
   Mr. Shribman is a staff reporter in the Journal's
Washington bureau.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
