ID: 212	RANK: 79	SCORE: 7.810616
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910828-0097
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910828-0097.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   What's News --
   World-Wide
</HL>
<DATE>
08/28/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<LP>
   GORBACHEV THREATENED to quit unless a new union treaty is
approved.
   But even as the Soviet president pressed Parliament to
agree on a treaty of sovereign states, yet another republic,
Moldavia, was declaring its independence. Gorbachev warned of
economic disaster and civil war if republics secede; his
views were echoed by reformers. In Washington, the World Bank
approved a $30 million trust fund for technical assistance to
the Soviets.
                                                                                                       

</LP>
<TEXT>
   The Bush administration is expected to extend diplomatic
recognition soon to Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia. Robert
Strauss, the new U.S. ambassador to Moscow, indicated an
announcement would come by the end of the week. The European
Community yesterday acknowledged the Baltics' independence.
   British Prime Minister Major said he would visit Moscow
this weekend for discussions with Gorbachev and Russian
republic leader Yeltsin.
   ---
   CAMBODIAN FACTIONS AGREED to reduce their armies and end
civil war.
   In what appeared to be a major step toward halting 12
years of fighting, Cambodia's warring groups agreed to cut
their forces by 70% and assign the remaining troops to
barracks. Prince Norodom Sihanouk made the announcement
during talks in Thailand focusing on a U.N. peace plan. But
the resistance leader warned that other disagreements
remained between the government and the three guerrilla
groups.
   The U.N. plan provides for a monitored truce,
demobilization of armies and U.N. supervision of the Phnom
Penh government prior to elections.
   ---
   Croatia's president met with Yugoslav military leaders in
an apparent last-ditch attempt to stop fighting in the
republic from escalating into all-out war. Croat officials
said they were ready to call up all qualified men for militia
duty in the battles with federal troops and Serb insurgents.
New clashes erupted in the town of Vukovar.
   ---
   The American Bar Association gave Clarence Thomas its
midlevel rating of "qualified" to be a Supreme Court justice.
The ABA gave Thomas the same evaluation when he was named a
federal appeals court judge in 1989. Senate Judiciary
Committee hearings on the Thomas nomination begin Sept. 10.
   ---
   Perez de Cuellar held talks in Geneva with a senior
Iranian diplomat to discuss the Lebanese hostage situation,
but no breakthroughs were reported. The U.N.
secretary-general indicated he no longer expected a quick
resolution of the impasse but said he had accepted an
invitation to travel to Tehran on Sept. 10 for discussions.
                                                                                                       

   Lebanon's Amal militia said it has the remains of two
Israeli soldiers and demanded that Israel free 28 women
prisoners before the remains could be examined. Israel
rejected the proposal. The pro-Iranian Hezbollah has said it
has two other Israeli soldiers or their remains, and a
Palestinian group claims to have the body of another.
   ---
   The Lebanese government granted rebel Christian Gen.
Michel Aoun a "special pardon" to allow him to leave his
refuge inside the French Embassy in Beirut and go to France.
The decision was announced at a cabinet session a few hours
after a general amnesty law for crimes related to the
16-year-old civil war was published.
   ---
   About 1,500 U.S. troops will remain in Kuwait longer than
previously planned in order to protect the emirate, the
Pentagon said. The administration earlier had indicated that
all American forces would leave Kuwait by next month, but a
Pentagon spokesman said they now are expected to stay "a
couple of months" beyond that.
   ---
   The Philippines and the U.S. signed a treaty in Manila
permitting U.S. use of Subic Bay Naval Base for 10 years.
Philippine President Aquino appealed to legislators to ratify
the treaty, which calls for Washington to provide annual
compensation of $203 million and trade benefits. The U.S. is
relinquishing volcano-damaged Clark Air Base.
   ---
   A national conference in Togo defied its suspension by
President Gnassingbe Eyadema, stripped him of most of his
powers and elected human-rights leader Kokou Koffigoh as its
own prime minister. The pro-democracy conference voted to ban
Eyadema's ruling RPT party and selected 79 members for a
transitional legislature.
   ---
   The U.S. government approved the sale of over $300 million
in high-tech items to Iran and Syria in recent years, even
though it says those nations back terrorism, according to
documents obtained by the Associated Press. The Commerce
Department reportedly used loopholes to clear the exports,
some of which had military potential.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
