ID: 221	RANK: 44	SCORE: 14.069473
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910926-0019
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910926-0019.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   What's News --
   World-Wide
</HL>
<DATE>
09/26/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<LP>
   IRAQ OFFERED to release 44 U.N. weapons inspectors, a
diplomat said.
   The Security Council president, France's ambassador to the
U.N., said he had received a letter from Iraq's envoy
offering to free the team. Baghdad urged the chief of the
experts to fly to the Iraqi capital and demanded that the
inspectors sign for each document they remove concerning
Iraq's nuclear program. The inspectors, who had been detained
a second day in a parking lot in Baghdad, earlier refused to
surrender the items. The papers reportedly include data on
countries and companies that aided Iraq's nuclear
development.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The White House warily accepted an Iraqi promise to allow
unimpeded U.N. helicopter inspection flights but said "all
options are open" to deal with Iraq's detention of the U.N.
team.
   ---
   EL SALVADOR SIGNED a comprehensive peace agreement with
leftist rebels.
   Culminating U.N.-mediated talks, the Salvadoran government
and the FMLN rebel movement said they reached an accord to
end the country's 12-year civil war. The agreement was
announced by U.N. Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar, who
said it covers the conditions for integrating the guerrillas
into the political process in El Salvador and guarantees
their safety.
   The agreement covers a range of military, economic and
land reforms, as well as the incorporation of the rebels into
a national civilian police force.
   ---
   French and Belgian troops rushed to southern Zaire and the
U.S. promised airlift support after riots, in which 30 people
died, ended in the capital. President Mobutu said the rampage
had wrecked Kinshasa. Copper futures prices rose on news that
violence spread to mining centers.
   ---
   An arms embargo was imposed on Yugoslavia by the U.N.
Security Council, which called for an end to fighting there.
Secretary of State Baker, in a strongly worded speech to the
council, charged Yugoslavia's military with unacceptable
aggression against the republic of Croatia.
   ---
   The Senate voted to continue funding for the B-2 stealth
bomber. In a separate vote, the anti-missile Strategic
Defense Initiative also survived an attempted cutback in
funds.
   ---
   Thousands of Romanian miners stormed the government's
headquarters in Bucharest and fought police with firebombs,
clubs and axes. Three people were killed in the rioting,
sparked by anger over high prices. President Iliescu said he
would form a new government "of national openness," but later
called in troops to restore order.
   ---
   Senate hearings will be extended into next week on Robert
Gates to permit a public airing of criticism that Gates
tailored CIA analysis to suit the conservative priorities of
the Reagan administration. The issue could prove embarrassing
to Gates, who has been tapped by Bush to head the agency.
   ---
   Baker met with Israeli Foreign Minister Levy at the U.N.
as the secretary of state pressed U.S. efforts to convene a
Mideast conference next month. In Algiers, moderate and
radical Palestinians clashed over the proposed peace talks as
the 450-member Palestine National Council prepared to vote on
the issue.
                                                                                                       

   American voters are siding with Bush in his efforts to
delay action on $10 billion in Israeli loan guarantees, a
nationwide poll shows. Moreover, the loan-guarantee issue may
be contributing to a voter backlash against Israel.
   ---
   A government witness stopped short of linking Noriega to
illegal activity during more than three days of testimony at
the former Panamanian dictator's drug-trafficking trial in
Miami. But prosecutors said Luis del Cid's testimony was just
a part of the case they would build with the help of other
witnesses.
   ---
   Makers of breast implants were told by the FDA that they
must provide doctors with consumer information on a variety
of health risks. The agency said that the brochures should be
written in easily understandable language for plastic
surgeons and other doctors to pass on to their patients.
   ---
   The National Commission on AIDS issued 30 recommendations
for fighting the disease, from expanding Medicaid to cover
all lowincome AIDS patients to providing drugabuse treatment.
Many of the suggestions are unlikely to be accepted by
budgetstrapped federal and state authorities.
   ---
   Rebel national guardsmen fought troops loyal to Soviet
Georgia's president, leaving five people dead in the
republic's capital, Tbilisi. Gamsakhurdia gave his opponents
until tonight to lay down their arms or face arrest. In
Tadzhikistan, protesters rallied for a third day to demand
the resignation of a new hard-line Communist president.
   ---
   The U.N.'s chief expressed hope that an American hostage
would be freed by Lebanese captors before the end of this
week. Perez de Cuellar's remarks came a day after pro-Iranian
kidnappers released Jack Mann, 77, who arrived home in
England after more than two years in captivity.
   ---
   Died: Theodor Seuss Geisel, 87, who as Dr. Seuss wrote and
illustrated 47 whimsical children's books, including "The Cat
in the Hat" and "How the Grinch Stole Christmas," Tuesday, in
La Jolla, Calif. . . . Klaus Barbie, 77, Gestapo boss of
Lyon, France, who was convicted of crimes against humanity in
1987 and sentenced to life imprisonment, in Lyon, of cancer.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
