ID: 221	RANK: 73	SCORE: 11.102249
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911226-0026
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911226-0026.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Higher Profits
   Are Expected
   For Toy Makers
   ---
   Dearth of Big Draws Causes
   More-Even Distribution
   Of Sales Among Firms
   ----
   By Joseph Pereira
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
12/26/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A4
</SO>
<CO>
   FPP GAL HAS J.NTD J.SEL MAT TOY TTI
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
SPECIALTY RETAILERS OF LIMITED PRODUCT LINES (OTS)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)
ALL SPECIALTY RETAILERS (RTS)
SOFTWARE (SOF)
TOY MANUFACTURERS (TMF)
</IN>
<NS>
ANALYSTS COMMENTS ON STOCKS, INDUSTRIES &amp; COMPANIES (ANL)
EARNINGS PROJECTIONS (ERP)
NEW PRODUCTS &amp; SERVICES (PDT)
</NS>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
FAR EAST (FE)
JAPAN (JA)
NEW JERSEY (NJ)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
RHODE ISLAND (RI)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Most major toy makers are expected to post improved
fourth-quarter results despite an absence of big-draw toys
this Christmas.
   Indeed, analysts say, a lack of "gottahaves" has led to a
more-even distribution of revenues among the top tier of toy
manufacturers, enabling a few to reverse losses of a year
ago.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Analysts expect Hasbro Inc., the nation's largest toy
maker, to report a net-income increase of more than 50%.
Mattel Inc.'s net is expected to rise by about 18%. Others,
including Tyco Toys Inc., Fisher Price Inc. and Lewis Galoob
Toys Inc., all of which lost money last Christmas season,
should be profitable this year, stock forecasters say.
   "This is a cornucopia type of year," says David Leibowitz,
analyst for American Securities. "In 1985 there was unanimous
agreement among children on what the top 10 toys were:
Cabbage Patch, Trivial Pursuit and Transformers topped the
list. In contrast, this year there is no consensus."
   Meanwhile, video games, the Grinch that in prior years has
stolen Christmas from makers of dolls, board games and more
traditional toys, aren't the siphon they used to be. But
their decline won't help toy retailers that have reaped hefty
profits in the past from the sale of videogame cartridges.
Moreover, the few minihit toys this year are in short supply.
Overall U.S. toy sales are expected to be flat or up 2% at
most, estimates Thomas Kully, analyst for William Blair &amp; Co.
He adds that the gains of the big toy makers have come at the
expense of their littlest rivals who, unable to afford big
advertising budgets, have lost market share.
   Hasbro, based in Pawtucket, R.I., will have a 14% increase
in U.S. sales in its Hasbro brand division, and a 5% to 9%
jump in its Milton Bradley board game division, Mr. Kully
estimates.
   As children, particularly boys, spend less time playing
video games, they've turned to toys like Hasbro's G.I. Joe,
which is making a comeback. Nerf Bow &amp; Arrow, another Hasbro
boys toy, is sold out nearly everywhere.
   Hasbro has helped spark sales by replacing last year's
fads, such as New Kids on the Block dolls, with new winners.
The company's Baby Wanna Walk; Yo-Yo, a fleeced cat doll; and
Crimp n' Curl, a modern-day Cabbage Patch, have all done
well.
   For the fourth quarter the company will report earnings of
75 cents a share, up 53% from 49 cents in the year-ago
quarter, says Gary Jacobson, analyst for Kidder, Peabody Inc.
Sales should climb 47% to $725 million. That includes sales
of Tonka, which Hasbro acquired in May. Excluding Tonka
sales, Hasbro's divisions alone should have sales of about
$540 million, up 9% from $492 million a year earlier,
estimates Mr. Jacobson.
   Mattel, El Segundo, Calif., the second-largest toy maker,
will post per-share net income of 57 cents, an 18% increase
from 45 cents a share last year, estimates Hal Vogel of
Merrill Lynch. Fourth-quarter sales are expected to climb 10%
to more than $475 million from $428 million a year ago, he
says.
   It isn't clear how well Hook, Mattel's new action figure
based on Stephen Spielberg's new movie, will do. And Hot
Wheels sales are "just coasting," Mr. Vogel says. But a train
of dolls from Mattel, led by Barbie, Magic Nursery, and Lil'
Miss Singing Mermaid, based on the Disney character, has
buoyed sales.
   Dolls will also boost Tyco Toys' fourth-quarter results.
The Mount Laurel, N.J., company's top seller this year is
Little Mermaid, which will bring in $50 million in sales. Not
very far behind are two drawing toys, Magna Doodle and Magic
Copier, which are sold out at most stores. Thanks to the
video game decline, the company's line of radio control cars,
planes and boats is selling briskly.
   Kidder Peabody's Mr. Jacobson estimates Tyco will earn 75
cents a share, reversing last year's loss of $1.46 a share.
Sales are anticipated to jump 33% to $157 million from $118
million a year ago.
   Lewis Galoob Toys, South San Francisco, led by new
management, is expected to report per-share net of between a
nickel and a dime on sales of $56.4 million, figures John
Taylor, analyst for L.H. Alton &amp; Co. That would represent a
sharp turnaround from the year-ago quarter when Galoob had a
loss of $1.83 a share on sales of $21.6 million.
   The company's new video game accessory, Game Genie, has
triggered most of the reversal. Game Genie allows
less-capable players to achieve better results in
labyrinthine games like Nintendo Ltd.'s Super Mario series.
   Game Genie's introduction was delayed because of legal
challenges from Nintendo. Shipping started in October and Mr.
Taylor estimates Game Genie will account for nearly half of
the company's fourth-quarter sales, or about $25 million.
   Galoob's management was reshuffled following the
resignations of David Galoob as president and chief executive
officer in June and Saul Jodel as president of marketing and
product development last month. Its new managers have taken a
conservative approach to making toys. Having trimmed its
staff to 360 from 190 over the past two years, the company
plans to develop more variations of tried-and-true toys and
place less emphasis on inventing new concepts. "Gone are the
boom-bust cycle days, the company now has return on
investment in mind," Mr. Taylor says.
   Another toy maker in recovery, FisherPrice, has returned
to its bread and butter-basic preschool toys, high chairs and
other kiddie products -- and away from more expensive gadgety
items. FisherPrice, East Aurora, N.Y., should post net of
$4.9 million, or 32 cents a share, estimates Sean McGowan,
analyst for Gerard Klauer Mattison &amp; Co. The company was a
unit of Quaker Oats last year and doesn't provide comparable
year-ago figures. But Mr. McGowan estimates its fourth
quarter net in 1990 equaled $19.5 million, or $1.30 a share.
   Toy retailers, on the other hand, are having tougher
times, battling the recession, price wars and supply
shortages.
   A big problem for Toys "R" Us Inc., Paramus, N.J., has
been video games. Last year the giant toy retailer did 18% of
its business in video games. That is expected to decline to
14% or 15% this year, analysts say.
   Traditionally, Nintendo has introduced a handful of new
games at Christmas, stimulating holiday buying. Last year
Super Mario III did $400 million in wholesale business. This
year, the Japanese video game maker has been preoccupied with
marketing its new game player, Super NES system, says Donald
Trott, specialty retail analyst for Dean Witter Reynolds.
This has prevented Nintendo from making "hot" titles for the
old system, he adds. The new system hasn't jolted the market
in old Nintendo style, analysts say.
   Other factors hurting the toy retailer are recessionary
economies in Canada and the U.K., and a price war waged by
retail rivals attempting to recoup lost business. Mr. Trott
expects Toys `R' Us to post pershare earnings of 96 cents a
share, a 18% gain over the prior year's quarter of 81 cents.
Revenue should climb also by about 18% to $3.01 billion from
$2.55 billion, he says. Mr. Trott cut his per-share estimate
from $1.02 last month.
   Mr. Kully has also scaled back estimates on Toys "R" Us to
between 86 and 89 cents from $1.25 to $1.30 three months ago.
The reason: Mr. Kully projects a $150 million decline this
Christmas in the retailer's video-game business.
   Sales of Nintendo's eight-bit video games are down 50%
this year, he says, a hole that Nintendo's new Super NES game
system, can't fill. Nintendo's chief competitor, Sega
Enterprises Ltd.'s Genesis system, is doing well, but
supplies are short.
   "It's been a year that started out with manufacturers
keeping their fingers crossed," says American Securities's
Mr. Leibowitz, "It's ending up with many toy manufacturers
having their fondest wishes come true."
   ---
   Corrections &amp; Amplifications
                                                                                                       

   THOMAS KULLY, analyst for William Blair &amp; Co., cut his
fourth-quarter earnings estimate for Toys "R" Us Inc. to
between 86 cents and 89 cents a share, from $1 to $1.02 three
months ago, based on a projected $50 million decline in
video-game sales. An article in yesterday's editions
misstated the previous earnings estimate and the estimate of
video-game sales.
   (WSJ Dec. 27, 1991)
</TEXT>
</DOC>
