ID: 309	RANK: 93	SCORE: 19.494488
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910115-0089
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910115-0089.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Travel:
   Theme Parks See Discounts as the Ticket
   ----
   By Richard Turner
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/15/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   DIS MC BUD TWX SNE
</CO>
<IN>
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)
</IN>
<LP>
   BURBANK, Calif. -- When Walt Disney Co. said last week
that it would cut prices at Disneyland through March 3 for
Southern Californians, the company tagged the device with one
of its typically upbeat monikers: It was a "resident salute."
   But just about everyone else, including financial analysts
on Wall Street, interpreted it as something less cheery: a
sign that the recession and the threat of war are attacking
tourism so gravely that even mighty Disney is in retreat.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The discounting also gives rise to speculation about the
changing landscape of the theme park business. Disney remains
dominant, but since the last economic downturn nearly a
decade ago, the field has grown more crowded, with
entertainment giants seeking a foothold in the U.S. to vault
into the growing foreign theme park market. Disney has
increased its own capacity in Florida and is contemplating
two new parks in Southern California; Matsushita Electric
Industrial Co.'s MCA Inc. unit is a serious player in both
locales; Anheuser-Busch Cos. has expanded by buying Sea
World; Time Warner Inc. has bought a stake in the Six Flags
amusement parks; and Sony Corp., through its Columbia
Pictures unit, is talking about building a Sonyland theme
park in Southern California.
   Regional amusement parks have been dealing for years with
wild fluctuations in such things as weather and razor-thin
price sensitivity. Now the bigger companies in the business
may have to be more agile at pricing strategies and other
marketing tools to go along with their big budgets.
   Disney isn't the only park operator discounting tickets.
Knott's Berry Farm in nearby Buena Park, Calif., cut the
price of its children's admissions by more than half to $9.95
on Dec. 21, and attendance since has surged 20%.
   MCA's Universal Studios Hollywood, though more dependent
on out-of-towners than other theme attractions in Southern
California, plans to announce a temporary resident discount
program in March, as it implements part of a $100 million
expansion. Park attendance fell 9% last year, partly because
1989 was a record year with a major new Earthquake
attraction. Attendance problems worsened, executives say,
when a back-lot fire in November gave many people the false
impression that the tour had sustained serious damage.
   The temporary price cut at Disneyland, from $27.50 to $20
for adult visitors who can prove they live in a zip code from
Bakersfield to San Diego, was the first in the 35-year
history of the Anaheim, Calif., park, and it contains a
measure of irony. One of the key ingredients in Disney's
success since 1984 under Chairman Michael Eisner and
President Frank Wells has been raising prices at its theme
parks -- nine times all told in California, from $13 six
years ago.
   The executives realized that Disney's unique family
franchise had been undervalued, and they were playing into a
growing economy and a baby boomlet. Theme park visitors
didn't seem to mind, and as Disney stepped up marketing,
families kept pouring through the gates.
   Against that background, the Disneyland discount "is
pretty meaningful," says Merrill Lynch analyst Harold L.
Vogel, who has been preaching the perils of a recession for
Disney for years. "If demand were still growing 3%, 4%, 5% a
year, there would be a reluctance to cut prices. Why should
they?"
   Although the price cut is aimed at locals, who make up
about half of Disneyland's market, it's also meant to
compensate for weakness in the other half. As growing hotel
discounting and low occupancy rates show, tourism in Southern
California and Florida slowed last year. Disney itself
conceded last November, as it reported its fiscal-year
results, that "weakening tourism" had hurt earnings. Disney
hasn't reported attendance figures for years; it does
acknowledge that attendance was somewhat slow in the summer
but says it had a strong holiday season. Amusement Business,
a trade publication, calculates that Disney's total theme
park attendance in the U.S. fell 5% in 1990.
   "It's not primarily the price of gas, the economy,
inflation or deflation," says analyst John Uphoff of Raymond
James &amp; Associates in St. Petersburg, Fla. "It's uncertainty.
For tourism, the worst possible catastrophe is gasoline
lines. And with war, you might have such a thing."
   Vacationers are likely to stick closer to home, but locals
are more price-sensitive than out-of-town tourists who have
already committed to their trip. For local residents, says
Lance Barnett, chief economist for the California Department
of Commerce, "Disneyland isn't competing against Disney World
in Florida, it's competing against ordering out for pizza."
   To keep the locals coming back, the parks must add
attractions often. At Six Flags Magic Mountain in Valencia,
Calif., where about 80% of attendance is from Southern
California, park officials credit last year's new Viper
roller coaster for boosting attendance 4.5%, and another new
ride, Psyclone, is planned for this year. Magic Mountain
officials won't say if they plan a price cut, but "we look
closely at what the competition is doing," a spokeswoman
says.
   Disney doesn't have a blockbuster new ride in the works
for Disneyland until the revamping of Tomorrowland in 1994 or
1995. Planned Muppet attractions are on hold after the deal
for Disney to acquire Henson Associates fell apart. A "Young
Indiana Jones" stunt show was shelved. To keep Southern
Californians interested, Disneyland will continue to change
its shows and parades more frequently than Disney World does.
   In Florida, resident discounts have been part of doing
business at Disney World since the park opened. The program
emphasizes the slow times of year to help pay for year-round
overhead and maybe even keep the locals away at crowded
times. When MCA opened Universal Studios Florida in Orlando
last year, there was never any question about following suit.
"People have come to expect it," an MCA executive says.
   Disneyland is including an additional promotion in its
resident salute: a price break for all California residents
who stay at the Disneyland Hotel, which Disney acquired in
1988. Last year, to celebrate the park's 35th anniversary, it
gave away a car a day for the full year.
   Disney officials say they planned the local discount even
before their latest price increase, last Nov. 1. "I wouldn't
overstate this," says Raymond E. Braun, senior vice president
of the consulting firm Economic Research Associates. "This is
a temporary marketing strategy for the off-season, and Disney
doesn't have to be too concerned with competition. But
everybody's going to have market themselves harder. This may
suggest we're entering a new age of theme parks, where the
upper limits of pricing are being tested."
   ---
                  Unamusing Results
                                                                                                       

   1990 theme park attendance, in millions, with percentage
change from 1989
                                                                                                       

 Walt Disney World (Lake Buena Vista, Fla.)  28.5*  -5.0%
 Disneyland (Anaheim, Calif.)                12.9*  -3.0
 Universal Studios Hollywood
   (Universal City, Calif.)                   4.6   -9.0
 Knott's Berry Farm (Buena Park, Calif.)      4.0*  -3.0
 Sea World of Florida (Orlando)               3.8*  -5.0
 Sea World of California (San Diego)          3.3*  -8.0
 Kings Island (Kings Island, Ohio)            3.2   +1.3
 Six Flags Magic Mountain (Valencia, Calif.)  3.2   +4.5
 Cedar Point (Sandusky, Ohio)                 3.1*  -2.0
 Busch Gardens The Dark Continent             3.1*  no
   (Tampa, Fla.)                                    change
                                                                                                       

   *Estimate
   Source: Amusement Business magazine and industry estimates
</TEXT>
</DOC>
