ID: 124	RANK: 79	SCORE: 10.918468
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910103-0028
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910103-0028.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   New Jersey Casino Revenue Rose 16%
   In December, but Analysts See Weak '91
   ----
   By Neil Barsky
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/03/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C8
</SO>
<CO>
   X.TMP AZTR
</CO>
<IN>
CASINOS AND GAMBLING (CNO)
</IN>
<LP>
   Atlantic City, N.J.'s casino industry capped one of its
most difficult years with a healthy 16% increase in revenue
in December, but analysts said the gain may prove to be a
mirage.
   The boost was attributed largely to unseasonably mild
weather in the Northeast and a marketing shift intended to
draw more gamblers who arrive by car rather than tour bus.
The so-called drive-in customers tend to spend more than
those who take the bus.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But analysts said it's premature to pop the champagne
corks. The new year is expected to be as tough as 1990, which
produced one of the weakest profits in the 12 years that
Atlantic City has allowed casino gambling.
   "I think there will be at least another six months of
tough times," said Salomon Brothers casino analyst Mark
Brostowski.
   Industry analysts said at least some of the gain in
gambling revenue was a result of the cash incentives thrown
at gamblers who drive to the casinos. But while drive-in
customers tend to be more affluent, and therefore bet more,
they also tend to drive from casino to casino to collect the
vouchers that can be redeemed for chips or coins. "Where you
only have to give a bus customer his bonus once, a lot of
guys are driving from garage to garage to collect," said Al
Glasgow, an industry consultant whose major client is Donald
Trump.
   Peter G. Boynton, president of the Caesars casino unit of
Caesars World Inc., said that while his casino gives vouchers
only to regular customers, a number of other casinos have
begun giving cash incentives to anyone who drives in. "For
the casinos who (give coupons) intelligently, it's very good
business," he said.
   In 1990, gamblers lost a total of $2.95 billion, which was
up 5.2% from 1989's $2.8 billion. In December, the casinos
had gambling revenue of $210.7 million, up from $181.9
million a year earlier. The figures aren't adjusted to
include the cost of cash vouchers and other promotions.
   The increased revenue figures include Mr. Trump's new $1
billion Taj Mahal casino, which did well enough to hurt its
competitors, but not well enough to avoid the protection of
bankruptcy court. Mr. Trump's advisers have said the casino
will likely file for bankruptcy court protection as part of a
bond restructuring proposal.
   The Taj's revenue has dropped every month since it broke
the industry's single-month record with a $39.9 million win
in July. Last month, traditionally the year's slowest in
Atlantic City, the facility grossed $27 million making it the
city's top-grossing facility.
   As the Taj's experience has shown, record revenue figures
do not guarantee success. Thanks to a crushing debt load,
high taxes and overbuilding, the casinos have had a tough
time making money of late; only eight of the town's 11
casions showed net operating profits in the 1990 third
quarter, which is traditionally by far the strongest quarter
of the year.
   In December, the biggest gainer was Tropworld, which won
$20.9 million, an 18% gain from December 1989. Trump Castle
posted the biggest drop in revenue, falling 18%, to $16.5
million.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
