ID: 162	RANK: 67	SCORE: 11.579840
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910201-0125
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910201-0125.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   International:
   Economic Woes Worsen in Egypt
   As Effects of Gulf War Hit Home
   ----
   By Jane Mayer
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/01/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8
</SO>
<CO>
   MDEST
</CO>
<IN>
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)
PETROLEUM (PET)
INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)
LODGING, HOTELS, MOTELS, LODGES, CAMPGROUNDS (LOD)
AIRLINES (AIR)
MARINE TRANSPORTATION (MAR)
</IN>
<LP>
   GIZA, Egypt -- At the base of the 4,500-year-old pyramids,
the mood is deathly still. While this may be appropriate for
these world-famous tombs, it's extraordinary for a site
usually overrun by swarms of tourists year round.
   The reason is clear: With the advent of the Gulf war,
armed security guards from Egypt's Tourist and Antiquities
Police have formed a cordon around all of the country's
ancient monuments and museums, closing them off to the public
to pre-empt a possible terrorist attack.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The pyramids, for instance, can only be seen from the
outside, and then on horses or camels -- a bony, malodorous
ride that offers a distant glimpse. Three days ago, there
were only four takers for the legions of camels and horses
lined up in the sand in hope of riders. Three were Polish
sailors, whose ship had docked in Egypt for the weekend, and
one was a Kuwaiti petrochemical engineer who had stopped by
on his way to London.
   "It's a little odd to be here in the middle of a war," he
allowed, "but at least there are no crowds."
   Even before the first shot was fired, Egypt's economy,
heavily reliant on tourism and other war-sensitive sources of
revenue, was a casualty of the Gulf conflict. The government
estimates that the tourism business has dropped from 70% of
usual activity in the first few months after Iraq's invasion
of Kuwait to nearly a complete standstill since Jan. 16, when
the shooting began. In fact officials here joke that the only
Egyptian economic statistic that can be known for sure is the
number of tourists now: zero.
   During what is ordinarily the high season, hotels are down
to 20% occupancy. Most major tour groups, including those run
by American Express Co., have canceled all trips to Egypt.
Every airline booked through Cairo's international airport
has either reduced or canceled its flights, many of which had
become inordinately expensive because of the war-zone
insurance surcharges tacked onto tickets. Excursion boats bob
emptily in the Nile, and unoccupied horse carriages line the
shores. "Not even the Kuwaitis are taking rides," complains
carriage driver Abdul Mohamed Said.
   The loss of tourism revenue, estimated to reach $1.5
billion to $3 billion by March, should the war continue that
long, is but one of the huge economic costs of the war that
Egypt is just beginning to count up. Three of the country's
four principal sources of revenue -- tourism, remittances
from Egyptians abroad and Suez Canal fees -- are all down
sharply, aggravating an already stagnant and indebted
economy.
   On Monday, the government estimated that $7 billion to $8
billion would be lost in remittances from Egyptians who
worked before the war in Iraq, Kuwait and elsewhere in the
Gulf. Some 670,000 Egyptian workers are estimated to have
fled back to Egypt, exacerbating the country's serious
unemployment problem. The government estimates it would cost
$5 billion to employ all of them. Moreover, the government
now reckons that these returning workers have lost $18
billion in property and savings because of the war; much of
the savings were seized by Iraqis who raided Kuwaiti banks.
   Added to this, the Chairman of the Suez Canal Authority,
Mohammed Ezzat Adel, said Sunday that the canal was losing $1
million in daily revenue because of the huge decrease in
traffic, a sharp contrast to the $1.4 billion it took in
during all of 1990. Egyptian authorities, who have posted
armed sentries along the length of the canal, insist it's
entirely secure and have lodged protests with such major
shipping insurers as Lloyd's of London for raising shipping
rates.
   One source of Egyptian revenue that has been helped by the
war is the country's modest oil exports. The rise in oil
prices may bring in an additional $70 million to $100 million
this year, the Egyptian Minister of Petroleum estimates.
   Offsetting the immense costs of the war somewhat, say
Western officials, are the various forms of debt forgiveness
that the Egyptians have received from the allied countries.
The U.S. canceled $6.7 billion in military debts, and the
Gulf countries have forgiven an estimated $6.5 billion,
though Egyptian officials point out that no one expected
these debts to be repaid anyway, so the savings aren't being
felt. The European Commission pledged Wednesday to give Egypt
$240 million as part of its aid to three countries affected
by the Gulf crisis. But that and other aid pledges won't come
near canceling the country's remaining $35 billion in foreign
debt.
   Because many of the losses are being felt in the service
sector, such as tourism and related industries, the burden
may fall especially hard on Egypt's middle class, which is
President Hosni Mubarak's chief source of support.
   "It is the middle class that is really getting pinched,
and the middle class that is really starting to ask serious
questions, both about the war and about the political system
in Egypt," says Essam Montasser, professor of economics at
the American University in Cairo.
   He acknowledges that few Egyptians support Saddam Hussein,
but suggests that an uneasy ambivalence is growing in Egypt
regarding the costs of the war and the methods and goals of
the allied forces. "A broad number of people think it's
become a matter of humiliation and demolition, like fighting
a mosquito with a gun," he suggests.
   At the Austrian Airlines office off Cairo's bustling
Tahrir Square, a ticket clerk blushes painfully and admits,
"We haven't had a customer walk in here for more than a week.
I worry about the war from a financial perspective. So many
people have lost their jobs, good jobs that they can't
replace. It's really serious. In the beginning I thought this
was a good war, but now I wonder."
   In a dark nook of a copper shop in Khan el-Khalily, the
city's medieval market, a prosperous artisan in gold-rimmed
glasses and a LaCoste sweater who declines to give his name
says his business has dropped to "nothing. I'm living on
capital now." While no admirer of Saddam Hussein, he reserves
his main criticisms for the U.S. and Mr. Mubarak.
   "By mobilizing all these troops, the U.S. has caused huge
problems in the Arab world -- social, economic and political.
I wonder, are the Americans going to stick around to solve
all of these problems?"
</TEXT>
</DOC>
