ID: 210	RANK: 42	SCORE: 6.423536
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911021-0185
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911021-0185.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Technology (A Special Report)
   ---
   Computer Illusionist:
   Myron Krueger Makes
   Computers Fun
   ----
   By Pascal Zachary
</HL>
<DATE>
10/21/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE R17
</SO>
<CO>
   BA MC
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
AEROSPACE (ARO)
COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)
HOME ELECTRONICS, FURNISHINGS, APPLIANCES (HMF)
</IN>
<NS>
NEW PRODUCTS &amp; SERVICES (PDT)
</NS>
<RE>
FAR EAST (FE)
JAPAN (JA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
WASHINGTON (WA)
</RE>
<LP>
   LAS VEGAS, Nev. -- A woman's hands skip across the table
top. A video camera overhead captures her movements,
displaying them on the screen in front of her. Her hands (or,
more precisely, the image of her hands) are squeezing a big
swatch of red. She molds the red blob into a statue, working
her hands vigorously. Then just as the blob takes the shape
of a head, the woman spreads her five fingers, and -- presto]
-- the electronic sculpture disappears.
   She stretches out her left hand and cocks her index
finger. Then the image of the finger taps an icon, or
command, on the screen. Suddenly, her finger is acting like a
paint gun. She is electronically finger-painting, etching
lines onto the screen.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "This is the dream computer," she says, jumping to her
feet. "This is the most natural thing I've ever seen."
   Welcome to VideoPlace, where video cameras, computers and
TV screens combine to create an artificial world in which
people can work and play with realistic computer animations.
VideoPlace is the system created by Myron W. Krueger, a
49-year-old computer scientist with a taste for performance
art. For nearly a quarter-century, Mr. Krueger has
entertained both artists and scientists with demonstrations
of what he calls artificial reality -- "a graphic fantasy
world in which a person uses her whole body to participate in
an experience created by the computer."
   The experience is achieved either by donning electronic
clothing that feeds sounds and images to the senses or by
entering spaces that are specially outfitted with cameras,
displays and computers. When properly programmed -- and when
the computers are constantly updated with fresh information
-- these systems produce the illusion of actual situations.
   A recent Krueger demonstration of VideoPlace was at the
prestigious Association of Computing Machinery's annual
graphics meeting here. But he's just as likely to turn up at
a gathering of artists. In the early '70s, he first showed
examples of VideoPlace in art galleries, where patrons were
asked to stand before video cameras and "touch" the video
images of other people. The reaction astonished participants,
including Mr. Krueger, who himself felt a wonderful tingle
when he initially embraced a friend electronically.
   The encounter, which occurred several years before the
advent of video games and personal computers, sent Mr.
Krueger on a quest to discover novel ways of blending
computers and performance, entertainment and education, work
and play.
   "I wanted to do great art, great science and great
business -- all in one," he recalls.
   At bottom, he hoped to make computers fun. That didn't sit
well with the computer establishment, which mistrusted Mr.
Krueger even though he holds a doctorate in computer science.
To the digital priesthood, computers in those days weren't
pleasure machines but super-calculators, imposing monoliths
that filled rooms and required dozens of attendants. Created
out of the crucible of the Second World War, computers were
first used to figure the trajectory of gunfire, crack enemy
codes and help in the construction of atomic bombs. By the
late 1960s, computers had gone civilian, but they still
seemed menacing, what with talk about how these machines
would "obsolete" many jobs and someday outwit man himself.
   Mr. Krueger was an unlikely rebel against the computer
establishment. His father was an executive of International
Businss Machines Corp., the world's largest computer maker
and the epitome of "square" in the experimental 1960s. A
graduate of Dartmouth, Mr. Krueger had prep-school manners
and dressed as though he had stepped out of an L.L. Bean
catalog. After a stint in the Army, where he managed a
computer network that left his superiors thoroughly
intimidated, he enrolled in the University of Wisconsin,
determined to change the image of computers.
   "People were afraid of computers," Mr. Krueger remembers.
"I was reacting against that. I wanted to tell people
computers could be different. I thought {I could prove that
to people} if I could just give them a five-minute experience
that left them with a warm feeling with computers."
   But how? The answer was interactivity. Why not play with
computers? The notion appealed to Mr. Krueger, who believed
artists should embrace new media rather than ignore technical
changes. He learned of work by Ivan Sutherland, Douglas
Englebart and J.C. Licklider, who separately showed how
computers, while great number crunchers, could also create
images, which could in turn be used as a means of control and
communication.
   These researchers built systems around terminals,
keyboards, pointing devices and even tiny TV screens built
into eyeglasses. Mr. Krueger preferred a different
"interface" -- the body's own movements, as recorded by a
camera hooked into a computer that was programmed to respond
in prescribed ways to images.
   Mr. Krueger thought it crucial to put the body at the
center of computing; otherwise, ordinary people would find
computers sterile. He recalls: "If you're going to use a
computer all day, every day -- which I foresaw in the 1960s
-- you get a lousy computer interface, you get a lousy life.
So making it pleasant, making it comfortable, was how to do
it."
   Mr. Krueger's basic insight, on which he has elaborated in
two books on artificial reality, hit many researchers like a
lightning bolt. "He's a hero of mine," says Randall Walser,
who heads an artificial-reality project at Autodesk Inc., a
software company. "His {first} book was a tremendous
influence on me. It changed my head around."
   Most important, Mr. Krueger's work convinced a vanguard of
designers that the keyboard and the pointing device weren't
the only ways of controlling computers. VideoPlace "is such a
stunningly simple idea: using your hands themselves to do
stuff," says Brenda Laurel, a researcher in Menlo Park,
Calif. "You can't ignore the power of direct manipulation."
   And the hands are only a beginning. "Arms, feet, legs --
any part of the body will do," says John Vincent John, an
exponent of Mr. Krueger's version of artificial reality. "The
idea is to place a person in an animation and allow them to
interact with it."
   Mr. John, a musician, initially combined video cameras and
a personal computer to enhance his own performances in the
mid-1980s. Later, his company, Vivid Group in Toronto,
developed programs that enabled participants to stand before
a camera and see (and hear) themselves performing on
imaginary instruments that appeared on the screen. As they
moved their hands, the participants could see (and hear) the
instruments respond to the image of their hands on the
screen.
   Recently, museums, theme parks and even some corporations
have installed systems. Vivid Group devised for B.F. Goodrich
an imaginary tour through the tire maker's history. A viewer,
standing before a video camera, could see, for example, an
assembly line on a computer screen and by maneuvering his
hand watch himself on the screen pluck a tire from the line.
   Despite growing appreciation for artificial reality, Mr.
Krueger has yet to profit much from it. "Somewhere along the
line," he quips, "I got vaccinated against money."
   Mr. Krueger, who lives in Storrs, Conn., earns a meager
living from a grab bag of consulting jobs and an occasional
philanthropic grant. He has never received lavish support
from any corporation, despite frequent nibbles, and blames
his relative neglect on the shortsightedness of U.S.
industry.
   "We don't do research until the last possible minute," he
says. "By the time we get the results, it's too late, the
technology is obsolete."
   Mr. Krueger's criticisms smack of sour grapes, but
colleagues insist he deserves a patient patron. "He needs
financial help because he doesn't fall into any neat
category," says Wallace Bowley, a professor of mechanical
engineering at the University of Connecticut. "He's in
between two giant things: art and engineering. But he moves
quite well in both worlds."
   An itinerant intellectual, Mr. Krueger is said by friends
to lack the instincts of an entrepreneur. Sometimes, he can
be his own worst enemy.
   "I describe {him} as a majority of one," says childhood
friend John Carroll, a telecommunications executive. Mr.
Carroll adds: "Somebody can have their foot on his throat,
and he'll still maintain his independence of thought. He may
do that to a fault."
   Indeed, Mr. Krueger's commercial prospects seem to be
fading. The concept of artificial reality is catching on
today, and dozens of companies, both in the U.S. and abroad,
are investigating how to put the technology to use in
everything from entertainment to medicine to product design.
But the most prominent researchers are pursuing an approach
that differs greatly from Mr. Krueger's.
   Whereas he espouses a "come as you are" philosophy, rivals
assert that it is easier to create lifelike simulations by
outfitting people with electronic gloves, data suits and
head-mounted displays. When tethered to a high-powered
computer, suitably attired people can wander in a synthesized
world that's been dubbed "cyberspace" by the faithful.
   The debate is lively. Mr. Krueger is scoring big points
with his complaint that artificial-reality hardware is too
slow. "If it isn't fast, it isn't real," he says. He also
complains that the digital wardrobe is too much of a hassle
to wear, adding: "The pressure on the technology is to make
it unencumbering."
   People are listening. "The whole point of Myron's work is
that you may go somewhere {electronically} but you don't put
gear on," says S. Joy Mountford, a researcher at Apple
Computer Inc.'s Advanced Technology Group. "I'm not terribly
excited about putting on goggles and gloves."
   Still, nearly all the money spent on research in
artificial reality is earmarked for futuristic hardware. In
the U.S., the most ambitious research is being done at the
University of North Carolina, but the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration, the University of Washington and
several private concerns, most notably VPL Research Inc. of
Redwood City, Calif., also are active in the field. The
expectation is that over time, goggles broadcasting
TV-quality pictures will weigh little more than ordinary
eyeglasses. Mr. Krueger himself thinks that someday TV
screens the size of contact lenses will be laid right on a
person's eyes, piping stereo images that create the illusion
for the individual that he or she is in a motion picture.
   Some big companies are betting on such advances. Boeing
Co., for instance, is considering designing future airplanes
with the help of artificial-reality tools; these would allow,
say, pilots to roam the cockpit of a new jet before the
design itself was set. Artificial reality could transform
retailing, too. In Tokyo, a Matsushita Electric Industrial
Co. subsidiary gives customers the chance to visualize the
kitchen of their dreams by strapping on gloves and goggles --
and building their dream kitchen with their own hands, out of
modules programmed into the computer.
   "A lot of work still has to be done to find good
applications," says Robert J. Schultz, a researcher in
artificial intelligence for Matsushita in Osaka, Japan.
"Right now, {artificial reality} is an answer looking for a
question that hasn't been asked yet."
   And Mr. Krueger may be just the one to ask it. He has a
knack for cooking up fresh uses of technology, and the
courage to promote them. He's convinced, for instance, that
many buildings ought to double as electronic signs so that
their visual appearance can change frequently.
   "That's where signs are going," he says. "The whole
building will be an electronic screen. A building in Las
Vegas could look like a slot machine. This is not a gimmick,
it's a world-class image."
   Last November, a group of perfume makers called on Mr.
Krueger for advice. He told them to consider the techniques
needed to create fragrances that change with emotions. Or
what about a corporate scent? "Everyone at IBM could smell
the same way," he suggests.
   Another Krueger original: creating giant light sculptures
at airports that can be viewed only from the sky. Two months
ago, he proposed a five-mile-long light display to the
stewards of Munich's airport. They mulled it over, then said
no thanks.
   The rejection didn't faze Mr. Krueger, who considered the
snub par for the course. "Whenever a company starts talking
to me about a job, their stock goes down," he says, adding:
"My future is always in doubt."
   ---
   Mr. Zachary is a staff reporter in The Wall Street
Journal's San Francisco bureau.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
