ID: 210	RANK: 62	SCORE: 5.575475
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP881010-0230 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-10-10-88 0612EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>a a BC-SPE--HomeElectronics:1staddPersonalComputers     10-10
0654</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-SPE--Home Electronics: 1st add Personal Computers,0660</SECOND>
<HEAD>BC-SPECIAL EDITION</HEAD>
<HEAD>Home Electronics: 1st add Personal Computers</HEAD>
<HEAD>UNDATED: earlier time.</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   That processing power increase is matched by new developments in
the technology of storing and retrieving information. CD-ROMS
(compact disk-read only memory) use lasers to encode and read
millions of characters of information in tiny pits on the surface
of a disk easily able to fit into a coat pocket. First popularized
as digital recording of music that wouldn't deteriorate with
multiple plays, CD-ROM technology can bring in-the-home access to
billions of characters of information. A single disk can hold more
than 500 million characters and reference-work disks are already
being published, including Grolier's Encyclopedia.
   A system that would allow you to store that many characters of
information and change any of it at will (read-write) has yet to
hit the marketplace, although at least one manufacturer, Tandy, has
announced plans. But even at the read-only level, the ability to
pack so much information in such a small space holds spectacular
promise. Teaching and entertainment programs that package realistic
video, sound and computer-aided interaction are possible on a level
formerly reserved for science fiction when the information that
would require a hand-truck load of bound books may fit comfortably
in pocket or purse.
   With the ability to store information escalating, the ability to
search it must keep pace and the developments in hypertext software
may do that. As an idea, hypertext dates back to World War II and
the term itself was coined more than 20 years ago, but this is data
base software with a difference: it allows you to search for things
in the same way scientists think you think, by association.
   Most data bases are sequential and organized according to some
artificial and fixed hierarchy, perhaps the alphabet or a number
system. A hypertext data base is different. Topics are linked by
association so that an examination of the topic ``apple'' could
flow into an examination of either ``tree'' or ``fruit'' or
``computer'' or ``orchards'' or ``cider,'' depending upon what you
wanted to know and what questions that prompted.
   A hypertext system, Hypercard, is already included with Mac
Plus, II and SE computers from Apple and other software is
available for MS-DOS machines.
   Finally, there is the beginning of something dubbed
``interconnectivity,'' defined as the ability to get different
machines from different mediums to work together and exchange
information. When you receive a facsimile transmission via the
telephone network on the facsimile board of your personal computer
and use OCR (optical character recognition) software and-or a
scanner to convert it into a digital form and then print the result
out on either a printer or a plotter while storing the information
on a magnetic disk, that's interconnectivity.
   Interconnectivity is also cellular telephones, and MIDI (musical
instrument digital interface) and the smart photocopy machines
called laser printers being used for desktop publishing. It's the
images scanned from a video camera and run through graphics
software to produce everything from T-shirts to art.
   Interconnectivity is also the beginning of order from the
often-chaotic marketplace, with the emergence of ``standards'' that
cut across more than one manufacturer's product line. Although
still in its infancy, interconnectivity should bring to gadgetry
what the interstate highway network brought to personal travel _
ease, speed and convenience in moving people, things and ideas
across borders.
   Of course, none of the above may happen. It may be back to quill
pens, parchment and candlelight, since there isn't a surefire way
to predict the future of anything as complicated as the application
of society's technologies to individual lives. But if we continue
in the directions that seem to be now the course, cornering the
goose-feather market for the next several years is probably not a
great investment.
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   _greater than
   (Larry Blasko writes ``CompuBug,'' a computer column, for the
Associated Press. He is the author of a soon-to-be published book,
``ABCs of Computers.'')
</TEXT>
</DOC>
