ID: 210	RANK: 82	SCORE: 5.314100
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910826-0038
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910826-0038.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   OTC Focus:
   Time May Be Right to Swap Big Names for No-Names
   ----
   By Anne Newman
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
08/26/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C1
</SO>
<CO>
   MNTX CNTX VALM SREG
</CO>
<IN>
STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
STOCK INDEXES (NDX)
OTC GENERAL MARKET COMMENT (OTC)
U.S. STOCK MARKET STATISTICS (STT)
</IN>
<NS>
STOCK &amp; OTHER MARKET NEWS (STK)
</NS>
<RE>
UNITED STATES (US)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
</RE>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- As over-the-counter stocks push to new highs,
some analysts are saying it's time to pare holdings in the
big OTC names you recognize such as Microsoft and Amgen and
to prowl among lesser-known stocks.
   Last week's bungled Soviet coup sparked a fleeting plunge
in the Nasdaq Composite Index followed by a powerful surge in
the small-stock benchmark to three successive new highs. The
rally may not be as strong as it seems, cautions Christine
Callies, a Boston-based technical analyst for Cowen &amp; Co. In
her view, even long-term investors who buy high-flying OTC
leaders at these levels could be in trouble.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "It could be quite hazardous if you buy and hold shares
when the market is overbought," says Ms. Callies, using a
term coined by technical analysts to mean that stocks are
pricey. "With that as a caveat," she adds, "I'd say that
(smaller) stocks can be used to improve the performance of a
portfolio, provided they are bought when they are down."
   A growing number of public and private pension funds
indeed are spicing up their portfolios by putting a slice of
their huge investments into small stocks -- and their buying
bodes well for a long-term rally in the group. Goodyear Tire
&amp; Rubber Co., for example, recently searched for a manager of
$50 million in small stocks; the Louisiana Employees'
Retirement System is looking to invest $75 million in smaller
shares, and the Iowa Police System plans to bet $50 million
on small stocks.
   But there are two clues, asserts Ms. Callies, that this
summer's small-stock rally is tiring. It has been led by the
Nasdaq 100, the 100 largest non-financial OTC stocks. That's
a sign that investors who expect a rise in OTC stocks dared
to tread only among big issues they could sell on quick
notice.
   The breadth of the rally also is narrowing, she adds.
Monday, when word of the coup sparked a 2.9% plunge in the
Composite Index, declining stocks swamped advancers, 6-to-1.
Wednesday, when the coup failed and the index rebounded 3.2%
to a record high, advancing stocks outweighed decliners by
less than 4-to-1. And their advantage has been narrowing
since.
   Small-stock investors, such as Rich Filippone of Piper
Jaffray Capital Management Inc. in Minneapolis, aren't afraid
to reduce holdings in highfliers. Mr. Filippone recently sold
about one-third of his holdings in SciMed Life Systems, a
Maple Grove, Minn., maker of medical devices whose shares
have more than quadrupled since September, and Buffets Inc.,
a Minneapolis restaurant operator that has nearly tripled
since October.
   Mr. Filippone and his colleague John Pauer have steered
the $50 million Piper Jaffray Emerging Growth Fund to a 42%
rise this year. They look for companies whose earnings are
growing at 25% a year or more -- far faster than the
companies in Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index. They also
prefer companies with little debt that are dominant in their
markets and make products that aren't sensitive to
recessions, such as Minntech, a Minneapolis maker of kidney
dialysis equipment and medical supplies.
   And they aren't shy about buying stocks that trade at more
than 25 times expected earnings for the following year -- if
they're convinced the earnings growth can be sustained. "If
we expect a company to grow 25% a year for the next few
years, it deserves a multiple at 25 or above," says Mr.
Filippone. But once the multiple reaches more than 1.5 times
a company's expected growth rate, "then we pull back," he
adds.
   They also look for companies that reduce the cost of
business of other companies, such as Centex Telemanagement, a
San Francisco manager of telecommunications equipment and
usage. At Friday's close of 14 3/4, Centex trades at 23 times
estimated 1991 earnings of 64 cents a share and nearly 18
times expected 1992 earnings of 84 cents -- below its
expected growth rate of 31%.
   Taking a different approach to small-stock investing is
Ken Fisher, president of Fisher Investments Inc. of Woodside,
Calif. As a so-called "value" investor, Mr. Fisher looks for
the shares of promising companies that trade near their book
values, at relatively low multiples of earnings and at
discounts compared with the highfliers. (The recent highs of
Nasdaq's big stocks signal to Mr. Fisher that so-called
growth stocks are getting pricey.)
   There are plenty of interesting, reasonably priced shares
to chose from, Mr. Fisher says. Valmont Industries, for
example, is a Valley, Neb., company with an unusual mix of
businesses -- it makes irrigation systems, but also sells
microcomputers -- that he says has kept Wall Street wary of
the stock. At Friday's close of 14 3/4, Valmont sells at just
1.5 times its book value, 13 times estimated 1991 earnings of
$1.10 a share provided by First Call, a unit of Thomson
Financial Networks, and nine times expected 1992 earnings of
$1.60 a share -- just the multiples that attract Mr. Fisher.
   Standard Register, a Dayton, Ohio, maker of paper forms,
is another overlooked company, he adds. "Nobody likes forms
-- they think they'll get wiped out by computers," Mr. Fisher
says, "but paper doesn't go away." He expects cost-cutting
measures to boost the company's lagging earnings, which
recently disappointed analysts. At Friday's close of 14 1/8,
Standard Register sells at 1.3 times book value, 13 times
estimated 1991 earnings of $1.06 a share and 11.5 times
expected 1992 earnings of $1.22 a share.
   ---
   Friday's Market Activity
                                                                                                       

   Over-the-counter stocks jumped to another closing high
amid signs of surprising strength in the economy.
   The Nasdaq Composite Index climbed 2.76 to 521.06, a 0.53%
gain, spurred on by a report that factory orders of durable
goods jumped a surprising 10.7% in July. Advancing stocks
outweighed decliners, 1,089 to 850, as National Market System
volume climbed to 123.3 million shares from 118.7 million
Thursday.
   Despite the day's rise, the most active OTC stocks were
mixed as some investors cashed in profits from some recent
gainers: Apple Computer fell 1 1/4 to 53, Dell Computer eased
7/8 to 34 3/8 and Charming Shoppes fell 1 7/8 to 22 1/4.
Intel, however, rose 1/4 to 50 1/4, Sun Microsystems climbed
7/8 to 33, Tele-Communications Class A shares added 3/8 to 13
5/8 and U.S. Healthcare gained 3/8 to 31.
   Vans, a newly public maker of tennis shoes, was the day's
most active OTC issue after an offering of 4.1 million shares
at $14 apiece. Vans closed at 15 on more than 4.4 million
shares.
   Microsoft jumped 1 1/4 to 85 1/4 after the Software
Publishers Association, a Washington, D.C., trade group,
reported that sales of Microsoft's Windows software more than
tripled in the second quarter.
   Medstat Systems, an Ann Arbor, Mich., provider of software
systems that help control medical costs, surged 4 to 37 1/2.
The stock was favorably profiled Friday as Investor's Daily
"Stock of the Week," after the company's announcement Monday
of a long-term contract to license data management software
to Prudential Insurance Co. of America.
   Synergen jumped 3 7/8 to 48 7/8 after a Business Week
article cited favorable expectations concerning the company's
drug products.
   After a one-point drop Thursday, Mentor Graphics rebounded
3/4 to 12 3/4. The Wilsonville, Ore., maker of computer-aided
design products announced a 15% cut in its work force and
said that it will take a "significant" charge in the third
quarter for restructuring costs.
   Puritan-Bennett gained 1 to 29 3/4. Thursday, the Overland
Park, Kan., medical products concern said that it received
clearance from the Food and Drug Administration to market a
system that monitors blood gases.
   Bioplasty, on the other hand, fell 1 3/8 to 6 3/8. The FDA
said it didn't have enough information to review data about
the safety and effectiveness for three types of silicon
breast implants -- including one that Bioplasty already
sells. The product accounted for about 24% of the St. Paul,
Minn., company's revenue in the most recent fiscal quarter.
The FDA accepted for further review applications by Bioplasty
for two other products.
   Williams-Sonoma shed 1 to 21 1/2. The San Francisco
retailer of home furnishings and cooking equipment reported a
second-quarter loss of three cents a share, compared with net
income of five cents a year earlier. Analysts had expected
the company to report a small profit.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
