ID: 210	RANK: 87	SCORE: 5.236452
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910611-0010
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910611-0010.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Rare-Coin Peddlers Are Losing
   A Survey Some Used for Scams
   ----
   By Elyse Tanouye
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
06/11/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C1
</SO>
<CO>
   SB
</CO>
<MS>
FINANCIAL (FIN)
</MS>
<IN>
DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, CREDIT INSTITUTIONS (FIS)
SECURITIES (SCR)
</IN>
<GV>
FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION (FTC)
</GV>
<RE>
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA (DC)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Bowing to pressure from the Federal Trade Commission,
Salomon Brothers dropped rare U.S. coins from its annual
investment survey.
   The Salomon survey has long been "the darling of
telemarketers," who use it to dupe unwary investors, says
Barry J. Cutler, director of the FTC's bureau of consumer
protection. These high-pressure telephone sales operations
trumpet Salomon's high ranking of coins, which have been the
No. 1 long-term investment since the early 1980s.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Last year's survey showed rare coins gaining value by an
average 17.3% annually over the previous 20 years, beating
second-ranked Chinese ceramics by nearly three percentage
points.
   "In virtually every case of boiler-room telemarketing of
coins, the Salomon Brothers report is a key part of the
marketing approach," says Mr. Cutler, who estimates
fraudulent telemarketers generate more than $100 million a
year in coin sales. "We're concerned when we get older people
investing $10,000 in coins to diversify," he says. "Many are
lucky to see 10 cents on the dollar" when they try to sell
their coins.
   The 20 coins in Salomon's index are truly rare
collectibles, some worth tens of thousands of dollars each.
But telemarketers use the survey to mislead people into
investing in lesser-quality coins, Mr. Cutler says.
   "It's like showing the performance characteristics of a
Porsche to sell a much less expensive car," says Donald
Doyle, chief executive officer of James U. Blanchard &amp; Co., a
New Orleans coin dealer.
   The Salomon Brothers report was mentioned both in the
telephone sales pitch and brochures that Eugene C. Wiehe of
Torrance, Calif., received in October 1987. Over the next few
months, he paid a Beverly Hills-based operation $50,000 for
coins and suspected nothing was amiss until he received a
call from the FTC. The commission alerted him to a potential
problem and had two appraisers look at his coins, which they
estimated were worth less than $2,000.
   In the most recent report, Salomon acknowledges that "some
misrepresentations and confusion about coins in general" were
behind its decision to eliminate the coins from the survey.
Stamps were substituted.
   Mr. Cutler said late yesterday he was pleased that Salomon
dropped coins from its report. "While we never claimed they
were doing anything wrong, we are pleased that {Salomon}
responded to our calls to help stop telemarketers from
abusing the survey," he said.
   But telephone pitchmen might still keep citing past
Salomon surveys to hawk coins, says Russell Damtoft,
assistant to the FTC director. And, the current survey may
open up new opportunities for the boiler rooms.
   "I'll bet we'll start seeing telemarketers selling stamps
now," Mr. Damtoft says. That has happened in the past:
telemarketers hawked diamonds when they ranked high in the
Salomon survey, but switched to coins when they rose to the
top spots of the Salomon rankings in the early 1980s, FTC
officials say.
   Telephone pitchmen will seize on anything to help them
make a sale. This year, some of them mentioned a table
published in January by The Wall Street Journal that, because
of a typographical error, showed coins gaining 20.6% in value
last year instead of falling 20.6%. The Journal ran a
correction on the error, but of course it isn't mentioned in
the sales chatter.
   Only truly scarce and rare coins make money as
investments, says Scott A. Travers, a New York coin dealer
and author of coin investing books. The common, generic coins
that telemarketers sell have plummeted in value in recent
years, he says.
   For example, Mr. Travers says, common varieties of the
Morgan silver dollar have fallen to $130 wholesale from $555
in mid-1989, while telephone pitchmen were charging as much
as $1,200 in 1989 and $600 more recently. The Morgan dollar
is named, as are many coins, after its designer, George T.
Morgan.
   The FTC has gone after 14 telemarketers selling coins
since 1986 and has won injunctions against each to stop
misrepresenting the coins they sell. Other investigations are
under way, says Mr. Cutler of the FTC.
   The International Council of Tangible Assets in Washington
is considering issuing a brochure to warn consumers about
fraudulent sales practices. Blanchard &amp; Co. already offers "A
Consumer's Guide to Coin Investment," produced with the U.S.
Postal Service and Consumer Information Center. A brochure
produced by the FTC and the American Numismatic Association
is also available from either the agency or the trade group.
   Mr. Wiehe, the California investor, is unusual because his
story has a happy ending. Shortly after he learned he had
been conned, Mr. Wiehe told the company he needed cash
quickly and demanded that it buy back the coins, as they had
guaranteed to do. After three weeks of hounding the company,
he received most of his money back.
   Another investor in Gardena, Calif., however, wasn't so
lucky, Mr. Wiehe says. Shortly after he received his refund,
Mr. Wiehe received a call from the Gardena investor, who paid
the same company $30,000 for coins that were identical to the
ones Mr. Wiehe had returned. That investor lost his
investment after the company closed down, Mr. Wiehe says.
   (See related story: "Wisdom of Salomon for Coming Year:
`Stocks Are Hot, Collectibles Are Not'" -- WSJ June 11, 1991)
</TEXT>
</DOC>
