ID: 245	RANK: 19	SCORE: 8.001210
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910103-0138
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910103-0138.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   TV: A Chicken Hawk, a Dead Anchor, a Raffish Outlaw
   ----
   By Dorothy Rabinowitz
</HL>
<DATE>
01/03/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A7
</SO>
<LP>
   Sunday, Jan. 6, 9-10 p.m. EST, on PBS (PBS air dates and
times vary so check local listings): "A Room of One's Own."
This "Masterpiece Theatre" portrayal stars Eileen Atkins in a
dramatic monologue based on Virginia Woolf's famous 1928
lecture. Her subject and complaint about the status of the
woman writer may sound familiar. It need hardly be said,
however, that in its intellectual force and spirit, to say
nothing of its wit, it bears small resemblance to what is
known today as feminist writing. Neither does Ms. Atkins bear
any resemblance to Woolf, a delicately beautiful woman whose
public manner was far from assertive.
   Host Alistair Cooke suggests that Ms. Atkins delivers the
monologue with a verve and humor that would have been beyond
the power of the author. Doubtless true, though it is also
clear that the battle-ax rant that keeps creeping into Ms.
Atkin's tone also undermines that humor. Still, Woolf's
wicked wit finds its way, in her description of the
experience of being refused admittance to the Cambridge
library -- where ladies were not admitted except by special
permission -- as in much else here.
                                                                                                       

</LP>
<TEXT>
   Sunday, Jan. 6, 9-11 p.m. EST, on CBS: "Bump in the
Night." The portrait here, of a college professor who slavers
over beautiful little boys, is not going to cheer the man-boy
love advocates. In this rather more than usually detailed-for
TV-view of a chicken hawk, the street name for predatory
pederasts, Christopher Reeves (the passionate professor)
plays the role with just enough ambiguity to keep things
interesting. Corey Carrier portrays an eight-year-old pawn in
a child-pornography scam that ends up delivering him into the
hands of his would-be seducer. The soundest and most
authentic aspect of the plot deals with the drinking-buddy
relationship between the boy's frantic mother and a
dipsomaniac neighbor, artfully played by Shirley Knight. Its
absurdities aside -- and they are numerous -- the movie
manages to be thoroughly engrossing, right up to its obvious,
inevitable and entirely incredible end.
                                                                                                       

   Sunday, Jan. 6, 9-11 p.m. EST, on NBC: "Perry Mason: The
Case of the Ruthless Reporter." Television journalists are
having a big season in TV drama, as we didn't need this Perry
Mason movie to tell us. One does need to be either a Mason
(Raymond Burr) fan or an addict of stories involving TV
journalists to hang on to the end of this wooden twaddle
about a murdered anchorman and the host of suspects who had
cause to kill him -- his entire news staff, that is.
   It seems the anchor has enraged the staff by writing a
memo denigrating the value and talent of everyone on the
show. The real-life inspiration for this plot line
undoubtedly will not escape Bryant Gumbel, author of a
similar memo about his colleagues on "Today."
                                                                                                       

   Sunday, Jan. 6, 9-11 p.m. EST, on ABC: "Dillinger." John
Dillinger, bank robber and scourge of the FBI in the '30s,
was, if this film is to be believed, a man of parts: lover,
raffish gent-about-town, philosopher and loyal comrade. Mark
Harmon gives a first-rate performance as the unknowable
outlaw, given to menacing silences even in the midst of his
sexual adventures, a lot of which are here, luridly detailed.
                                                                                                       

   Monday, Jan. 7, 9-10 p.m. EST, on PBS: "After the Crash."
This chapter of "The American Experience" series deals with
the early depression years, when farmers starved and unrest
threatened. A huge army of World War I veterans descended on
Washington to demand the bonus the government had promised
they would be paid. It was the beginning of the shantytowns
called Hoovervilles, named after the president. Hoover, who
did not believe in direct aid, advised the needy multitudes
of his belief that "adversity would deepen the spiritual life
of the people." The footage is harrowing, the history
haunting.
                                                                                                       

   Wednesday, Jan. 9, 8-9 p.m. EST, on PBS: "Cats: Caressing
the Tiger." The title comes from the saying, "God made the
cat that man might have the pleasure of caressing the tiger."
The footage of the real tigers shown here suggests that
pleasure may be a dubious one. This new National Geographic
Special provides much lore about cat history, cat physiology,
cat whiskers, cat psychology, and, not least, the
similarities between the domestic cat and its jungle
relatives. The film also explains why cats who fall a short
distance are hurt more severely than those that fall from
greater heights. This otherwise excellent documentary does
get derailed for a time when it focuses on a Long Island cat
breeder, on screen for a dog's age, who lugs her cats around
to visit sick people while effervescing about the good this
accomplishes.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
