ID: 245	RANK: 59	SCORE: 7.374938
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880412-0037 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-04-12-88 0140EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>b a AM-Oscars 15thLd-Writethru a0475 04-12 1064</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Oscars, 15th Ld - Writethru, a0475,1085</SECOND>
<HEAD>URGENT</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: New quotes, details to dash; combines; this should stand for
AMs.</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos LA10, LAA1,2,4,5,6,7,8,11,12,18, Others Upcoming</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By BOB THOMAS</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>LOS ANGELES (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Cher won the Oscar as best actress Monday
night for her role as a widow who discovers love in ``Moonstruck,''
while ``The Last Emperor,'' a tragic epic of modern China, became
the most-honored film in 26 years with nine awards, including best
picture.
   Michael Douglas was named best actor at the 60th Academy Awards
for his portrayal of a ruthless inside trader in ``Wall Street.''
   Best supporting performers were Olympia Dukakis, as Cher's
outspoken Italian mother coping with a wayward husband in
``Moonstruck,'' and Sean Connery, the hard-fisted, incorruptible
Chicago beat cop in ``The Untouchables.''
   ``When I was a little girl, my mother said, `I really want you
to be something,''' Cher told the cheering crowd at the Shrine
Auditorium. ``... I don't think this means I am somebody, but I
guess I am on my way.'' The actress, known for outlandish fashions
as well as talent, wore a see-through sequined dress that was
somewhat less revealing than her notorious headdress outfit of two
years ago.
   ``Emperor,'' the sweeping story of China's last imperial ruler,
won in all nine categories for which it was nominated by the
Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences: best film, best
director for Bernardo Bertolucci, screenplay adaptation, costumes,
original score, art direction, cinematography, sound and editing.
   That gave it more Oscars than any movie since ``West Side
Story'' took home 10 in 1962. ``Ben-Hur'' holds the record for 11
in 1960. In the 1959 awards, the musical ``Gigi'' also swept nine
Oscars out of nine nominations.
   It was a night of few surprises but some awkwardness, with the
shadow of a strike by movie and TV writers falling heavily on the
proceedings. There were numerous references, some joking, some
serious, to the labor dispute, and on several occasions performers
appeared to stumble over their remarks.
   Douglas, who also starred in last year's box-office smash
``Fatal Attraction,'' thanked his father, actor Kirk Douglas, ``for
helping a son step out from his shadow.''
   Douglas' award was presented by Marlee Matlin, a deaf actress
who won last year's Oscar. She has been taking speech lessons, and
after signing her opening remarks she haltingly named all the
nominees to prolonged cheers.
   The actress category had sparked the most interest this year,
with Cher drawing strong competition from Glenn Close in ``Fatal
Attraction'' and Sally Kirkland in ``Anna.'' Also nominated were
Holly Hunter for ``Broadcast News'' and two-time winner Meryl
Streep for ``Ironweed.''
   John Patrick Shanley's script for ``Moonstruck'' won for best
original screenplay, making that film a distant runner-up to
``Emperor'' with three Oscars. Denmark's ``Babette's Feast'' was
best foreign film.
   ``As an Italian, a European, the Academy Awards always seemed
like a distant ceremony: Distant, remote, something I did not
belong to,'' Bertolucci told the audience. He was introduced by
Robin Williams, who jokingly said the academy was offering this
year's winner a ``green card,'' a reference to the fact that none
of the five director nominees was American.
   ``OK, Michael, let's go!'' a jubilant Miss Dukakis whooped after
accepting the gold statuette. The reference was to her cousin,
Massachusetts Gov. Michael S. Dukakis, who is seeking the
Democratic nomination for president.
   Connery, Hollywood's original James Bond, addressed his
acceptance to ``Ladies and gentlemen, friends, a few enemies,'' and
put in a fervent plea for an end to the writers' strike.
   The best original movie song of 1987 was ``The Time of My Life''
from ``Dirty Dancing.''
   The first prize of the night, for best visual effects, went to
``Innerspace,'' a Steven Spielberg-produced fantasy about a test
pilot reduced to microscopic size and accidentally injected into
the body of a grocery clerk.
   The award for best animated short film went to ``The Man Who
Planted Trees.'' ``Young at Heart'' was best documentary short
subject and ``The Ten-Year Lunch: The Wit and Wisdom of the
Algonquin Roundtable'' was best documentary feature. Best live
action short film was ``Ray's Male Heterosexual Dance Hall.'' The
award for makeup went to ``Harry and the Hendersons.''
   More than 1,000 movie fans had packed bleachers hours in advance
to cheer celebrities arriving for the ceremonies, which were
broadcast live by ABC-TV with Chevy Chase as host.
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   The move from the Music Center to the Shrine meant far more
limousines than usual pulling up before the six 24-foot Oscars
guarding the auditorium entrance.
   ``Last year at the Music Center we had 3,000 people,'' said
Samuel Goldwyn Jr., producer of the Oscar show for the second year.
``This year we have 6,000.''
   But apparently there wasn't enough room for the Oscarcast
orcestra at the cavernous Shrine. The musicians were housed on a
sound stage five miles away in Hollywood and would offer their
``live'' fanfares and movie themes via phone lines to giant
speakers in the auditorium.
   Producer Goldwyn faced a special problem this year: the strike
by the Writers Guild of America against the motion picture and
television producers. Much of the script had been written before
the strike was called, but the guild refused to grant a waiver for
the work to be completed. The Guild had also warned that
non-members who write for the show might face rejection if they
ever wanted to join the WGA.
   The 60th awards marked a first in press coverage: the U.S.S.R.
was represented. Photographer Nikolai Gnisyuk of the Soviet Screen
magazine (circulation: 2 million) was accredited to join the mass
of media backstage.
   ``We journalists and photographers in the Soviet Union are
amazed that such a fuss is made over these awards,'' said Gnisyuk
before the ceremonies. ``That is, we understand the importance of
the awards to the industry, but all this mania is just incredible.
It's as if someone were running for national election.''
   One major award was already known: Billy Wilder for the Irving
G. Thalberg award for consistent quality of production. Wilder has
already received six Oscars for his work as writer, director and
producer, his films including ``The Lost Weekend,'' ``Sunset
Boulevard,'' ``Some Like It Hot'' and ``The Apartment.''
   Unlike Alfred Hitchcock, John Ford and other filmmakers with
distinctive styles, Wilder's films don't easily fit a pattern.
``I'm just a storyteller,'' Wilder once remarked. ``Technique is
secondary to me.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
