ID: 245	RANK: 73	SCORE: 7.240882
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900413-0205 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-04-13-90 1331EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>a e AM-APArts:Authors-Films Adv19   04-13 1106</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-AP Arts: Authors-Films, Adv 19,1140</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv19</NOTE>
<NOTE>For Release Thursday AMs, April 19, and Thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>Lost in Translation: Hollywood Butchers Books</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By HILLEL ITALIE</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>NEW YORK (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Margaret Atwood figures a really faithful
adaptation of her book, ``The Handmaid's Tale,'' would run nearly
six hours.
   The author, however, is not complaining about the 109-minute
film now playing in theaters. She considers herself lucky, very
lucky. The plot varies only slightly from her best-selling story
about the Republic of Gilead, a country ruled by right-wing
fundamentalists who overthrew the United States.
   But many writers aren't quite as fortunate when Hollywood takes
their works and mounts them on screen. Something always manages to
get lost in the translation. Hollywood tends to butcher books.
   Many authors understand William Holden's quip in ``Sunset
Boulevard,'' in which he portrayed a luckless scriptwriter: ``The
last one I wrote was about Okies in the desert bowl. You'd never
know because, when it reached the screen, the whole thing played on
a torpedo boat.''
   Film is often stranger than fiction. By the time Bernard
Malamud's ``The Natural'' reached the screen in 1984, slugger Roy
Hobbs had magically reformed, turning down the bribe he accepted in
the book and hitting a game-winning home run that caused Hollywood
sparks to fly.
   The original ending of ``Wuthering Heights'' had Cathy and
Heathcliff dying, just like they did in Emily Bronte's novel. But
when a sneak preview was poorly received, producer Samuel Goldwyn
superimposed ghostly figures of the two lovers walking hand in hand
to heaven. The next preview was rewarded with a long ovation.
   In ``The Wizard of Oz,'' Dorothy's silver slippers become ruby
on the screen for the benefit of Technicolor. The 1933 film of Noel
Coward's play, ``Design for Living,'' was so drastically changed
that screenplay writer Ben Hecht boasted, ``There's only one line
of Coward's left in the picture _ see if you can find it.''
   Even titles are in danger. The 1979 film of Ann Beattie's novel,
``Chilly Scenes of Winter,'' was called ``Head Over Heels.''
According to Beattie, the producers thought the original name
sounded too serious, ``like an Ingmar Bergman film.''
   So Atwood feels grateful that her novel didn't get lost in the
translation, recalling that her reaction to the film was to
``breathe a sigh of relief.''
   She never imagined that a movie of her controversial book would
star such big-name actors as Robert Duvall and Faye Dunaway, have a
screenplay by the celebrated English playwright Harold Pinter and
attract a well-respected director such as Volker Schlondorff
(``Death of a Salesman,'' ``The Tin Drum'').
   ``I thought it would take a lot of guts for anybody to do it,''
Atwood said in a recent interview. ``But once given that nerve, I
could certainly see it visually and see it dramatically.''
   Bobbie Ann Mason is also among the grateful, although the film
of her popular novel, ``In Country,'' received mixed reviews. The
author was pleased that it stuck faithfully to her story of Sam
Hughes, a Kentucky teen-ager trying to learn more about her late
father.
   Mason was also glad that the movie didn't ``stereotype the
country folks.''
   ``I think the story and the characters came across very well,''
said Mason, who had high praise for stars Emily Lloyd and Bruce
Willis, and screenwriter Frank Pierson.
   ``I thought the actors did add something extra. Emily Lloyd
really brought across Sam's energy and I thought Bruce brought
(Sam's uncle) Emmett into a focus that I hadn't perceived.''
   But include Fay Weldon among the less grateful. The author would
rather not discuss ``She-Devil,'' which takes the sharp curves of
her darkly funny ``The Life and Loves of a She-Devil,'' and turns
them into flat, ineffective comedy.
   ``She-Devil'' retains the basic plot of the ugly housewife Ruth
wrecking the life of beautiful romance novelist Mary Fisher who's
run off with Ruth's husband, Bob. But that's about all the two
works have in common.
   In the book Ruth is a giant of a woman. Not in the movie; she's
played by the short, fat, compact Roseanne Barr. In the book, Ruth
spends years and millions of dollars having painful and
revolutionary surgery to make her face look like Mary's and to chop
bone from her thighs to make herself shorter. None of this happens
in the movie.
   In the book, Ruth commits several crimes and has several sexual
encounters after her husband runs off with Mary Fisher, including a
lesbian relationship. Not in the movie.
   The film was poorly received, especially compared to the
acclaimed British Broadcasting Co. miniseries run on PBS.
   ``I thought Meryl Streep was wonderful,'' was all Weldon would
say at first about ``She-Devil,'' which featured Streep as Mary
Fisher. But the author, seeking a way to ``phrase this tactfully,''
then discussed the problems of handing over creative control.
   ``If you sign an American contract, you go to the American
Embassy and you undertake to sell your rights to the story,''
Weldon said in a telephone interview from her home outside London.
``You also have to declare that you're in your right mind.
   ``I thought I would be able to look at it dispassionately, but I
found that I wasn't.''
   For Atwood, the real hero is producer Daniel Wilson, who has won
18 Emmys for his television specials, including five for the ABC
Afterschool Special, ``The Late Great Me: Story of a Teen-age
Alcoholic.''
   The author said she chose Wilson because he was passionate about
the book and that he would make sure the film had the proper feel.
   But Atwood had one major complaint.
   ``They did an outrageous poster in Germany which makes it look a
`men-in-a-raincoat' film, kind of soft porn. There's going to be a
lot of disappointed men in raincoats. It was really quite
astonishing. That's what I was trying to avoid,'' she said.
   Still, Atwood is eager to try it again. She recently finished
the script for her most recent novel, ``Cat's Eye,'' and says the
earlier works ``Bodily Harm'' and ``Life Before Man'' have been
optioned.
   Mason raved about the excitement of having ``In Country'' made
into a movie and has written a screenplay for the novel ``Spence
&plus;Lila.'' Weldon said that a film of her novel, ``Puffball,'' is
being considered and admitted that even the disappointment of
``She-Devil'' has not quite wiped the stars from her eyes.
   ``Yes, of course I would do it again,'' she insisted. ``Film's
much more fun. I think the whole process is amazing, and there is a
feeling on the set of major films that's like nowhere else.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Thursday AMs, April 19</NOTE>
</DOC>
