ID: 188	RANK: 45	SCORE: 16.085558
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911122-0108
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911122-0108.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Corporate Focus:
   Kimberly-Clark Bets, Wins on Innovation
   ---
   Huggies Pull-Ups Are
   Hallmark of Strategy
   ----
   By Alecia Swasy
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
11/22/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A5
</SO>
<CO>
   KMB
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
</MS>
<IN>
CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS AND SERVICES (HOU)
CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS (HPR)
CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)
</IN>
<NS>
CORPORATE PROFILES (PRO)
</NS>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
TEXAS (TX)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   NEENAH, Wis. -- Inside an old Ford dealer's garage here,
Kimberly-Clark Corp. scientists quietly worked on a top
secret project called Omega.
   They envisioned disposable training pants, a cross between
absorbable diapers and underwear, but kept running into
snags. Lumpy pulp and plastic can't be easily sewn into
garments, and the pants couldn't be churned out on high-speed
production lines. "I wasn't too excited about the project,"
says Wayne Sanders, former head of the diaper business and
now company president.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Mr. Sanders eventually scrapped Omega with a $12 million
charge in 1987 but, convinced the idea was good, told
scientists to keep trying. The result: Huggies Pull-Ups, a
fast-seller with no competition in sight. After one year on
the market, sales of Pull-Ups are expected to soon reach $500
million a year. With a retail price of 51 cents each, twice
the price of standard baby diapers but about half the
promotional costs, Pull-Ups are enormously profitable.
They're also a big reason why Mr. Sanders has been tapped as
chief executive.
   The story of Pull-Ups shows how Kimberly-Clark, a
once-sleepy newsprint and cigarette-paper maker, has used
product innovations to tweak rival Procter &amp; Gamble Co.,
which invented disposable diapers 30 years ago. "Procter was
always the big company with the big market shares," says
analyst Bonita Austin of Wertheim Schroder &amp; Co. "Now
everybody is nibbling off share, but Kimberly is taking more
than others."
   Kimberly-Clark's Huggies brand is the leading diaper line
with about 31% of the $4 billion U.S. market ahead of P&amp;G's
Pampers and Luvs brands. Likewise, other Kimberly-Clark
consumer products, like Kleenex facial tissues and Kotex
feminine care products, are market leaders.
   The architect of the company's success has been Chief
Executive Darwin Smith, a farmer by birth and lawyer by
training, who still prefers plaid flannel shirts to gray
flannel suits. When he took over 20 years ago, he was
impatient to change the backward commodity paper maker into
an innovative consumer products company.
   To do that, Mr. Smith hired a cadre of ex-P&amp;G managers and
focused on innovations from the labs rather than
acquisitions. He ditched products like charcoal, toothpaste
and detergent to focus on the basic business of making
diapers and other absorbency products. He set a simple goal:
"Make life miserable for our competitors," he said.
   But just three months into his tenure, Mr. Smith was told
he wouldn't get a chance: Doctors found a cancerous tumor in
his throat. At the age of 45, he was given a year to live.
Doctors prescribed painkillers, along with radiation
treatments, so he could deliver the address at his first
annual shareholders meeting. "It gave me a sense of wanting
to accomplish things and live to see the results," he says.
   Now 65, Mr. Smith beat the odds. During his tenure,
Kimberly-Clark's net income rose an average of 15% a year to
1990 net of $432.1 million, after a charge from the sale of a
Canadian subsidiary. Return on equity has soared to 21% from
6% when he took over. About 80% of the company's $6.4 billion
in sales now comes from consumer products.
   The company faces difficult times ahead. Price and
promotion wars in several key products, including diapers and
bathroom tissue, are cutting into profits. Kimberly
increasingly is up against cheaper store brands as well as
deep discount chain stores and warehouses. Wall Street had
been predicting fiscal 1992 earnings of between $6.40 to
$7.20 a share, but Mr. Smith recently told analysts that the
lower figure would be the highest they should expect for the
year.
   Mr. Smith, meanwhile, steps down as chief executive in
December. His successor, Mr. Sanders, was tapped for the job
because of his success in the diaper business, insiders say,
as well as his decision to stick with the disposable training
pants project despite heavy losses.
   Mr. Sanders saw promise in the product because consumers
had been telling Kimberly-Clark for years about their kids'
toilet training woes. Scientists began the search for
disposable pants in the early 1980s, but early models had
problems. The Omega project lacked the stretchy sides needed
for children to pull them off and on like underwear.
   An engineer who took over the diaper business in 1987, Mr.
Sanders suggested combining a stretchy fabric developed in
Georgia research labs with the Wisconsin lab's diaper making
to make a more formfitting pair of pants. The combination
worked in lab tests, so Mr. Sanders took the risky move to go
immediately to full-scale commercial production with four new
machines at the company's Paris, Texas, diaper plant.
   Another shortcut was to skip the traditional consumer test
market and rely solely on tests done with the lab product. By
cutting time in the manufacturing and marketing steps,
Kimberly-Clark got the product to market 50% faster than past
products, officials say.
   Only one other company, Unicharm of Japan, sells
disposable training pants, called Moony Trepanman, or
Training Pants Man, loosely translated. But those pants, sold
only in Japan, are stiff and don't stretch as much as
Pull-Ups. P&amp;G has yet to follow with its own training pants.
"Somebody will copy us sooner or later," says Mr. Smith, "but
by that time, we'll be pretty far up the learning curve."
   Innovation isn't limited to Pull-Ups. Kimberly-Clark
research has especially paid off in diaper market wars with
P&amp;G.
   One key Kimberly-Clark innovation in that market has been
the blend of synthetic and natural fibers that make clothlike
features that are more versatile than plain cellulose. The
company is also attentive to aesthetics. In April, for
instance, Kimberly-Clark added nursery rhymes to the
waistbands of Huggies and received 10 times its normal
testimonial letters from consumers.
   "Huggies is number one because it puts in features that
Mom notices," says Tanya Rhone, a vice president of
Weyerhaeuser Co., the largest maker of private-label diapers.
Adds Mary Kay Binder, a Cleveland mother of two boys:
"Huggies seem to be more absorbent, and they fit better."
   But the diaper market is akin to jungle warfare. The $27
billion P&amp;G, considered the world's leading marketer of
consumer goods, aggressively promotes its Pampers and Luvs
brands. And it has expanded internationally much faster,
selling its two brands in twice as many countries as
Kimberly-Clark. Moreover, P&amp;G is spending heavily to launch
an expanded line of diapers called Pampers Phases.
Kimberly-Clark will soon offer its own line of expanded sizes
Huggies Baby Steps, but it will hit store shelves a month or
more behind Phases.
   Kimberly-Clark vows to keep up the fight: "P&amp;G has deep
pockets and they can be an awesome competitor," says Mr.
Smith. "But that doesn't make us afraid."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
