ID: 100	RANK: 88	SCORE: 9.396919

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31682 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114_h_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> HUNGARY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Chairman Horn Interviewed on MSZP Goals </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Chairman Horn Interviewed on MSZP Goals </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   LD1406102394 </F>
<F P=103> LD1406102394 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Budapest Duna TV in Hungarian at 1920 
GMT on 13 June carries an unscheduled 30-minute compilation 
called "Help Yourself, the West Will Help You Too." The 
program, which deals with the political and economic conference 
held in Innsbruck on 11 June, includes a 20-minute exclusive 
interview with Gyula Horn, chairman of the Hungarian Socialist 
Party, MSZP. Jozsef Laszlo hosts the program; the place and 
date of the interview are not given. 
  Laszlo outlines the agenda of the Innsbruck conference and 
introduces its participants. Video clips are shown of Gyula 
Horn's arrival at the venue; there are extracts from his 
interview given to Austrian Television. Also shown are an 
extract from an interview with German politicians Hans-Dietrich 
Genscher and Rudolf Scharping, who both express their trust in 
Hungarian democracy and Gyula Horn's premiership. 
  The interview with Gyula Horn follows next. Horn reiterates 
his criticism -- outlined at the Innsbruck conference -- of the 
European Union, EU, for not having concrete programs on 
cooperation with the Visegrad countries. He repeats his 
arguments in favor of an urgent change. He confirms Hungary's 
readiness to repay its debts and urges the EU to draw up a 
timetable for Hungary's process of joining the EU. 
  Horn also confirms the three main elements of the MSZP's 
foreign policy. Asked about relations with Hungary's neighbors, 
he says: 
  "There is a basic treaty with Ukraine, as well as an 
agreement of about 20 pages on cooperation in minority matters. 
I have to say that the question of whether the Ukrainian side 
indeed observes the agreement also has to be examined, since 
there have been reports that this is not happening exactly the 
way it should." 
  Horn adds: "There have been problems in its implementation, 
and what is happening is not exactly what had been promised by 
the other side, in Kiev." 
  Horn is then asked about relations with Slovakia. He 
replies: 
  "When I met [Slovak Prime Minister Jozef] Morvacik in 
Bratislava about one and a half months ago, I said that we 
should try to free the entire Danube matter -- the Gabcikovo 
matter -- from its political overtones and hold substantial 
talks on it. We cannot reconcile ourselves to the situation 
they created, which would mean the eventual implementation of 
variant C. We consider unacceptable any kind of divergence from 
the water distribution system recommended by the EU, which would 
be disadvantageous for Hungary. We regard this as a key 
question, and Moravcik promised that they would revise the 
decisions, the position, taken by them [Slovakia]." 
  After further elaborating on the subject, he says: 
  "As far as the Office for Hungarians Beyond the Border is 
concerned, I do not know whether there is any need for it or 
not. I am personally convinced that there is no need for it. I 
have to say -- although the reports may be exaggerated, or 
perhaps they are not well founded -- that I have heard a lot of 
negative things about its activities. However, there are people 
even within the party who say that this office should be 
maintained. We will examine this question. We will not make a 
hasty decision on it." 
  At the end of the interview Horn outlines the most urgent 
tasks of the new government: a detailed review of the economy, 
decisions on the world exhibition and the Gabcikovo project, and 
solutions to the most serious problems in health service. He 
says: 
  "I am convinced, finally, that the Hungarian Government has 
to prepare an overall program -- which should be handed over, 
first and foremost, to the EU and, in addition, to the United 
States and Japan as well -- that would serve as a basis for 
Hungarian modernization. I mean complete modernization of the 
infrastructure, including roads, transport, telecommunication 
and all large networks in connection with this, since 
modernization cannot be started without this. And I am thinking 
of a revision of all the rules, regulations, laws, and decrees 
that prevent a larger influx of foreign capital into the 
country." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
