ID: 251	RANK: 13	SCORE: 7.949218
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910108-0069
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910108-0069.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   If War in Gulf Starts, U.S. and Others
   Are Likely to Raid Pro-Iraq Terror Cells
   ----
   By Walter S. Mossberg
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/08/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A4
</SO>
<CO>
   MDEST EUROP AFRIC LATAM FREST
</CO>
<GV>
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)
</GV>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- If war starts in the Persian Gulf, police in
countries across the world, including the U.S., plan raids on
suspected pro-Iraqi terrorist cells they have had under
surveillance for months.
   It's understood that the raids are intended to disrupt and
harass suspected terrorist groups that Western officials
believe are prepared to carry out Iraqi leader Saddam
Hussein's threat to take any war into countries around the
world.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   American intelligence officials say, however, that no such
raids can round up all terrorists poised to move when war
starts. They expect the onset of war to set off an immediate
wave of terrorist bombings of American, other Western and
moderate Arab targets by members of groups either controlled
by or sympathetic to Iraq.
   Many of the expected incidents are likely to occur in the
Middle East, Europe and North Africa, these officials say.
But threats have been made or detected in such far-flung
places as Brazil, the Philippines and Australia.
   Most ominously, government counterterrorism officials are
bracing for possible bombings inside the U.S., which has for
years managed to repel and deter attacks by Mideast
terrorists.
   Terrorism experts in the Bush administration will discuss
the terrorist side of a potential war only in general terms
and only on condition they aren't identified. They wouldn't
comment on the subject of rounding up suspected terrorists.
   But one official said that "our guess is that the
terrorists have already done the operational planning for
many of the incidents and that they are just waiting now for
the war." Another official said that counterterror forces,
for their part, "are fully cranked up and ready."
   The contemplated police raids would be preventative, and
many of those rounded up would have to be released fairly
quickly for lack of evidence they had committed crimes. But
anti-terrorism agencies around the world hope the actions
will break up at least some early plans for attacks and
frighten terrorist leaders.
   James Schlesinger, a former defense secretary and director
of central intelligence, predicted yesterday that "there will
be a wave of terrorism and sabotage" if war starts. He added
that Western Europe would be a prime target and that "I
suspect that there may be a number of intermittent attacks in
this country."
   Since shortly after Iraq invaded Kuwait Aug. 2, the U.S.
government has repeatedly claimed that it has spotted
suspected terrorist operatives scouting out and photographing
possible targets at American installations abroad. The State
Department said so again yesterday. And the administration
has issued several specific terrorist warnings.
   But as the possible start of war gets nearer, concern is
rising.
   Two developments are particularly worrisome, officials
say. There are some signs that Iraqi agents have begun to
make use of the established network of commercial fronts that
Libya established in the 1980s to organize and coordinate
terrorism. And there are signs that non-Arab terrorist groups
are in contact with Iraq, leading to fears they too may join
in the expected terror campaign.
   Among the main Arab groups likely to be involved in the
attacks, officials say, are the Abu Nidal organization, the
Palestine Liberation Front, and a band led by Abu Ibrahim, a
shadowy master bomb maker. All are believed to operate out of
Baghdad.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
