ID: 251	RANK: 24	SCORE: 7.296699
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910115-0099
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910115-0099.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   REVIEW &amp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):
   If Not Now, When?
</HL>
<DATE>
01/15/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14
</SO>
<CO>
   MDEST
</CO>
<GV>
DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)
</GV>
<LP>
   With Saddam Hussein's intransigence closing the last
avenues to a peaceful solution of the Kuwait crisis, it's
time to review why the impending war is necessary. In brief,
because we have a monster loose in a crucial corner of the
globe we share.
   The future is at stake. If Saddam's aggression fails,
potential pirates around the world will be forced to think
twice before invading their neighbors and disrupting the
world's commerce and diplomacy. But if he succeeds his
ambitions will grow, and barring some miracle we will face a
future choice between succumbing to his intimidation and
fighting a larger and bloodier war.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   We all know that battle means American deaths, not to
mention vast expenditures. But in truth, war started August 2
when Saddam ordered his troops to pillage Kuwait; our
resulting blockade is already an act of war. The issue in
today's United Nations deadline is not whether to start a
war, but whether an offensive is necessary to conclude one.
   The attack on Kuwait was unprovoked, a gross violation of
international law and common-sense morality. The gratuitous
cruelty was shocking even by the standards of this jaded
century, though not surprising from a man who in his own
country had already used poison gas on an ethnic minority. As
we learn more of Saddam, it confirms the picture of a
megalomaniac proud of his own amorality.
   The world has known other monsters, of course, and the
United States need not go to war to punish them all. But
Saddam sits astride the Persian Gulf and its immense oil
reserves. The United States cannot allow this region to fall
under the domination of a hostile power. It was a Democratic
President, after all, who proclaimed "The Carter Doctrine,"
that the Gulf was within "the vital interests of the United
States."
   It could scarcely be more obvious that Saddam's ambitions
extend far beyond Kuwait. He had previously started a war
with Iran, declaring a treaty "null and void." Despite the
punishment of that protracted war, he emerged with a larger
army. He has devoted his oil revenues, what he could borrow
and the labor of his people into constructing a military
machine. As neighbors like the Saudis, Egyptians and Turks
quickly recognized, an Iraqi success in Kuwait would be
followed by further aggression elsewhere.
   The analogy with Hitler is of course not complete, since
Iraq is not one of the most advanced nations of our times.
But it has already launched a space satellite, and is working
feverishly on development of nuclear weapons. If Saddam ever
conquered or dominated the whole Gulf, he would be able to
use oil not only for revenues but for blackmail -- rewarding
nations that cooperated with his nuclear program and
punishing others. Saddam has also tried to use anti-Western
resentments to mobilize the Arab masses, an effort that would
be much enhanced by success in Kuwait. A nuclear-armed Saddam
at the head of the Arab world would be a threat of global
proportions.
   It's true that we could try to avoid war by adopting a
purely defensive posture in Saudi Arabia. This obviously
would give Saddam time to develop his nuclear potential, and
to try resuming his expansion by subverting the Saudi regime.
It also would risk a change in the attitude of the Soviet
Union, a possibility that events in Lithuania make all too
clear. President Bush decided that the less risky course was
to establish a deadline, and to take the offense if
necessary. In this judgment he has by now been supported by
the United Nations, the majority of the Congress and,
according to the polls, a substantial majority of the
American people.
   It's also true that battle is always risky. Equipment can
fail, foes can mount surprises and generals can make
mistakes. We surely hope that an attack would be well
planned: Exploiting our air power to cut off Iraqi troops,
but without indiscriminate bombing threatening to civilians.
Contemplating an eventual ground assault if necessary, but
avoiding a frontal attack on fortifications just to give the
Army and Marines a part of the action. Facilitating the
surrender or defection of Iraqi troops likely to be less
deluded than their leader, and quite vulnerable in the desert
if our planes can interdict their water supplies. With good
planning and decent fortune, we can hope that this will not
be a lengthy or costly engagement.
   It's true, finally, that Saddam is not about to invade the
United States. Neither was Hitler. Though Pearl Harbor ended
our internal political divisions, the retrospective lesson
was that we could not escape involvement. The world is too
small, and the United States too large. This is even more
true today. While "new world order" may sound a bit
grandiloquent, the invasion of Kuwait was the first
largescale piracy of a post-Cold War era; its disposition
will prove an important precedent on whether that era is one
of greater order or greater chaos.
   The reason for spending blood and treasure in battle is to
avoid even worse choices and even greater sacrifices in the
future. As today's deadline passes, we face an Iraqi leader
with demonstrated ambition and ruthlessness, threatening
undeniably strategic territory at a moment of historical
crux. If this is not the time to stand and fight, when?
</TEXT>
</DOC>
