ID: 251	RANK: 59	SCORE: 6.497206
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890803-0241 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-08-03-89 1338EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>s i BC-50YearsOn-Legacy Adv13   08-03 1215</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-50 Years On-Legacy, Adv 13,1246</SECOND>
<HEAD>$Adv13</HEAD>
<HEAD>For Release Sunday, Aug. 13, and Thereafter</HEAD>
<HEAD>Legacy of World War II Shapes Thinking to This Day</HEAD>
<HEAD>With LaserGraphics, LaserPhotos</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By KEVIN COSTELLOE</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>FRANKFURT, West Germany (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Savagely attacking Poland a
half-century ago, Adolf Hitler's armies sparked a conflagration
that killed more than 50 million people and spread worldwide in
history's costliest war.
   World War II drew in every major power, leaving behind a bitter
legacy from fighting and Holocaust that shape the thinking of
nations to this day.
   The reverberations range from the tensions between the
capitalist West and communist East to lingering uneasiness over the
possibility of ever reunifying the two Germanys.
   And there are more individual problems, such as in Japan, with
the diplomatic difficulties that arose over the attendance of
foreign dignitaries at the funeral of Emperor Hirohito last
February, and in Austria, where President Kurt Waldheim's war
record as a German officer is under divisive scrutiny.
   The Holocaust _ the Nazis' extermination of an estimated 6
million Jews _ shocked the world like no other atrocity known to
mankind and still casts the longest shadow of the war.
   Last November, Philipp Jenninger had to resign as speaker of the
West German Parliament just 48 hours after making a clumsily worded
speech that sought to explain the German people's anti-Semitism and
fascination with Hitler.
   However good his intentions, Jenninger offended many Germans,
Jewish and non-Jewish.
   The war is remembered, too, in small, day-to-day details, like
the seats reserved for war invalids on French trains, or the
Christmas tree in London's Trafalgar Square, an annual gift from a
grateful Norwegian people for the British war effort.
   It was an arena for giants, good and bad: Hitler, Winston
Churchill, Josef Stalin, Franklin Roosevelt. And it produced
postwar leaders such as Charles de Gaulle, architect of modern
France, and Marshal Josip Broz Tito, who ruled Yugoslavia until his
death in 1980 and helped found the movement of non-aligned nations.
   Every nation shapes its own lessons from the war, often with
distortions or exaggerations.
   For the French, there is the painful knowledge that one's
parents or grandparents may have collaborated with their Nazi
conquerors.
   For Eastern Europe, decades of official hero-worship of the
Soviet forces are giving way to greater objectivity, in large part
as a result of Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's policy of
openness.
   ``In the vision of the war we used to get, only the Russians
were brave in fighting the Germans,'' said Anna Radziwill, who has
taught high school history for 30 years and was elected to Poland's
newly created Senate.
   ``The vision of the West was that they were just sending us
canned food,'' said Ms. Radziwill, a member of one of Poland's old
noble families.
   German sailors aboard the old battleship Schleswig-Holstein
fired the first shots of World War II, shelling a small Polish
garrison at Westerplatte near the Free City of Danzig at 4:45 a.m.
on Sept. 1, 1939. The German army poured across the Polish frontier
while Hitler's warplanes pounded the country from overhead.
   Two days later Britain and France declared war on Germany. But
not until 1941 did the fighting become a true world war, with the
German invasion of the Soviet Union and the Japanese attack on the
U.S. fleet at Pearl Harbor. In all, more than 50 nations joined the
fighting.
   Still uneasy neighbors 40 years after their creation, the two
Germanys present vastly different accounts of World War II and its
causes.
   In communist East Germany, a high school textbook from 1986
states: ``World War II was unleashed by German imperialists and
militarists,'' spurred by a desire for profits and conquests.
   But just over the border, teen-agers in West Germany's Hesse
state are taught that Nazism was an all-embracing affair, ``a
terrible aberration to which an entire people was able to be driven
by ideological blindness, ignorance and cowardice.''
   Revised history books for Soviet high school students still
insist Moscow's forces defeated Japan virtually single-handed, even
though the Kremlin did not declare war on Japan until three days
after a U.S. bomber dropped an atomic bomb on Hiroshima.
   The textbook for the 11th grade says that ``the use of the
atomic weapon was not militarily necessary.''
   ``By this crime, unprecedented in the history of mankind,
imperialist circles in the U.S.A. wanted to demonstrate its
then-strategic superiority before the whole world,'' the textbook
says.
   But Soviet students do learn that their country's agreement to
divide up Poland with the Germans was unjust.
   In Warsaw, a newly emboldened Communist government is moving
closer to blaming the Soviets for the massacre of more than 4,000
Polish officers in Katyn. To reverse the official line _ that the
Nazis did it _ would constitute a monumental act of historical
revisionism in East European minds.
   Momo Kapor, a best-selling Yugoslav author and satirist, summed
up the distortions of the past this way: ``During the past 40 years
or so, grandpas and grandmas, uncles and old aunts have been
correcting, secretly, official lessons from textbooks.
   ``From our earliest days, to finish school somehow, we had to
pretend that we believed in official stories, while in fact we
believed in things that were forbidden,'' Kapor said in a recent
column in the Belgrade daily newspaper Politika.
   While Britain remains unabashedly proud of its wartime role,
other Western European nations, such as France and Italy, have had
to face up to the darker side of their war record.
   France was easily defeated in 1940 and was then divided into an
occupied zone and a French puppet regime headquartered in the town
of Vichy. The Germans later occupied the whole country.
   Historian Henri Rousso said in an interview that many fellow
Frenchmen have long thought their country was made up mostly of
brave resistance fighters who ultimately helped the Allied victory.
He said textbooks began to tell a different story in the early
1970s.
   French Nazi hunter Serge Klarsfeld said many French people do
not know that the country ``actively collaborated with the Germans.
And thanks to de Gaulle's diplomatic genius, many French people
think that France really won the war.''
   ``The period was like a civil war, with two opposite camps: de
Gaulle and the resistance on one side, and the Vichy
collaborationist regime on the other,'' Klarsfeld said in an
interview.
   Alessia Jannece, a high school student in Rome, said: ``They
really don't teach us much about fascism. I learn mostly from TV or
what I remember from middle school.''
   The lessons are important for a country haunted by its past
under fascist dictator Benito Mussolini. Professor Renzo De
Felice's highly respected 1982 biography of Mussolini contends
there was general consensus for fascism in Italy.
   Last year's 50th anniversary of Austria's annexation by Nazi
Germany and a select commission's finding that Waldheim was in
``close proximity'' to Nazi war crimes also prompted soul-searching.
   ``Although the Second World War is now far distant, its shadows
are long, its echoes loud,'' British historian Martin Gilbert says
in a new history of the war. ``How else could it be with an event,
lasting for nearly six years, in which courage and cruelty, hope
and horror, violence and virtue, massacre and survival, were so
closely intertwined?''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Sunday, Aug. 13</NOTE>
</DOC>
