ID: 251	RANK: 8	SCORE: 8.626452
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890902-0109 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-02-89 1729EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-Glemp 1stLd-Writethru a0554 09-02 0869</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Glemp, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0554,0893</SECOND>
<HEAD>Glemp Wants Accord on Auschwitz Convent Renegotiated</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: LEADS with 9 grafs to UPDATE with Macharski remarks, Jewish
reaction in Chicago. Pickup 5th pvs, `The reports....' Minor editing to
TRIM.</HEAD>
<DATELINE>ROME (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Polish Cardinal Josef Glemp said in an interview
published Saturday that an agreement to move a convent away from
Auschwitz should be renegotiated because the cardinals who signed it
didn't understand the issue.
   Glemp, the Roman Catholic prelate of Poland, said that moving the
Carmelite convent would be a ``scandal'' and ``offensive'' because
the nuns who live there are entitled to pray for Christians who died
at the Nazis' Auschwitz death camp.
   He criticized fellow Polish Cardinal Franciszek Macharski, saying
he acted too hastily and ignored Polish public opinion when he and
others signed a 1987 international accord to move the convent.
   Macharski, speaking Saturday at Birkenau near Auschwitz, urged an
end to ``hostility and hatred of Judaism.''
   Macharski addressed several thousand people who marched about a
half mile along the railroad tracks from Birkenau to the former of
the Auschwitz giant crematories. The procession was part of a World
Day of Prayer for Peace organized by the church to mark the
anniversary of the invasion of Poland by Nazi Germany.
   In Chicago, several Jewish leader rejected invitations to attend
an interfaith service planned for Glemp's visit to Chicago scheduled
for Sept. 21-25.
   Rabbi Shlomo Levine, president of the Chicago Board of Rabbis,
said, ``I cannot in good conscience be part of an event honoring
him.''
   Rabbi Herman Schaalman, a former president of the board, and
Barry Morrison, regional director of the Anti-Defamation League of
B'nai B'rith, said they would not attend the Sept. 25 service and
reception.
   Glemp's impromptu interview, given to Italian reporters in Poland
on Friday, appeared in several Italian newspapers.
   The reports contained the primate's first published remarks on
the matter since he stirred controversy last month by saying Polish
anti-Semitism would disappear if Jews would abandon their
anti-Polish sentiments.
   He also offended many Jews by suggesting Jews helped spread
communism, and by saying some Jews collaborated with Nazis during
World War II or as businessmen neglected and detested Poles.
   In the remarks published Saturday, Glemp said the Auschwitz
controversy could be settled. He was quoted as saying, ``Oh, we will
resolve it ... with patience. One needs to reflect a bit. There are
some Jewish circles who have let themselves be carried away by
nerves.''
   Jewish groups say the convent and its Christian religious symbols
offend the memory of the 2.5 million Jews who died there. Several
Jewish protesters recently entered to convent grounds to demand that
the convent be moved.
   Glemp spoke to reporters from Rome's La Repubblica and Il
Messaggero newspapers, Milan's Il Giornale, and the Catholic daily
Avvenire during a reception in Warsaw. Glemp was among the religious
leaders participating in joint prayers for peace on the 50th
anniversary of the start of World War II.
   Friday's ceremony was boycotted by Poland's rabbi, Menachem
Joszowicz, because of the presence of the Carmelite convent a few
feet from the fence surrounding the death camp.
   In an accord signed in Geneva in 1987 by Catholic and Jewish
leaders, the nuns were supposed to have moved by Feb. 22 to an
interfaith prayer center to be built several thousand yards away.
But the deadline passed without anything happening, and the center
has yet to be built.
   On Aug. 19, Macharski _ Polish-born Pope John Paul II's successor
as archbishop of Krakow _ said he was suspending the accord because
of ``aggressive'' demands and protests by Jewish activists at the
convent.
   When a reporter said the accord was signed by top church
officials, Glemp responded: ``No, by Cardinal Macharski and a group
of men who are not competent (in the matter),'' La Repubblica said.
   In addition to Macharski, French cardinals Jean-Marie Lustiger
and Albert Decourtray and Belgian Cardinal Godfried Danneels signed
the 1987 agreement.
   ``I want this accord to be renegotiated,'' Glemp was quoted as
saying. ``It has to be done by competent people and not by just any
cardinal who doesn't understand the things. ...''
   ``It's a scandal to expel the nuns from the convent,'' he was
quoted as saying. ``What do we have to do? Put them in tents? Who do
the nuns offend by praying next to the wall of the concentration
camp?''
   ``Our people don't understand. The Jews should understand that
devoting oneself to a life of prayer near the place where Christians
were martyred doesn't offend their feelings.''
   Asked if the ecumenical center would ever be built, he said there
was no money for it right now because of the nation's economic
crisis.
   When asked if Jews, including Americans, could help pay for it,
he said, ``Yes, I think so. But first there is a need to
re-establish a bit of calm.''
   Theo Klein, former president of the Representative Council of
Jewish Institutions of France and one of the signatories of the 1987
agreement, said in an interview on Radio Monte-Carlo:
   ``If he wants to renegotiate the accord, he will have to
renegotiate with himself. I don't see how any Jewish authority would
accept to renegotiate this accord with Monsignor Glemp.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
