ID: 251	RANK: 91	SCORE: 6.138018
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910117-0002
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910117-0002.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Politics &amp; Policy:
   An Old Kansas Cow Town's Reflections on War
   Mirror the Attitudes and Anxieties of the Nation
   ----
   By Dennis Farney
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/17/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<CO>
   MDEST
</CO>
<LP>
   ABILENE, Kan. -- Step by step, as inexorably as the march
of history, Abilene resigned itself to the war that erupted
last night.
   Few here oppose the war -- not in this conservative,
Republican, porch-swing-out-front town that gave the nation
President and Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower. When a ministerial
alliance held a prayer vigil Tuesday night, it felt compelled
to reassure people that the event wasn't an anti-war protest.
That's the kind of place this is.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Abilene went to war reluctantly, but with a
roll-up-the-sleeves sense of a dirty job to be done.
   "It's frightening, but I think it's the right thing to
do," Linda Knopp, executive director of the Red Cross chapter
here, said last night after the news of the first air raids
on Baghdad. "This was the only way."
   "You see history unfolding before your eyes," says native
son Kevin Mickey, 34 years old. "It's a very strange
feeling." But Mr. Mickey says he has no doubt that the U.S.
action was necessary and will end in victory. "We're the kind
of people who win wars," he says. "We follow orders. We're
not sophisticated, but we know right from wrong."
   Esther Foltz watched the president's speech last night and
pronounced it "wonderful." Though a grandson is in the Saudi
Arabian desert, Mrs. Foltz nevertheless concludes: "There was
nothing left to do but this. We're going to win this thing,
and the world's going to be better."
   These attitudes echo throughout the country. But so, too,
do the deep apprehensions of residents here -- "a haunting
fear of the unknown," as the Rev. Peter Balaban put it in a
prayer just before the United Nations deadline expired. And
some of them will go to war without quite knowing why. There
is a sense that this old cow town, which has made so much
history, is in the grip of history now, swept along by forces
that will affect it as surely as they affect far-off Iraq and
Kuwait.
   When Lucia Berry heard that the war had begun, "The panic
just overwhelmed me," she says. Not only does she coordinate
a support group for families of military service members in
the Gulf, but her own husband, Ellery, is serving there too,
helping to retrieve and repair damaged tanks. "Sheer panic --
that's what we're all feeling now," she says. "I'm just in
wonderment. What can this lead to?"
   And the Rev. Balaban frankly concedes that although he has
urged his Lutheran congregation to pray, "I'm not sure I can
tell them what to pray for." Should they pray for a short but
violent war, knowing that some of their own loved ones may be
killed in the process?
   "Maybe," he concludes in his study here, "our best prayers
are given in that time of uncertainty, when we don't know
what to say."
   Though half a world away, the war will profoundly touch
this town of 6,500. Fort Riley, the home of the Army's First
Infantry Division -- the famed Big Red One -- is less than 30
miles away. Many of its personnel lived here and in
surrounding Dickinson County before the division was deployed
to Saudi Arabia. Thus, well over 200 county residents --
women and men -- are in the desert now.
   In a kind of slow-motion slide toward the inevitable,
townspeople have been shaken by a succession of events over
the past five months.
   For Mrs. Knopp, the Red Cross official, a moment of
foreboding came when she watched 18-year-olds fill out wills
at Fort Riley. She watched a female soldier, her husband
already in the Gulf, hand over their two-month-old son to a
grandmother before embarking herself. Then, she says, "I went
home and cried."
   "This is the scariest time I can remember," says Dave
Bergmeier, the 28-year-old managing editor of the Abilene
Reflector-Chronicle. "We can't stay over there very long
without a draft. That puts me in an age group where I could
get drafted."
   Though outright opposition is muted, some genuine
reservations -- and even bitterness -- are in the air. "There
will be no winners," says Jim Griffin, a farmer outside town.
"Only losers."
   Even before the war started, the regulars who gathered for
their daily coffee at the Daylight Donuts shop on Third
Street debated the wisdom of defending alien cultures in a
far-away region. The regulars, having watched Cable News
Network, knew all about terrible weapons of destruction such
as the fuel-air bomb. They knew about the latest statements
of Saudi Arabian King Fahd ("Ol' King Fahd," they call him
familiarly). "I don't think that oil over there is worth the
people we've killed already," says William J. Taylor, a slim,
erect 75-year-old with a bristling crew cut.
   Like so many here, Mr. Taylor knows war. As a World War II
B-17 crew chief, he remembers the mission from which one
plane returned with two crewmen missing legs; one leg had
been shot off below the knee, the other just above the knee.
Perhaps for that reason, he was especially impatient with
those who urged bloody U.S. intervention. "I'll tell you what
they should do with the people who want to send 'em over
there," he says angrily. "Take them over to a Veterans
Administration Hospital."
   But Mr. Taylor is in the minority, and he knows it. More
typical is the comment of his friend Lloyd T. Cummings. He
calls Saddam Hussein "another Adolf Hitler" and believes the
U.S. should "kick his pants off as fast as we can kick them
off."
   Mrs. Knopp, the Red Cross official, says people often ask
her, "Are we going over there for the oil, Linda?" She
assures them that the U.S. has intervened for more noble
purposes, but finds it difficult to understand the Saudis'
attitude toward their U.S. protectors. Her twin sister,
Glenda Bacon, an Air Force wife, is in Saudi Arabia and must
wear the traditional black robe that conceals almost all but
her eyes. Out of deference to the Saudis, who don't eat pork,
her brother-in-law Rick Bacon calls himself "Major Rick," she
says.
   For all of that, she supports President Bush, hopes the
war will end quickly and finds solace in her own deep
religious convictions. "Whatever happens, I truly believe
it's in God's hands now," she says.
   As the final hours before the U.N. deadline ticked away
Tuesday night, the Rev. Balaban threw open his Trinity
Lutheran Church to citizens of all faiths. They were somber,
silent and sometimes crying. Every half hour, they would pray
together. "Though war rise up against me, yet I will be
confident." "Hasten the day, oh God, when peace will embrace
the whole world, when nation will not threaten nation."
   Eleven o'clock Eastern time came and went. Eleven thirty.
Midnight. And as the deadline passed, the people continued to
pray.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
