ID: 316	RANK: 11	SCORE: 8.862170
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910805-0089
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910805-0089.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
   Mountain-Bike of Madness
   ----
   By Thomas J. Meyer
</HL>
<DATE>
08/05/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   Portland, Ore. -- STEP 1: I arrive in the Pacific
Northwest. Friends in California ask: "How do you like the
rain?" Friends in Oregon ask: "Have you got your mountain
bike yet?" I'm not sure what this means. What is a mountain
bike? I ask myself. I take steps to find out.
   STEP 2: I poke my head into a bike shop. Nothing in it
seems to resemble my old 10-speed Peugeot. The bikes all have
thick metal frames and tires with big treads. Feeling
insecure and vulnerable, I flee before making contact with
the fitlooking, Lycra-clad salespersons.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   STEP 3: A newspaper story says that in Seattle they use
mountain bikes as police cruisers. I decide there must be
something to this.
   STEP 4: I try another bike shop. I try to look like I know
what I'm doing. A salesman asks if he can help. I tell him,
"I'm looking for a mountain bike." He asks: "What kind of
riding are you going to be doing?" I'm not sure how to answer
this question. I feel like asking back: "What's an example of
an answer?" (When I bought my car, what if the salesman had
asked what sort of driving I'd be doing. What would I have
said? "Fast. Awkward. Discourteous. Stop-and-go.") I settle
on this: "A little of this, a little of that." He's not
satisfied. He asks me my price range. I'm not sure about
that, either. He tells me not to get anything for under $350.
He tells me I'll get what I pay for. I tell him I'll look
around.
   STEP 5: I'm feeling braver, after some training from a
friend. I try another shop. Same question. "Mostly around
town," I say. "Some on trails." The guy looks me up and down,
then tells me I'm probably a "bigger" rider, but not a
"heavier" one. I'm not sure how to take this. He suggests I
try an aluminum frame. "It's lighter than the chromoly, but
it's got less give," he says. Chromoly? I don't know what he
means. "Well, the alloy is stronger," he says. "Alloy?" I
ask. But he's already telling me about drive trains and brake
sets. "They've all got 21 speeds, but on a few you have an
option of index shifting or friction." He's asking which I
prefer, but I'm not listening.
   "Twenty-one speeds?" I say.
   STEP 6: I see TV news footage of people in Beijing. Over
pictures of thousands of people riding bicycles, the TV
commentator wonders aloud about the future of China. I
wonder: What kind of drive trains have they got? I get closer
to the set; everything seems to be the old one-speed variety.
One billion Chinese didn't have to decide whether index
shifting was for them.
   STEP 7: Bike shop No. 4. Finally, a saleswoman who speaks
ordinary English, but she brings up yet another choice: What
kind of shift levers do I prefer -- above the bar or below?
The advantage of below the bar: You can do all the shifting
with your thumb. "But if anything ever happens to your thumb,
you can't shift," she says. (I feel like pointing out another
drawback of this scenario: Not only can't you shift, but
there's nothing left to separate you from lower species.)
   Then she comes up with a new option: She suggests I start
looking at hybrids. I get discouraged by the introduction of
new, agriculture-based lingo, just as I was getting my
bearings.
   STEP 8: Reviewing my past bicycle-buying successes I
recall my first major bike: the Sears Spyder 500 10-speed my
father bought me when I was 10. The big choice at the time:
purple or blue? I went with the blue. Good decision. I rode
it without problems for several years.
   STEP 9: I'm enjoying the quest now, especially the
spirited debate pitting alloy vs. aluminum. A salesman at
store No. 5 is big on an all-aluminum frame. At store No. 6,
a salesman keeps showing me bikes made of Chromoly, which
I've now learned is a steel alloy. "Do you have anything in
aluminum?" I ask. He smirks. "You don't want aluminum," he
says. I notice something about these salespeople: They're all
wearing tight-fitting shorts and have formidable thigh
muscles. They're the sort of people who know what kind of
riding they'll be doing.
   STEP 10: A scene reminiscent of "The Graduate": Another
salesman cuts through the prattle, pulls me aside and shares
with me the two main qualities I ought to be looking for.
"Ride characteristics," he says, "and race geometry." My
bike-searching universe is shattered; I've been looking for
the wrong thing all along. Race geometry?
   STEP 11: A sunny day. I notice a lot of people riding
mountain bikes. They whiz by, uninhibited and free. I wonder
how each one of these people decided on a bike. I feel
inadequate and out of touch with my fellow-citizens. I lose
perspective on the process, imagining the only purpose for a
bike will be to shuttle between bike shops in the search.
   STEP 12: To help settle the frame debate, another salesman
suggests a humanistic plan: "Take the bikes out for a ride,
one at a time, then when you get back, write down a little
about how you feel about each one." I like the idea and give
it a try. But I find it difficult to put my feelings about
bicycles into words. Perhaps therapy might help.
   STEP 13: A period of malaise and frustration. I remind
myself: All I wanted was a bike.
   STEP 14: I feel I'm close to a decision -- I know, at
least, that I want something in blue -- but then I run into a
friend who's a former mountain-bike enthusiast. He's not
riding his bike. He's got funny-looking things on his feet.
"Hey," he says. "Have you got your Rollerblades yet?"
   ---
   Mr. Meyer is a free-lance writer based in Portland.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
