ID: 316	RANK: 25	SCORE: 8.044691
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911226-0038
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911226-0038.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Transportation:
   Riding a Bike
   To Work Gains
   In Popularity
   ----
   By Suzanne Alexander
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
12/26/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   FLE LABOR X.FFL
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)
LEISURE TIME SERVICES AND PRODUCTS (REQ)
</IN>
<NS>
LABOR, UNIONS, STRIKES, WAGES, RECRUITMENT (LAB)
MANAGEMENT ISSUES (MNT)
</NS>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   It's 8 a.m. on a Monday, and Joseph Tramontana is starting
his commute to the office. A 60-year-old Xerox Corp.
scientist, he turns from his driveway and heads onto the road
-- energetically pedaling away.
   Like a growing number of Americans, Mr. Tramontana has
shunned car keys and metro passes to commute by bicycle.
While others are stuck in traffic jams, Mr. Tramontana uses
uncrowded bike lanes to zip 8 1/2 miles over the hills of
Palo Alto, Calif., to his job in just 30 minutes.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "I started eight years ago because I wanted to strengthen
my legs to go skiing," Mr. Tramontana says. "Now, I find I
enjoy biking as much as skiing."
   Biking to work has plenty of drawbacks, including bad
weather, crowded downtown streets and sweaty arrivals at
work. But some 3.5 million people nationwide commute by
bicycle at least occasionally, more than double the 1.5
million who biked to the office in 1983, according to a
survey by the Bicycle Institute of America, a trade group
based in Washington. Moreover, of today's bike commuters, two
million pedal to the office daily, the institute reports.
   Rising fuel and public transportation costs are the main
reasons commuters are bicycling more. But environmental and
health concerns also play a role.
   "You don't have to spend an additional hour in the gym
when you get home," says Andrew Clarke, a spokesman for the
Bicycle Federation of America, a nonprofit consulting firm.
Parking expenses aren't an issue, and bike maintenance is
cheaper, he adds. In some cases, biking can be faster than
driving or using public transportation.
   Bicycling's safety record is also improving, the National
Highway Traffic Safety Administration reports. In 1989,
bicycle, tricycle and unicycle fatalities fell to a 14-year
low of 832; though they rose last year, to 856, they remained
well below the peak of 1,003 in 1975. The government
attributes the recent lower levels to increased helmet use
and cyclist training.
   Many employers, faced with federal clean air regulations
that require some to establish alternative modes of employee
commuting, have embraced the bike. Companies also support
bicycle commuting as a way to promote fitness. Food 4 Less
Supermarkets Inc., a La Habra, Calif., supermarket chain,
gives new bicycles to employees willing to cycle to work at
least three times a week; it has given away 25 bikes in three
years. James Manion, the company's director of environmental
affairs, says, "We think of it as a low-cost, one-time thing
that builds morale, improves health and takes a car out of
the parking lot."
   Some companies do more. Fleetwood Enterprises Inc., a
recreational vehicle maker in Riverside, Calif., gives free
helmets, reflective vests and mirrors to committed riders. It
also has volunteer bike mechanics on site and will rescue
riders who get flat tires on their way to work.
   But bicycle commuting isn't for the faint of heart. First,
many people live too far from work. Terry Cook, a 43-year-old
customer-service manager for a division of Westinghouse
Electric Corp. in Ogden, Utah, doesn't mind biking 34 miles
round trip a day, but many people would.
   Harsh weather is another possible roadblock. Biking on wet
or icy roads can be deadly, and even the most ardent riders
generally switch to other modes during the fiercest winter
months.
   Moreover, many cities still have no bike lanes downtown,
and drivers can be ruthless with cyclists. Ann Sullivan, 34,
a dance teacher who bikes to her job at St. Ann's School in
Brooklyn, N.Y., has had several minor accidents in recent
years. In one incident, a car knocked her off her bike; in
another, a taxi forced her bike into the loading ramp of a
truck.
   For those who survive the ride, finding a place to stow
the bike can be difficult. Office buildings generally don't
allow bicycles on their elevators, for liability reasons, and
locking bikes to signposts often isn't feasible or safe.
Alden Chase, a 52-year-old engineer at Boeing Co. in Seattle,
stores his bike under a stairwell in his building. With few
bike racks on site, "every individual has to find his own
parking place," he says. Stanley O'Connor, 36, who commutes
from Brooklyn to his job in Manhattan as an administrative
assistant at the nonprofit Office of Transportation
Alternatives, uses two locks to secure his bike to a
signpost, then lugs his seat pad, lights, helmet, mirror and
biking gloves into work for safekeeping.
   Like many cyclists, Mr. O'Connor wears biking shorts while
riding. But with no showers or changing rooms at the job, he
must clean up and change in the men's room. "People do notice
that I'm sweaty, with wild hair," he says.
   Because of such limitations, some people in corporate
America still view biking to work as a "little quirky," says
Marcia Lowe, senior researcher at Worldwatch Institute, a
research organization in Washington, D.C., that focuses on
environmental and social issues.
   But bike commuting could gain further momentum from the
Bicycle and Pedestrian Improvement Act now pending before
Congress. The measure would allot 3% of federal highway
funds, or about $110 million a year, for the building of bike
and pedestrian paths and bicycle racks. According to a recent
Bicycling magazine poll, 33 million people would sometimes
commute by bicycle if there were safe bike lanes alongside
roads and highways.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
