ID: 316	RANK: 30	SCORE: 7.811776
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910802-0007
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910802-0007.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
   Macho Biking
   ----
   By Douglas Gantenbein
</HL>
<DATE>
08/02/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A7
</SO>
<LP>
   Seattle -- "There's one now," Glenn said, pointing to the
side of the road. We'd just been talking about the problem
the two bicyclists now squatting in the grass faced as they
wrestled with a flat. Common enough on bicycles. But this
seemed cruel. We were barely half a mile from our starting
point, the Kingdome in Seattle. It was 5:45 in the morning.
And we -- like the two people cursing at the roadside -- had
close to 200 miles to go before the day was over. "If that
were me," I said. "I'd quit now."
   Twelve years ago, a small group of Seattle cyclists
thought it would be fun to ride to Portland, Ore. From that
has grown the Seattle to Portland Classic, known simply as
the STP. One of the largest mass rides in the nation (a
"lemming ride," purists snarl), the STP now sees 10,000
two-wheelers stream south from Seattle one weekend each June.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Sensible people spare their buttocks by making the trip in
two days, camping or staying in a hotel at the midpoint. But
macho-afflicted riders, about 1,700 this year, opt to do it
in one shot. For some reason, I'd checked the one-day box on
the registration form. Midlife crisis, insisted my wife.
Could be, I thought Saturday night, as I doggedly plowed
through a double plate of spaghetti. The pasta is my talisman
against the dread "bonk," the sickly fatigue that hits a
cyclist whose blood sugar falls for lack of carbohydrates.
   I was still trying to digest the spaghetti at 3:30 a.m.
when the alarm rang. At 5:40, Glenn and I crossed the
starting line and pedaled past Boeing Field, past
plywood-and-plastic shelters thrown up by transients along
the coffee-brown Duwamish River, past the flat expanse of
warehouses in the once-scenic Kent Valley. Big Honda
Gold-Wing motorcycles thrum by; the local Gold-Wing club
helps cyclists felled by fatigue or mechanical gremlins.
   This was an STP where the one-day people seemed, in
hindsight, smart. Saturday's clot of 8,300 had become
enmeshed in a low-pressure front moving up from the Oregon
coast. Sheets of rain and stiff winds battled them. We rolled
along under partly cloudy skies, with a view of snowfrosted
14,410-foot Mount Rainier. Weather here is unpredictable. Two
years ago temperatures in the low 90s mowed down riders like
blades of grass; this year several cases of hypothermia were
treated.
   Things got serious at 35 miles with a one-mile climb
through the improbably named town of Puyallup. Shortly
afterward the tire gods frowned. As Glenn pried the limp tube
off the rim with his thumbs a good samaritan roared up and
leaped out of his car with a tire pump. With his help we had
the flat fixed in 10 minutes. Things had been worse on
Saturday; some whimsical soul, I later heard, littered a
stretch of road with thumbtacks.
   By 50 miles random knots of cyclists began to coalesce. A
pace line of 10 bikers passed us, and I caught the end. In a
pace line, bikers share the hard part -- cutting through the
wind -- by riding in tight single file and trading off the
point. We barreled along: 22, 23 miles per hour. Past
sprawling Fort Lewis and the 40-foot-tall plywood cowgirl
outside a little store in the town of Roy. Glenn opted for a
slower pace, and dropped behind.
   Seventy miles and into the rural portion of the huge,
shallow valley that runs between Seattle and Portland. Just
three of us were left in the pace line, and we traded off the
lead every three minutes as we fought a brisk headwind. In
the open fields on either side were hundreds of grassy,
four-foot-tall mounds. Called Mima Mounds, they've puzzled
geologists for years. The home of giant prehistoric gophers?
Part of some ancient Native American rite? No one knows.
   A rhythm set in: Lead, fall back, watch the rear tire of
the rider ahead. My two new companions, Corey and Shawn, were
faster than I was, and I struggled to keep up. By 130 miles I
was beginning to fade on the now hilly terrain, but I knew
that if I lost these two my pace would plunge. Plus we were
now sharing that odd bond of shared pain that comes between
people in endurance events.
   A park near the town of Longview (140 miles) was the final
checkpoint. People were hurting; $1,500 bikes thrown to the
ground reflected some riders' disgust with the venture.
Others crowded around tables of food set out by squads of
relentlessly encouraging volunteers: Bagels, muffins, fruit,
boiled potatoes. Bonk antidotes. Bananas -- the unofficial
fruit of the biking world -- were the most popular selection.
Hunched-over cyclists walked back to their bikes clutching
four or five to their chest. They looked like chimps stealing
from Jane Goodall's camp.
   From Longview we crossed into Oregon and headed down the
wide shoulder on Highway 30. Thirty miles to go. Twenty
miles. Then 10, and we saw the twin Gothic towers of the St.
Johns Bridge on the edge of Portland. Through the tree-lined
St. Johns neighborhood, its Ozzie-and-Harriet houses dappled
by the evening sun, under Interstate 5 through a tunnel, and
we were there. Thirteen-and-a-half hours, 194 miles, and I
was thoroughly fed up with bicycling. But exhilarated, too.
   Corey, Shawn and I guzzled a beer, congratulated
ourselves, and swapped phone numbers for future rides. I was
famished, and spotted a hamburger stand. "I'd like a
cheeseburger," I said to the young, bored-looking waitress.
"We're out," she said, with a toss of her kinked blonde hair.
"What about those right there?" I said, pointing at a grill
with about 20 cheerfully sizzling burgers. She shrugged
petulantly. "Those are for the staff here. They worked hard
today."
   I settled for stale pizza the staff didn't want. After
all, they'd worked hard. I'd just been riding a bike.
   ---
   Mr. Gantenbein is a Seattle-based freelance writer.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
