ID: 316	RANK: 53	SCORE: 7.451608
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891009-0164 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-10-09-89 1511EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>s a BC-APN--TheBicycle Adv22-1stAdd   10-09 0910</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-APN--The Bicycle, Adv 22-1st Add,0929</SECOND>
<HEAD>$adv22</HEAD>
<HEAD>AGENCIES AND RADIO OUT</HEAD>
<HEAD>For Release Sunday, Oct. 22</HEAD>
<HEAD>UNDATED: neighborhood shops.</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   In Europe, the Netherlands and Denmark have taken steps to make
their roads more friendly for cyclists with the result that
bicycles are used for 20 percent to 30 percent of all urban trips
and up to half in some towns.
   In the Netherlands, a recent system of taxes increased the cost
of buying and driving a car by half. An electronic system will
monitor speedometers and excessive drivers will be taxed
accordingly. At the same time, public transit is being given an
extra $5.7 billion a year.
   In Denmark, officials claim that gasoline prices are the highest
in Europe, thanks to aggressive taxing. And, says the Worldwatch
report, ``the Danish Ministry of Transport describes the 186
percent sales tax on new cars _ compared with 47 percent in the
Netherlands and 5 percent in the United States _as paying for three
cars and getting only one.''
   A British study said that if only 10 percent of car trips of
less than 10 miles were made by bicycle it would cut the country's
fuel consumption by 14 million barrels of oil a year, 2 percent of
annual consumption.
   The ironies abound. Third World governments concentrate on
building roads for cars in their rural areas despite the fact that
their rural citizens do not have cars or trucks. Worldwatch quotes
transportation expert Wilfred Owen as saying, ``Many miles of roads
in poor countries prove more useful for drying beans and peppers
than for moving traffic.''
   And even though bicycle rickshaws are a transportation mainstay
in many Asian countries, and a means of raising the income and
status of poor people, some local governments say they are unsafe
or inhumane. A more likely motive, says Worldwatch, is that the
quaint rickshaws make cities look poor or backward.
   So it comes to pass that in Dhaka in Bangladesh, the government
threatened to phase out rickshaws, even though they employ 140,000
people and account for more than half of the city's passenger miles.
   And in Jakarta, the capital of Indonesia, some 100,000 rickshaws
have been confiscated in the last five years and dumped into the
sea.
   Japan, which makes cars for most of the world, leans heavily on
bicycles and commuter railroads. When railway terminals began to
suffer from bicycle pollution, the government set aside bike
parking lots of which there are now 8,600 with a capacity of 2.4
million bikes. In urban downtowns where land prices are over $7,000
a square foot, they have built bike parking towers.
   In California, the university towns of Davis and Palo Alto vie
for cycling honors. Davis boasts that a quarter of all trips made
by its 44,000 citizens are made by bike. Bike trailers are a common
sight for lugging groceries or children.
   Palo Alto pays its employees 7 cents a mile for all business
travel by bike. It sponsors a city wide ``leave your car at home
day,'' has a bicycle squad in its police force and holds a traffic
school for children who break bicycle laws.
   Some employers in the city of 56,000 have joined the movement.
One offers bike commuters $1 a day for every day they ride to work.
Xerox provides free towel service in the shower room.
   It's been 173 years since the first bike appeared in 1816. A lot
has changed. Bikes have evolved from a crude contraption called the
hobbyhorse, which was propelled by the rider's feet on the ground,
to the enlarged front wheel that covered more ground for each
revolution of the rider's pedals, to chain drives and the safety
bicycle, to today's one-piece lightweight frames.
   Bicycles gave the world ball bearings and pneumatic tires.
   In the late 1800s, bicycle racers were some of the highest paid
athletes in the country, garnering winnings of between $20,000 to
$40,000 a year.
   ``They were like today's superstars,'' says Bicycling's Fred
Zahradnik. ``They traveled the world to race.''
   Thousands flocked to see the six-day bike races on wooden or
concrete tracks. At the turn of the century there were some 200
race tracks in the United States alone.
   One racer was Charles (Mile-a-Minute) Murphy. On June 30, 1899,
he pumped up to 60 mph on a board track making use of the suction
behind a fast locomotive.
   Another, Zahradnik says, was Major Taylor, ``one of the first
great black athletes to emerge in the United States in the late
1800s. He was often turned down by hotels on his world racing
circuit.''
   Bike makers have constantly changed designs to appeal to young
riders. With the balloon tire came Schwinn's Streamliner. There was
the Donald Duck bike by Shelby, sporting a Donald Duck hood
ornament and a quack-quack horn. There was the Huffy Radiobike,
which had a radio in the tank on the crossbars. In the late 1950s
there was Bowden Spacelander and a drag racer called the Schwinn
Orangecrate.
   But now engineers are setting out to improve designs for
practical reasons. Bicycle trailers and three- and four-wheel
designs are increasing the load-carrying capacity.
   The Oxtrike, designed at Oxford University, has a platform and
gears capable of moving heavy cargo. In India, designers are
working on a multipurpose bike that can double as a
non-transportation motor for threshing rice paddies, shelling
peanuts or pumping water.
   It may indeed be that the wheels of the past will power the
future.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>END ADV</NOTE>
</DOC>
