ID: 229	RANK: 12	SCORE: 17.026398
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910212-0010
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910212-0010.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Gambling:
   Luck Is Running Out at Some Lotteries,
   As Competition and Boredom Take Toll
   ----
   By Pauline Yoshihashi
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/12/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<IN>
CASINOS AND GAMBLING (CNO)
COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (CMT)
</IN>
<LP>
   Lotteries for years have pushed dreams of easy millions,
both for bettors and the states that sell tickets to
potential fame and fortune. But, like more pedestrian
businesses, state lotteries are beginning to feel the effects
of increased competition and plain old customer boredom.
   Since lotteries were introduced in the mid-1960s, states
have distilled the public's lust for instant riches into a
bonanza for cash-strapped coffers. Lottomania has swept 33
states and the District of Columbia, pumping more than $7
billion into education, senior citizens' programs and other
causes last year alone. Estimated 1990 sales rose to a record
$20 billion, although the approximate 6% increase was the
smallest since 1987 and resulted largely from new states
starting games.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   While new lotteries usually enjoy robust double-digit
growth for a while, the real trick is producing steady growth
once the novelty wears off. "There are people who think
lotteries are in a world by themselves, but they're not
immune to the laws of the marketplace," says Saul F. Leonard,
a gambling industry consultant in Los Angeles who works with
state lotteries. And lottery officials, who are looking for
new games and technologies that can produce solid long-term
growth, warn that there aren't any quick fixes.
   In the short term, many lottery officials say the
recession is chipping away at customers' discretionary
spending, debunking the old myth that gambling is
recessionproof. While executives say it's difficult to know
just how damaging the recession will be, it's clearly
affecting lottery sales in New York and a number of other
states.
   Although lotteries are a form of gambling, they compete
directly with movies, video rentals and other discretionary
purchases for the consumer's entertainment dollar. The
expansion of riverboat gambling, Indian bingo, off-track
betting and other forms of gambling may also hurt.
   "Lottery growth is continuing, but in many cases it's not
meeting expectations," says William S. Bergman, executive
director of the North American Association of State and
Provincial Lotteries. While new lotteries are continuing to
do well, he says, "for the more mature lotteries, especially
those in the Northeast and the Rust Belt, things are
softening a bit."
   Total sales in California dropped to $2.47 billion in the
year ended June 30 from $2.62 billion the prior year,
although lottery officials say the decline has leveled off
since last summer. Iowa's sales dropped about 2% to $169.5
million last year, while such other states as Pennsylvania
have also shown declines in the past year.
   In several states, lotto game sales are declining, but the
drop is being offset somewhat by increases in other games.
Peter D. Lynch, director of the New York lottery, thinks
higher gasoline prices are a prime suspect in the sharp
falloff of state lotto sales since last summer. "Someone who
spent $15 to fill up the gasoline tank and $5 in lottery
tickets is now spending $22 to fill up the tank," Mr. Lynch
says. Lotto sales have dropped 8% since last summer, he
estimates.
   The problems affecting the New York lottery, long
considered one of the nation's most successful, are typical
of those bedeviling mature lotteries. Tight-fisted state
officials slashed the lottery's ad budget 40% this fiscal
year. A special promotion in January produced a spectacular
$90 million jackpot, and officials hoped it would pump up
sales by grabbing big headlines. But hardly a word appeared
in the press because of coverage of the war. Nonetheless, Mr.
Lynch expects sales to hit $2.1 billion this year, up from
$1.92 billion in the year ended March 31.
   Bigger jackpots alone no longer guarantee player interest,
experts say. And serious gamblers have always argued that
lotteries are a lousy bet: The odds of picking the correct
six of 53 numbers, for example, are a staggering 23 million
to one. Many lotteries operate under guidelines similar to
those governing California's lottery, which allocates at
least 34% of sales to public schools, 50% to players and a
maximum of 16% to retailer commissions and other expenses.
   Given those odds, many lotteries are shifting their
pitches from "become an instant millionaire" to the fun of
playing. "We stress winning too much," says Jim Davey,
director of the Oregon lottery and president of Lotto
America, a lottery game that is played in several smaller
states. "We haven't done a good job in positioning it as
entertainment."
   The Oregon lottery was a pioneer in a new generation of
lottery games when it started the nation's first sports pool
games last year. The games fell short of expectations, and
faced formidable opposition from the National Football League
and the National Basketball Association, which are fighting
in Congress and individual states to block lottery sports
betting.
   Many experts believe sports games could help lottery
growth, but most say new technologies hold greater promise.
South Dakota is among the first to try video lottery
terminals, which offer instant results and have proved
popular with players. But many lottery directors worry about
a public outcry over video terminals, which some might think
blur the line between traditional lotto and "hard" gambling.
   The format that may hold the greatest potential -- and
faces the biggest hurdles -- is an interactive telephone
lottery. A group of lottery directors is exploring a
multi-state lottery that would let players gain access to the
game from their telephones. A television show tie-in would
provide the excitement and "player engagement" that makes
casino gambling so popular.
   "Phone interactive is one of a very, very few remaining
big-time events for lotteries," says Sharon Sharp, director
of the $1.6 billion Illinois lottery and a leading proponent
of the game. Mrs. Sharp acknowledges that political
opposition could be formidable but notes that lotteries are
by their nature controversial.
   Chon Gutierrez, who oversees the nation's biggest lottery
in California, believes the key to growth isn't in new games
but in making lotteries more accessible to players. "The key
to the future of the lottery is in broadening the player
base," Mr. Gutierrez says. "We have to minimize the hurdles
that force the occasional player to go out of his way to
play."
   Despite the slowdown in lottery growth, the games seem
certain to spread. Resistance to lotteries has succumbed to a
need for revenue even in such conservative states as
Louisiana, and experts bet that other Bible Belt states and
Texas won't be far behind. "When their financial situation
becomes stressful enough, you'll see gambling come through,"
says Mr. Leonard.
   In fact, lottery officials say, some cities are looking at
lotteries as a possible way of stemming their own flood of
red ink, either by tapping into their state's lottery or
starting up a separate municipal game, a move likely to meet
heated opposition from state games. New York City considered
a 25-cent surcharge on ticket sales and even wanted to start
its own scratchoff lottery game, but the Legislature didn't
approve them. Industry experts say the issues are bound to
recur as fiscal crises deepen around the nation.
   As lotteries enter their next phase, some worry that
states may seek a higher payoff for themselves. "Expectations
are so high," says Illinois's Mrs. Sharp. "But if we see
states get too greedy for lottery dollars, it can hurt."
Increasingly, lotteries find themselves stuck in the
political crossfire among legislatures, constituents and
state leaders as they search for cash cows to supplement
shrinking tax bases.
   Mr. Lynch of the New York lottery says the current
slowdown in lottery growth proves clearly that "there's a
limit to the public's discretionary spending on all forms of
entertainment, and lotteries in particular." But considering
the huge "gray market" for such activities as video poker
machines, he adds, "there's still plenty of room for
lotteries to grow without reaching a saturation point."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
