ID: 229	RANK: 61	SCORE: 13.072598
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900226-0177 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-02-26-90 0333EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a BC-LOT--LotteryState-by-State 2Takes   02-26 0767</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-LOT--Lottery State-by-State, 2 Takes,790</SECOND>
<BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE>
<HEAD>CALIFORNIA</HEAD>
<HEAD>Lotto</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   Tickets containing all six winning numbers in the California
Lottery's weekend ``Lotto 6-49'' game were sold in the cities of
Eureka and Carlsbad, lottery officials said Sunday, and each is
worth $3,186,409.
   There were six tickets containing five winning numbers and the
bonus number, and each was worth $282,498. The tickets were
purchased in South Gate, Newhall, Los Angeles, Baker, Covina and
Modesto.
   The winning numbers were: 44, 30, 33, 18, 36, 49 and the bonus
number, 43. The numbers are listed in the order they were
announced, but any combination would win.
   There were 277 tickets sold with five of six winning numbers,
and each ticket was worth $3,152. Some 14,012 tickets with four of
six winning numbers paid off at $56 each, and the 260,149 tickets
with three of six winning numbers were worth an automatic $5 each.
   Saturday night's televised drawing was delayed for 50 minutes by
what officials first thought was a breakdown of the machine that
spits out the balls containing the winning numbers.
   ``It was human error,'' California Lottery spokeswoman Carolyn
Walker said later.
   She said a person who was supposed to press three buttons on the
machine that randomly selects the numbers forgot to press the third
button in the sequence.
   The buttons cause the numbered balls to drop out of the machine.
Citizens are chosen randomly to press the buttons that release the
numbered balls for the twice-weekly drawing, Ms. Walker said,
because lottery employees are prohibited from starting the drawing.
   Lottery officials already had stopped the 7:55 p.m. statewide
broadcast of the drawing before they realized what went wrong, Ms.
Walker said. When the final button was finally pressed, the balls
dropped normally.
   Security cameras in the Sacramento TV studio made the required
videotape of the drawing, so it is valid even though it wasn't
broadcast live, she said.
   Sales from Wednesday night to Saturday's drawing were
$15,878,153. Wednesday's lottery jackpot is expected to be worth
about $5 million.
</TEXT>
<HEAD>Lottery</HEAD>
<DATELINE>SACRAMENTO, Calif. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Two tickets sold in Eureka and
Carlsbad contained all six winning numbers in the California
Lottery's weekend ``Lotto 6-49'' game to win the ticket holders
$3,186,409 each.
   There were six tickets containing five winning numbers and the
bonus number, and each was worth $282,498. The tickets were
purchased in South Gate, Newhall, Los Angeles, Baker, Covina and
Modesto.
   The winning numbers were: 44, 30, 33, 18, 36, 49 and the bonus
number, 43. The numbers are listed in the order they were
announced, but any combination would win.
   There were 277 tickets sold with five of six winning numbers,
and each ticket was worth $3,152. Some 14,012 tickets with four of
six winning numbers paid off at $56 each, and the 260,149 tickets
with three of six winning numbers were worth an automatic $5 each.
   Saturday night's televised drawing was delayed for 50 minutes by
what officials first thought was a breakdown of the machine that
spits out the balls containing the winning numbers.
   ``It was human error,'' California Lottery spokeswoman Carolyn
Walker said later.
   She said a person who was supposed to press three buttons on the
machine that randomly selects the numbers forgot to press the third
button in the sequence.
   The buttons cause the numbered balls to drop out of the machine.
Citizens are chosen randomly to press the buttons that release the
numbered balls for the twice-weekly drawing, Ms. Walker said,
because lottery employees are prohibited from starting the drawing.
   Lottery officials already had stopped the 7:55 p.m. statewide
broadcast of the drawing before they realized what went wrong, Ms.
Walker said. When the final button was finally pressed, the balls
dropped normally.
   Security cameras in the Sacramento TV studio made the required
videotape of the drawing, so it is valid even though it wasn't
broadcast live, she said.
   Sales from Wednesday night to Saturday's drawing were
$15,878,153. Wednesday's lottery jackpot is expected to be worth
about $5 million.
   On Saturday's ``Big Spin,'' a sixth-grade teacher from Fullerton
and a city worker from Catalina Island each won $1 million Saturday
in the California Lottery's ``Big Spin'' program.
   They are Char Leonard, 54, of Fullerton and Ann Marshall, 37, of
Avalon.
   William Dang of Garden Grove won $80,000. Terry Ostrander of
Point Richmond and Mary Barnett of Lake Isabella each received
$40,000.
   Moushginaz Kilijian of Fresno and Fred Moore of Bakersfield each
took home $30,000. Colleen Monahan of Concord got $20,000. The
$10,000 winners were Delia Moreno of La Puente and Paul Madden of
Las Vegas.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>MORE</NOTE>
</DOC>
