ID: 229	RANK: 94	SCORE: 12.347042
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890417-0101 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-04-17-89 1352EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a PM-LottoFever 1stLd-Writethru a0490 04-17 0660</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Lotto Fever, 1st Ld - Writethru, a0490,0673</SECOND>
<HEAD>Four Win in Record $69.9 Million Lottery Jackpot</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: LEADS with four grafs to UPDATE with one winner tentatively
identified, jackpot raised; PICKS UP 4th graf pvs, ``For all ...'</HEAD>
<DATELINE>CHICAGO (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Lottery officials waited today for the holders of
four tickets to step forward and claim a world-record jackpot of
$69.9 million.
   Holders of the tickets, whether it's one person, a couple or a
group, will split the pot, which was raised from $69 million today
after final sales were tallied.
   Two people, one in Chicago and one elsewhere in Illinois,
contacted state officials Sunday to report they held winning
tickets, but Lottery Director Sharon Sharp said the tickets would
have to be validated before the millionaires could be annointed.
   Officials today tentatively identified one winner as a man from
west central Illinois who planned to share the winnings with his
two sisters from Arizona. He was on his way to Chicago to have his
ticket validated, said lottery spokeswoman Carrie Worley.
   ``For all of you who said it's easier to be struck by lightning
than to win the Lotto, four people were struck last night and they
struck gold,'' Ms. Sharp said Sunday at a news conference.
   Each winner would get a $17.25 million share of the grand prize,
paid over 20 years, said Lottery spokeswoman Kathy Rem. The total
could rise after final sales figures are tallied, she said.
   The winning numbers were 3, 14, 32, 40, 46 and 54.
   Hopeful players from around the country and world descended on
Illinois last week, buying record numbers of tickets that enabled
lottery officials to boost the prize. Some rerouted flights, others
called from as far away as Europe, Japan and South America to find
out how to get a piece of the action.
   Losers said they were disappointed but took their losses in
stride.
   ``I just got one ticket because ... if you're going to win,
you'll win with one,'' said Lonny Taylor, a systems engineer from
Chicago.
   In addition to the four big winners, Ms. Sharp said Saturday's
drawing produced 1,220 players who matched five of the six numbers
to win prizes of $2,316.50, and 73,452 who will receive $76.50 for
matching four of six.
   The jackpot beat the old world record of $61.98 million set in
October in California. That pot was split among three winning
tickets, one bought by an individual and the others bought by
groups of co-workers.
   The previous Illinois record jackpot of $40 million was won by
Chicago printer Mike Wittkowski in 1984.
   Ms. Sharp said sales for the week _ $56.5 million _ eclipsed
totals for the week leading up to the $40 million jackpot in 1984.
She said sales on Saturday reached 27,000 tickets per minute.
   ``It was a little hairy there for a while,'' she said.
   Forty cents on every dollar in Lotto proceeds goes to the state
for the Common School Fund, Ms. Sharp said. But since the amount of
money spent on schools is determined by state budget figures, the
additional revenue from last week's record sales will go into state
coffers not specifically slated for education, she said.
   If only one person had matched the numbers, the jackpot would
have been the largest paid to a single winner.
   But with four ticketholders sharing the pot, the largest single
winner in U.S. history remains Sheelah Ryan of Winter Springs,
Fla., who walked away with $55.16 million in the Florida lottery in
September.
   Florida's Lotto jackpot is on the rise again, to an estimated
$37 million in next Saturday's drawing, its second highest level
after Ms. Ryan's winnings, because nobody won this weekend's $23
million prize, Lottery secretary Rebecca Paul announced Sunday.
   ``We're urging players to purchase their tickets early this week
to avoid the possiblity of longer lines Friday and Saturday,'' said
Mrs. Paul, who helped Illinois set up its lottery before she moved
south to Florida.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
