ID: 260	RANK: 29	SCORE: 8.691043
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910801-0053
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910801-0053.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   True or False:
   Happiness Lies
   In Taking of Tests
   ---
   Members of a Japanese Sect
   Love Getting Quizzed
   On the Founder's Books
   ----
   By Yumiko Ono
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
08/01/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<RE>
FAR EAST (FE)
JAPAN (JA)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
</RE>
<LP>
   TOKYO -- "Remember this," said the Roman emperor Marcus
Aurelius, "that very little is needed to make a happy life."
   About all it really takes are a few book reports and a
couple of multiple-choice exams. Or so it seems for followers
of the Institute for Research in Human Happiness, Japan's
fastest growing sect.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   While some U.S. religious groups mesmerize throngs through
rock music, television shows and theme parks,
success-oriented Japanese take pleasure in answering
questions like, Which of the following are not among things
the evil spirits dislike: (a) psychic power; (b) contentment;
(c) modesty; (d) self-reflection, or (e) desire for
self-improvement. {Answer: (a)}
   Mari Kume derived so much joy in accumulating knowledge
through test-taking that the 26-year-old abandoned plans to
become a biologist at a research lab and joined the institute
as a staff member. "My interest in analyzing the structure of
protein started to fade," she says.
   The five-year-old institute is the creation of Ryuho
Okawa, who, as it turns out, was no standout at taking tests.
He flunked his entrance exam to Tokyo University, then failed
a bar exam and a civil service test. (He did study
international finance at New York University and law at Tokyo
University, and until five years ago was a finance officer at
a major trading firm, where he distinguished himself as the
first employee to bring a portable shrine into the company
dormitory.)
   In spite of his unimpressive testing career, Mr. Okawa
lists lofty credentials. He claims to be Buddha reincarnated,
and, before Buddha, to have been the Greek god Hermes. He
says he has talked with Picasso, Jesus Christ and Newton, all
of whom helped him devise a four-pronged approach to
happiness: love, intellect, self-reflection and development.
   The testing and book reports were his own ideas, and a
rather natural epiphany for a finance-officer-turned-writer.
Institute candidates must prepare book reports on 10 of his
books. Once accepted, his estimated 1.5 million followers, of
whom 15% are devoted test-takers, continue to study Mr.
Okawa's writings to pass exams and advance through seven
spiritual levels.
   Roughly one million people subscribe to the institute's
monthly magazine, containing such pieces as highlights of his
speech on "The Conditions of an Angel." Heaven only knows how
many more are inspired by Monthly Miracle, a free magazine
that recently featured a cartoon with a robot called Miracle
who visits a bookstore and marvels at the number of books Mr.
Okawa has written.
   More than 27 million copies of Mr. Okawa's books are in
circulation, his staff estimates. He has become one of the
richest authors in Japan. Last year, sales of his 130 books
and of his cassette tapes totaled 312 million yen ($2.2
million) for his publishing unit alone, and that doesn't
include proceeds from six other companies that sell his
books.
   Staffers say the test-taking isn't designed to sell books;
Mr. Okawa, they say, is interested in weeding out casual
happiness seekers. Hiroshi Matsumoto, for one, assumed he
could just breeze into the institute. But he flunked his
first test, and his one-page book report was rejected with a
nice note suggesting he study more and try again in three
months.
   "It was a sudden awakening," says the 31-year-old, who has
since buckled down and advanced to the fourth level, which
enables him to teach others.
   Such zest for study may seem surprising, considering that
most Japanese spend much of their youth struggling through
"examination hell" to ensure they get into good high schools
and universities. Some have suggested that filling out
bluebooks on Buddha provides a kind of comfort to examophiles
who have perfected their testtaking and memorizing skills.
   For those who need extra coaching, pep-rally-type study
sessions are held in hotels in the countryside. And for
procrastinators, there's a cheat-sheet called the "Mind Up
Series," which efficiently catalogs Mr. Okawa's major themes.
A favorite saying involves snowballs. People, Mr. Okawa says,
should view life as a snowball that picks up pebbles and
dirt, but ultimately ends up fluffy, pure and white.
   Strenuous standards might encourage cheating, but the
institute doesn't seem too worried. One can look up answers
on takehome multiple-choice tests, but it's harder to lie on
essay questions like "Why does love lead to happiness?"
   Mr. Okawa would not be interviewed for this article.
Otherwise, he is not shy. Unlike most traditional Japanese
religious groups, which shun publicity, Mr. Okawa flies a
silver blimp over Tokyo that flashes a message in red: "The
age is now: Institute for Research in Human Happiness."
   Full-page color ads with his photograph are found in
national newspapers, and television commercials announce that
Mr. Okawa has published more than three million copies of his
best-selling book "The Terrifying Revelations of
Nostradamus," about the 16th-century French astrologer and
physician. And while members of other Japanese sects often
don't like to acknowledge their involvement in the groups,
his staffers sport stickers of the institute mascot,
Leviathan, a smiling blue sea monster with yellow gills,
accompanied by a slogan: "Love] Love] Leviathan]"
   The group is "completely changing the image of religion"
in Japan, says Hiromi Shimada, assistant professor of
religious studies at Japan Women's University. Such
burgeoning mass support worries some religious scholars, and
Japan's association of Buddhist sects doesn't acknowledge the
institute, saying it is "different in nature" from
traditional groups. Other observers say many of Mr. Okawa's
preachings seem harmless and make sense. (No doubt some make
more sense then others. Allah, Mr. Okawa says, told him that
the internal political struggle in the Soviet Union is
happening partly because Mikhail Gorbachev is Julius Caesar
reincarnated, while Boris Yeltsin used to be Brutus.)
   Maybe the other sects are jealous. The happiness
institute, which already outnumbers Japan's one million
Christians, vows to amass 10 million followers in a year, and
to convert the whole nation by the turn of the century.
   Recently, 50,000 ardent followers crowded the Tokyo Dome
for Mr. Okawa's 35th birthday party. A suit-clad, somewhat
sleepy-eyed Mr. Okawa appeared on stage, with his arms
outstretched telling the crowd he is Buddha. "To die without
fulfilling your mission means to break the pledge you made
with Buddha," he said, raising his high-pitched voice.
Followers gazed fondly at his chubby figure atop the radiant
stage, or at an image of him on two adjoining giant screens.
   Not everyone is so impressed. A senior executive of a
Tokyo advertising company can't understand a book about
various spirits living in a nine-dimensional world. "I
couldn't follow it all," says the executive, who read three
of Mr. Okawa's books after repeated prodding by his boss,
whose wife is a devoted member.
   Regardless of what such skeptics think about the
institute, Mr. Okawa's writings provide some hard-to-get
information. Japanese novelist Tamio Kageyama needed some
advice when writing "Borneo Hotel," a book about an American
student with psychic powers who was trying to identify
spirits surrounding a hotel on a lonely island. Mr. Kageyama
credits Mr. Okawa's handy guide "How to expel Evil Spirits."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
