ID: 260	RANK: 60	SCORE: 7.028407
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880509-0112 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-05-09-88 1458EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u w PM-Regan'sRecord 2ndLd-Writethru a0586 05-09 1275</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Regan's Record, 2nd Ld-Writethru, a0586,1200</SECOND>
<NOTE>EDs: Subs pvs grafs 2-3, For her part, with new grafs 2-8 on
Reagan denial.</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By W. DALE NELSON</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The White House denounced Donald T. Regan
today as exploiting the presidency with his book detailing Nancy
Reagan's interest in astrology, but left open the question of
whether stargazing still plays a role in presidential scheduling.
   President Reagan said again that he never used astrology to make
policy decisions.
   At a Rose Garden ceremony honoring small business executives,
Reagan was asked whether he permits the consultation of
astrologists in connection with schedules and public appearances.
   ``Well, you asked for it,'' he replied. ``I can't because I
never did.''
   Moments later, however, Reagan's chief spokesman, Marlin
Fitzwater, said the president had misunderstood the question
shouted by a reporter from the rear of the Rose Garden. Reagan
thought he was being asked whether astrology was being used to make
key policy decisions, Fitzwater said.
   So Reagan was in effect merely reiterating a statement he made
last Friday, denying that stargazing played a role in policy
decisions, his spokesman said.
   Earlier, Fitzwater left open the question of whether astrology
still plays a role in scheduling.
   For her part, the first lady says she will keep talking to her
astrologer, her spokeswoman said.
   Fitzwater told reporters that President Reagan feels ``deep
personal disapointment with this breach of confidence.''
   ``I was taken aback by the vengefulness of the attack. It comes
through to me that Don Regan doesn't really like me,'' Mrs. Reagan
was quoted as saying by her press secretary.
   Fitzwater gave a sharply-worded statement to reporters as the
first lengthy White House reaction to the book by the former White
House chief of staff entitled, ``For the Record: from Wall Street
to Washington.''
   In the book, Regan contended Reagan ``laid down no rules and
articulated no missions'' while his wife presided over a ``shadowy
distaff presidency'' heavily influenced by astrological advice.
   ``The new book by Donald Regan is a kiss-and-tell story in the
mold of all books that seek to exploit the presidency or the first
family for personal self-interest,'' Fitzwater said.
   ``The president emphasized last week that he made no policy
decisions based on astrology. We recognize that the first lady has
an interest in astrology,'' he added.
   The spokesman defended the first lady's interest in stargazing,
as well as her input into the preparation of the president's
schedule.
   ``She has every reason to make contributions on presidential
schedules and activities,'' Fitzwater said. ``She has every right
to continue it,'' he added at another point.
   Asked repeatedly whether she continued to rely on astrological
predictions in such matters, Fitzwater replied, ``I don't know.''
   The spokesman also took issue with Regan's contention that
astrology played a major role in decisions about the president's
schedule. Asked about any factual errors in the book, Fitzwater
replied there were ``a whole lot of things, but we're simply not
going to go into it.''
   ``I know the first lady is very upset about anybody trying to
exploit her concerns for her husband's safety and welfare,'' he
said.
   Elaine Crispen, the first lady's press secretary, said today
that Mrs. Reagan told her she intends to keep talking to the
astrologer. The woman has been identified as a San Francisco
socialite, Joan Quigley.
   Asked if the first lady will continue to use astrology in
helping plan the president's schedule, Mrs. Crispen said only,
``She will more than likely continue to talk to this person because
she does get some comfort from it.''
   ``It doesn't control their lives ... she doesn't see any harm in
it,'' Mrs. Crispen added.
   Regan's book details his allegations that Mrs. Reagan consulted
an astrologer about scheduling of presidential events.
   The book pictures Reagan as a reluctant decision-maker, saying,
``Never did he issue a direct order, although I, at least,
sometimes devoutly wished that he would.''
   ``He listened, acquiesced, played his role, and waited for the
next act to be written,'' Regan wrote of the president who dumped
him in favor of former Sen. Howard H. Baker Jr. at the height of
the furor over the Iran-Contra affair. Mrs. Reagan was widely
reported at the time to have a played a major role in influencing
the president to replace Regan.
   The White House issued a statement Sunday saying:
``Vindictiveness and revenge are not admirable qualities, and are
not worthy of comment. Donald Regan's attempts to defame the first
lady, on Mother's Day no less, are certainly in that category.''
   In an interview Sunday, Regan said, ``I don't think this is an
attack on his wife. ... There are no adjectives, no deprecation of
the first lady. I merely told the story of what she did or didn't
do during my period as chief of staff.''
   The former chief of staff said he regarded Mrs. Reagan's
interest in astrology as a harmless eccentricity at first and ``it
wasn't until it began to impinge and in my judgment harm the
presidency in the latter part of 1986 and early 1987 that I began
to protest.''
   Regan said he was donating all of his proceeds from the book,
published by Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, to charity.
   In his book, the former chief of staff wrote ``my admiration for
Reagan as president remains very great'' although ``my judgment of
him as a man, in light of my final experience as his chief of
staff, underwent a certain change.''
   Over and over, however, he described the president as a leader
who holds the reins lightly.
   ``Theodore Roosevelt believed that the president could conduct
his office in any way that was not specifically prohibited by the
Constitution,'' he wrote. ``Reagan, who laid down no rules and
articulated no missions, conferred a Rooseveltian latitude on his
subordinates.''
   Regan, who was secretary of the treasury before moving to the
White House, said that in his four years at the Treasury
Department, ``I never saw President Reagan alone and never
discussed economic philosophy or fiscal and monetary policy with
him man to man.
   ``From first day to last at Treasury, I was flying by the seat
of my pants. The president never told me what he believed or what
he wanted to accomplish in the field of economics. I had to figure
these things out like any other American, by studying his speeches
and reading the newspapers.''
   As for the first lady, he said, ``Mrs. Reagan regarded herself
as the president's alter ego not only in the conjugal but also in
the political and official dimensions, as if the office that had
been bestowed upon her husband by the people somehow fell into the
category of worldly goods covered by the marriage vows.''
   He said of Mike Deaver, who served as deputy chief of staff
before Regan came to the White House, that ``his function in the
White House had as much to do with the mysterious process of
managing this shadowy distaff presidency as with his visible role
as the custodian of the presidential image.''
   Regan says that ``virtually every major move and decision the
Reagans made during my time as White House chief of staff was
cleared in advance with a woman in San Francisco who drew up
horoscopes to make certain that the planets were in a favorable
alignment for the enterprise.'
   He said he did not know the woman's identity. However, Time
magazine, which published excerpts from the book, identified her as
Joan Quigley of San Francisco. Ms. Quigley confirmed in a telephone
interview that she had been giving Mrs. Reagan astrological advice
since shortly after the assassination attempt on the president in
1981.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
