ID: 260	RANK: 61	SCORE: 6.989028
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP901105-0194 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NY-11-05-90 0832EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>a e PM-APonTV-TheBigOne Adv06   11-05 0752</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-AP on TV-The Big One, Adv06,0911</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv06</NOTE>
<NOTE>For release Tuesday PMs, Nov 6, and thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>Big Quake Yields Big Exaggerations in NBC Mini-Series</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By LEE SIEGEL</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP Science Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>LOS ANGELES (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Buy extra water, hoard some groceries and
dive under your desk. NBC is about to ravage the nation's second
largest city in an upcoming mini-series, ``The Big One: The Great
Los Angeles Earthquake.''
   Just remember, it's sweeps time.
   In the quest for big ratings, television's magnitude-8 seismic
disaster is far more catastrophic than the real ``big one'' the
government says is at least 60 percent likely to rock Southern
California within 30 years.
   Modern skyscrapers are flattened. Quakes last too long for the
magnitudes they are assigned by the movie's writers. Death and
destruction are rampant, even though scientists and officials
expect most of the city and its residents will survive the real
great earthquake.
   The two-part series airs 9 p.m. to 11 p.m. EST, next Sunday and
Monday.
   ``I don't think we will ever see the devastation they depicted
in the movie,'' said Paul Flores, director of the Southern
California Earthquake Preparedness Project, part of the state
Office of Emergency Services.
   ``The concern is that it's difficult to sell preparedness when
people are shown that level of devastation. It leads to fatalism.
The public will ask, `How do you prepare for something like
that?'''
   Lucy Jones, a seismologist at the U.S. Geological Survey in
Pasadena, served as a technical adviser for the mini-series and
also as a model for its heroine: crusading, quake-predicting USGS
seismologist Claire Winslow, played by Joanna Kerns of ``Growing
Pains.''
   ``The damage from the earthquake is awfully extreme. They've
gone for the worst possible earthquake,'' the 35-year-old Jones
said. ``It gives the image that in an earthquake, you're likely to
die.
   ``The truth is that even in the worst-case scenarios, with
10,000 or 20,000 people dead, that's one-tenth of 1 percent of the
people in the affected area. Even in a bad disaster chances are
you're not going to die.''
   Jones convinced the mini-series' makers to tone down some
exaggerations, but said many of her objections were met by the
response, ``That's too bad, we need that for the dramatic effect.''
   Unfortunately, the movie often lacks enough drama. It takes all
of part one to reach the brink of disaster. And the plot is mucked
up by a political assassination attempt, a soap opera involving
Winslow's mother and sister, and what Jones calls ``gratuitous
sex'' between Winslow and her husband, portrayed by Dan Lauria of
ABC's ``The Wonder Years.''
   ``The Big One'' does have some redeeming social value.
   It emphasizes the need for citizens to prepare themselves by
learning how to shut off natural gas lines to their homes and
assemble quake supplies such as water, food, batteries and
flashlights.
   Damage to lifelines such as electricity, water lines, phones and
transportation links is depicted fairly accurately.
   The movie also illustrates possible shortcomings of locating Los
Angeles' emergency operations center four levels underground and
correctly shows how most citizens must fend for themselves after a
big quake.
   But seismologist Claire Winslow displays absolutely unrealistic
certainty in predicting the big quake is imminent. And an Office of
Emergency Services official, played by Joe Spano of ``Hill Street
Blues,'' is unrealistically portrayed as a political hack trying to
muzzle Winslow to protect a wealthy developer.
   Such drawbacks seriously hurt and oversimplify the depiction of
the dilemma facing officials who must decide whether to warn the
public about very uncertain signs that seismic disaster might be
imminent.
   While the expected ``big one'' most likely will be an magnitude
7.5 to 8 quake some distance from Los Angeles on the San Andreas
Fault, the movie version is a magnitude 8 quake on the Elysian Park
Fault, directly under the heart of the city. Seismologists suspect
that fault probably would produce a quake no worse than magnitude
6.5 to 7.
   The quake in the mini-series ``is a very unlikely quake,'' Jones
said. ``It could happen, but it's improbable. ... It's an
absolutely worst-case scenario.''
   Flores objects to the public hysteria, looting and panic shown
after the quake prediction is publicized.
   ``People behave a lot more rationally,'' he said.
   Nevertheless, Jones enjoyed working on ``The Big One,'' and said
viewers ``should remember it's a movie. It's not reality.''
   As for Kerns' portrayal of a Jones-like character, the real
seismologist said: ``I've never been as skinny as she is and never
will be in my life.''
   ---
   Elsewhere in television ...
   THEY'VE GOT YOUR NUMBER - ``Frontline,'' the distinguished PBS
investigative documentary series, takes a long hard look tonight at
lotteries - the staes that run them, the promoters who design and
sell them, and the people who buy the tickets.
   ``Betting on the Lottery'' focuses on Sharon Sharp, the director
of Illinois' state lottery, who took over the 16-year-old lottery
three years ago with a mandate to revitalize it.
   ``Frontline'' also visits Maryland, a state with the
second-highest per capita betting on the lottery, and questions the
morality of the lottery.
   ``The state is not taking care of people. The state is taking
advantage of people's weakness for gambling,'' says a state
legislator from Baltimore.
   Check local listings.
   ---
   EDITOR'S NOTE: Science writer Lee Siegel specializes in covering
earthquakes and seismology.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
