ID: 260	RANK: 67	SCORE: 6.832993
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880507-0089 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-05-07-88 1206EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-StargazingAmerica Bjt   05-07 0943</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Stargazing America, Bjt,0972</SECOND>
<HEAD>Stargazing Firmly Established in Popular Culture</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By ROBERT BARR</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>NEW YORK (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Horoscopes aren't as popular as comic strips and
obituaries and surveys find few people willing to admit they are
guided by the stars, but astrology is firmly rooted in American
culture.
   ``Part of it is amusing and a parlor game, but unfortunately
some people take it seriously,'' says Paul Kurtz, chairman of the
Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the
Paranormal.
   ``If it is the case that the U.S. delayed the INF signing due to
astrological predictions, that is serious,'' Kurtz said.
   What he was talking about, of course, was the disclosure by
former White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan that Nancy Reagan
consulted astrologers about her husband's schedule, including the
signing of a nuclear arms limitation treaty with the Soviet Union.
   Her spokeswoman later confirmed that Mrs. Reagan did, indeed,
consult astrologers. But the president said he had never based a
policy decision on a horoscope.
   If true, that's just a darn shame, according to Joelle Mahoney,
president of the 140-member Astrologers Guild of America.
   ``Using an astrologer, to me, is just one more piece of input
for the president to make a decision,'' she said Friday.
   To determined skeptics such as Kurtz, astrology is just another
instance of what H.L. Mencken once called ``the virulence of the
national appetite for bogus revelation.''
   A survey of 2,000 adults, conducted last year by the Public
Opinion Laboratory of Northern Illinois University, found that
two-thirds were regular or occasional readers of horoscopes and 36
percent thought astrology was scientific. However, only 7 percent
said they ever adjusted their plans based on their horoscopes.
   New York Telephone gets a million calls a month _ at 28 cents a
call _ for its dial-a-horoscope lines. However, according to
company spokesman Steve Marcus, three to four times more callers
dial for weather forecasts.
   The Gallup Poll hasn't asked adults about astrology since 1978,
when it found that 29 percent of the respondents said they believed
in it. More people expressed belief in such things as extra-sensory
perception and deja vu, said Colleen McMurray of the Gallup
Organization, but astrology ranked higher than the Loch Ness
monster and Bigfoot, with only 13 percent believing in them.
   Barry Karr, who works with Kurtz's committee, said Gallup polls
of children aged 13-17 found that belief in astrology increased
from 40 percent in 1978 to 52 percent in 1986. In contrast, the
number of those who believed in ESP fell from 67 percent to 46
percent and belief in the Loch Ness monster dropped from 31 percent
to 13 percent.
   In newspaper readership surveys, anywhere from one-fifth to
one-half of those surveyed say they read the daily horoscope, said
Deanne Termini, executive vice president of Belden Associates of
Dallas, a newspaper marketing research firm. It averages out to
about one out of three readers, she said,
   By comparison, obituaries, editorials, comic strips and the
``Dear Abby'' or ``Ann Landers'' columns are followed by about 50
percent of newspaper readers, she said, while 20 percent do the
crossword and only 5 percent bother with the bridge column.
   As far as Mrs. Mahoney of the astrology guild is concerned,
newspaper horoscopes ``are about the worst press that astrology
has.''
   ``The true science of astrology is quite complex, and there are
no two astrological profiles that are the same,'' she said.
   Robert W. Cooper, executive-secretary of the American Federation
of Astrologers in Tempe, Ariz., takes a kindlier view of newspaper
horoscopes, saying they at least serve to interest people in the
art.
   The federation has between 4,000 and 5,000 members, Cooper said,
adding that not all are astrologers. He estimated that the number
of Americans involved in ``serious astrology'' is no more than
50,000 _ astrologers and clients included.
   All in all, Cooper said, the publicity generated by the White
House connection made it a good week for astrologers. And he didn't
seem at all surprised that it came on the same week the federation
was observing the 50th anniversary of its founding _ on May 4,
1938, in Washington, D.C.
   Cooper and Mrs. Mahoney say astrology can't predict anything.
Even with the help of computers, which have cut the time for
casting a horoscope from six hours to 20 seconds, Mrs. Mahoney
said: ``We don't promise anything. We simply view ourselves as
map-readers.''
   ``We can advise you, for instance, that the aspects in effect
make you accident-prone for the coming period,'' said Cooper.
However, he said, astrology can't predict whether an accident will
happen.
   The risk of making predictions was demonstrated last week by
Ostaro, the Hindu Astrologer, who volunteered to peer into
President Reagan's future for The Associated Press.
   In addition to predicting Tuesday that Reagan might have some
foot and knee injuries next year, Ostaro volunteered a prediction
that the Chicago White Sox would beat the New York Yankees that
night. The Yankees won.
   Despite skepticism, astrology has even had its moments in court.
   In 1985, the California Supreme Court overturned an Azusa city
ordinance which banned fortune-telling, astrology, palmistry,
tea-leaf reading and other occult arts.
   The only dissenting justice, Malcolm Lucas, argued that a
municipality has the right ``to protect its citizens from their own
gullibility.''
   But Justice Stanley Mosk wrote for the majority: ``When such
persons communicate their beliefs to others, they are not acting
fraudulently; they are communicating opinions which, however
dubious, are unquestionably protected by the Constitution.''
   Mosk noted that many other people ``purport to predict the
future,'' including economists, investment counselors, political
pollsters, and ``clergymen who describe the concept of a
hereafter.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
