ID: 260	RANK: 88	SCORE: 6.394550
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880508-0055 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-05-08-88 1603EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u w AM-Regan'sRecord Bjt 2Takes 05-08 1158</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Regan's Record, Bjt, 2 Takes,1,150-2,000</SECOND>
<HEAD>For 6:30 p.m. EDT release; time set by source</HEAD>
<HEAD>Regan Portrays Reagan as Controlled by Astrology-Influenced First
Lady</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By SUSANNE M. SCHAFER</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Donald T. Regan, former White House chief of
staff, on Sunday portrayed President Reagan as a hesitant and
unassertive chief executive controlled by a scheming,
image-conscious first lady who depended heavily upon an
astrologer's stargazing predictions.
   Regan offered a sometimes bitter account of his stormy days at
the White House in a memoir, ``For the Record: From Wall Street to
Washington,'' published by Harcourt Brace Jovanovich and scheduled
to go on sale in bookstores on Monday.
   ``Virtually ever major move and decision the Reagans made during
my time as White House chief of staff was cleared in advance with a
woman in San Francisco who drew up horoscopes to make certain that
the planets were in a favorable alignments for the enterprise,''
Regan wrote.
   He did not identify the woman, saying Nancy Reagan referred to
her only as ``Friend.'' But Time magazine, which carried excerpts
of the book in its new issue, said, ``She is Nob Hill Socialite
Joan Quigley, sixtyish, a Vassar graduate who has written three
books on astrology.''
   Ms. Quigley, a wealthy Republican whose specialty is politics,
is a frequent guest on the Merv Griffin show. She has been
practicing astrology since the 1960s and has written several books
on the subject.
   Reached by the San Francisco Chronicle last week on vacation in
Paris, she acknowledged she has known the Reagans for years, but
refused to comment on whether they had ever been her clients.
   ``I never say who my clients are. Never. It is very
confidential,'' she said.
   Asked if it would be wrong to say she was the Reagans'
astrologer, she said: ``I won't comment on that. I can't comment.''
   The Reagans had no comment Sunday afternoon when they alighted
from the helicopter that brought them from Camp David, Md., where
they had spent the weekend. Reagan pointed to his ear, indicating
he could not hear questions shouted at him by reporters; Mrs.
Reagan appeared cool and unsmiling, but said nothing.
   On Friday, however, Reagan expressed irritation about Regan's
book, the latest in a series of ``kiss and tell'' books about
Reagan's presidency. ``He's chosen to attack my wife and I don't
look kindly upon that at all,'' Reagan said.
   For a time, Regan says he was kept in the dark about Mrs.
Reagan's secret, closely held by a handful of aides since Reagan's
days as the governor of California.
   But after repeated clashes with the first lady over schedules,
longtime Reagan aide Michael Deaver told the chief of staff about
the woman and advised Regan to ``humor'' the first lady, he said.
   ``At one point, I kept a color-coded calendar on my desk
(numerals highlighted in green ink for `good' days, red for `bad'
days, yellow for `iffy' days) as an aid to remembering when it was
propitious to move the president of the United States from one
place to another, or schedule him to speak in public, or commence
negotiations with a foreign power,'' Regan wrote.
   Mrs. Reagan liked to chat with the woman every Saturday from
Camp David, he said. The advice from the soothsayer, coupled with a
concern by Nancy Reagan for the president's health that Regan
described as ``excessive,'' caused particular problems when the
Iran-Contra scandal broke and prostate surgery required a time of
recuperation, the former chief of staff recalled.
   Regan described Mrs. Reagan as presiding over ``a shadowy
distaff presidency'' and using ``adroit guerrilla actions'' to
achieve goals in ``a genuine belief that she was the best judge of
her husband's interests.''
   ``Mrs. Reagan regarded herself as the president's alter ego not
only in the conjugal but also in the political and official
dimensions, as if the office that had been bestowed upon her
husband by the people somehow fell into the category of worldly
goods covered by the marriage vows,'' he wrote.
   ``The president's view of the situation was never discussed,''
he said. ``The fact that he permitted it to exist, and that he
never reversed any of the situations created by his wife's
intervention, was regarded as sufficient evidence that he was
willing to tolerate the state of affairs.''
   Regan pressed the first lady to allow the president to speak out
on the Iran-Contra affair, telling her, ``We need a press
conference, public appearances, speeches.''
   ``A full month after the president's release from the hospital,
his schedule was still a dead letter because Mrs. Reagan's `Friend'
had not provided a list of auspicious days. The whole month
appeared inauspicious for the president,'' Regan wrote.
   After consulting with her ``Friend,'' the first lady provided
some possible dates, Regan wrote. But her advice was not always
heeded. Regan wrote that Mrs. Reagan appeared to want to delay the
president's July 1985 surgery for suspected cancer of the colon
because of her astrological concerns, but the president overruled
any delay.
   Regan quoted the president saying, ``Why wait? Do the test and
go ahead with the operation.''
   But Mrs. Reagan's influence hardly stopped at such lesser
matters as scheduling trips or speeches, Regan said. In his
account, she was the one who decreed that Vice President George
Bush and national security adviser Robert McFarlane be barred from
Reagan's hospital bed for days following his cancer surgery.
   And the president's longtime friendship with CIA Director
William J. Casey did not prevent the first lady from pressing for
his ouster, even as he lay recuperating from brain cancer surgery
at Christmastime 1986, Regan contended in one of his many
descriptions of their telephone conversations.
   ``Mrs. Reagan, who had already shown signs of irritability, now
became angry. ... `You're more interested in protecting Bill Casey
than in protecting Ronnie!' she cried. `He's got to go. He can't do
his job; he's an embarrassment to Ronnie. He should be out,'''
Regan quoted the first lady as insisting.
   And, Reagan asserted, the first lady not only chose the speech
writer for such vital addresses as the State of the Union, but also
heavily edited them.
   ``I don't give a damn about the right-to-lifers,'' he quotes
Mrs. Reagan as saying when she demanded that passages referring to
abortion be deleted.
   Regan contended he was ousted by an effort organized at the
hands of Mrs. Reagan and several of her close associates, and he
barely has a kind word for the first lady in the 379-page book.
   Regan portrayed Reagan as a president who ``laid down no rules
and articulated no mission.'' At the same time, he told of
instances in which Reagan held lengthy discussions with aides on
complicated legislation, bills or administration efforts to push
budget cuts through Capitol Hill.
   But Mrs. Reagan emerged in the book as Regan's foremost target.
He paints her as an easily irritated ``constant telephone
presence,'' who constantly meddled in administration affairs.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>MORE</NOTE>
</DOC>
