ID: 276	RANK: 23	SCORE: 28.414236
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900327-0096 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-03-27-90 1304EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a PM-Oscars 1stLd-Writethru a0483 03-27 0896</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Oscars, 1st Ld - Writethru, a0483,0917</SECOND>
<HEAD>Small Budget Films `Miss Daisy' and `Left Foot' Take Top Oscars</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: SUBS 8th graf, `Denzel Washington,' to DELETE reference to
regiment being first to fight; historical material and movie press
release indicate it may have been first fighting unit recruited in
the North but not first blacks to fight in Civil War. Note a0535
PM-Oscars should have been slugged PM-Oscar-Optional sted as 1st Ld
- Writethru.</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserColor LAA104,102; LaserPhoto LAA4; LaserGraphic</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By JOHN HORN</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP Entertainment Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>LOS ANGELES (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The Academy Awards celebrated movies low in
budget but rich in talent as ``Driving Miss Daisy'' took the Oscar
for best picture and actress, while ``My Left Foot'' won for best
actor and supporting actress.
   Jessica Tandy, who played the combative Southern widow who'd
rather walk in ``Driving Miss Daisy,'' became the oldest performer
to win an Oscar at age 80.
   A surprised Miss Tandy wondered aloud why the producers cast an
actress whose career has mostly been on stage to play a lead in a
movie.
   ``I think I'm very lucky they trusted me with such a wonderful
part,'' she said backstage at the Los Angeles Music Center. ``I
never thought of myself as a movie actress.''
   The movie, about the widow's growing friendship with her black
chauffeur, won four prizes, the most of any in the 62nd annual
Academy Awards on Monday night. It took screenplay honors, for
Alfred Uhry's adaptation of his Pulitzer Prize-winning play, and
the makeup Oscar.
   Daniel Day-Lewis was named best actor for ``My Left Foot,'' the
emotional account of artist-poet Christy Brown's battle against
cerebral palsy. Brenda Fricker, who played Brown's selfless mother,
won for supporting actress.
   The Civil War movie ``Glory'' drew three prizes, and another
high-priced war film, ``Born on the Fourth of July,'' won two, best
director for Oliver Stone and best editing.
   Denzel Washington, who played a runaway slave turned soldier in
``Glory,'' got the supporting actor Oscar. The account about a
black Union regiment that fought in the Civil War also gathered
trophies for cinematographer Freddie Francis and for best sound.
   ``My son said he was going to make one of these out of clay for
me, now I've got a model for him,'' an exultant Washington said as
he held up his gold statue, first award of the evening.
   Stone won a directing Oscar for the 1986 movie ``Platoon.''
   ``Born on the Fourth of July,'' the account of Ron Kovic's
passage from gung-ho soldier to disabled anti-war protester, was
among the most hyped Oscar contenders, as was its star, Tom Cruise.
   But Academy voters seemed determined to ignore the efforts of
the immodest, favoring instead those films whose path to the screen
was more unconventional.
   The award for art direction went to ``Batman,'' which was the
top moneymaker of 1989 at $251 million but failed to win a
nomination in any other category. Another top box-office draw,
``Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade,'' won for sound effects
editing. The Oscar for visual effects went to the $60 million
underwater thriller ``The Abyss.''
   The makers of ``Driving Miss Daisy,'' on the other hand, had to
cut the production budget almost in half _ to $7.5 million _
because studios feared it wouldn't be a commercial success. It is.
It has grossed $74.5 million.
   ``My Left Foot'' was made for a paltry $3 million and
distributed by independent Miramax Films.
   ``Miss Daisy'' was dropped by MGM-UA and picked up by Warner
Bros., which provided only part of its budget. Producers Richard
and Lili Zanuck found foreign financing and slashed their costs to
get the film made.
   The movie's director, Bruce Beresford, wasn't even nominated for
an award, a fact lamented by several award winners and presenters.
In his opening remarks, show host Billy Crystal described ``Driving
Miss Daisy'' as ``the movie that apparently directed itself.''
   ``My Left Foot'' carried the imprint of one man, too _ Christy
Brown.
   ``For everyone involved in the film, all our desire to make the
film, all the strength that we needed, all the pleasure that we
took in making the film came from Christy Brown,'' Day-Lewis said.
   The Dublin-born Miss Fricker gave thanks to ``Christy Brown,
just for being alive, and to his mother, Mrs. Brown. Anybody who
gives birth 22 times deserves one,'' she said, referring to the
Oscar.
   Italy's ``Cinema Paradiso,'' a reminiscence of growing up in a
Sicilian village, was named best foreign film.
   The announcement of the foreign film award came after an
ear-rattling satellite feed from Moscow, where Jack Lemmon and
Soviet actress Natalya Negoda announced nominees with a triple echo
reverberating through the sound system. There also were satellite
feeds from Australia, Argentina and England.
   The show, seen by an estimated 1 billion viewers in 90
countries, ran a long 3 hours and 34 minutes.
   Disney's much-praised animated fairy tale ``The Little Mermaid''
won two Oscars _ best song for the calypso ``Under the Sea,'' and
best original score.
   Japanese filmmaker Akira Kurosawa, director of such classics as
``Rashomon,'' ``The Seven Samurai'' and ``Ran,'' received an
honorary Oscar.
   In his acceptance speech the 80-year-old master struck a humble
note, saying, ``I really don't feel yet that I have grasped the
essence of cinema.''
   ``Henry V'' took the prize for costume design. Tom Schulman,
author of ``Dead Poet's Society,'' won for best original screenplay.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
