ID: 276	RANK: 40	SCORE: 23.215216
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900327-0024 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-03-27-90 0132EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>b a AM-Oscars 16thLd-Writethru a0443 03-27 1290</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Oscars, 16th Ld - Writethru, a0443,1321</SECOND>
<HEAD>URGENT</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Recasts lead, new quote from Zanuck, minor editing; should
stand for AMs.</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto staffing; LaserGraphic</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By BOB THOMAS</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>LOS ANGELES (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   ``Driving Miss Daisy,'' the heartwarming
story of a crotchety Jewish widow and her friendship with a patient
black chauffeur, won the Oscar as best picture Monday and captured
the top acting prize for Jessica Tandy. Its total of four awards
made it the year's most-honored film.
   Daniel Day-Lewis was named best actor for his role in ``My Left
Foot'' as Christy Brown, who battled cerebral palsy to become an
acclaimed artist. Brenda Fricker, who played his devoted mother,
won the best supporting actress award.
   Oliver Stone was honored at the 62nd annual Academy Awards as
best director for ``Born on the Fourth of July,'' the story of a
Vietnam soldier's transformation from bitter paraplegic to anti-war
activist. It was the second such prize in three years for Stone,
who also won for the 1986 anti-Vietnam epic ``Platoon.''
   ``My deepest thanks for your acknowledgment that Vietnam is not
over, though some people say it is,'' said Stone.
   For the first time since 1981, the directing award did not go
for the year's best picture. Bruce Beresford, who directed ``Miss
Daisy,'' was not even nominated, an omission that was commented on
frequently during the presentations.
   ``We're up here for one simple reason,'' said Richard Zanuck,
who produced ``Miss Daisy'' with his wife, Lili. ``And that's the
fact that Bruce Beresford is a brilliant director.''
   Denzel Washington, the runaway slave turned soldier in
``Glory,'' won the best supporting actor award.
   ``My son said he was going to make one of these out of clay for
me, now I've got a model for him,'' an exultant Washington said as
he held up his gold statuette, first award of the evening.
   ``I never expected in a million years that I would be in this
position. It's a miracle!'' said Miss Tandy, who at 80 becomes the
oldest performer to win an Oscar. The slender, white-haired actress
received a standing ovation from the crowd that packed the Dorothy
Chandler Pavilion of the Los Angeles Music Center.
   Day-Lewis had to overcome tough competition from ``Miss
Daisy's'' Morgan Freeman and ``Fourth of July's'' Tom Cruise to win
his Oscar.
   ``For everyone involved in the film, all our desire to make the
film, all the strength that we needed, all the pleasure that we
took in making the film came from Christy Brown,'' Day-Lewis said.
   ``I don't believe this!'' exclaimed the Dublin-born Miss Fricker
as she came on stage.
   She added her thanks to ``Christy Brown, just for being alive,
and to his mother, Mrs. Brown. Anybody who gives birth 22 times
deserves one,'' she said, referring to the Oscar.
   The awards were spread in unusually even fashion during the
3-hour, 34-minute show that was televised live on ABC-TV and
reached a worldwide audience estimated in advance at 1 billion.
   ``Miss Daisy'' also won for screenplay adaptation and makeup,
making it the night's leader. ``Glory,'' the inspirational story of
the first black regiment to fight in the Civil War, also won
trophies for cinematography and sound, to finish with three.
Besides the directing prize, ``Fourth of July'' won just one other
Oscar, for film editing.
   Washington becomes the fourth black performer to win an Oscar.
Previous black winners were Hattie McDaniel for ``Gone With the
Wind,'' in 1939 and Louis Gossett Jr. for ``An Officer and a
Gentleman'' in 1982, in supporting categories, and Sidney Poitier
for ``Lilies of the Field'' in 1963 as lead actor.
   Alfred Uhry, who adapted his own Pulitzer Prize-winning play,
won the screenplay adaptation award for ``Miss Daisy.'' Tom
Schulman, the author of ``Dead Poet's Society,'' won for best
original screenplay.
   The award for art direction went to ``Batman,'' the top
moneymaker of 1989 at $251 million that failed to win a nomination
in any other category. Another top box-office draw, ``Indiana Jones
and the Last Crusade,'' picked up an Oscar for sound effects
editing. The Oscar for visual effects was given to the underwater
thriller ``The Abyss.''
   ``Henry V'' took the prize for costume design.
   Disney's much-praised animated fairy tale, ``The Little
Mermaid'' won two Oscars _ best song for the calypso ``Under the
Sea,'' and best original score.
   Italy's ``Cinema Paradiso,'' a reminiscence of growing up in a
Sicilian village, was named best foreign film.
   The announcement of the foreign film award came after a tortuous
satellite feed from Moscow where Jack Lemmon and Soviet actress
Natalya Negoda rattled off the nominees with a triple echo coming
though the sound system.
   Japanese filmmaker Akira Kurosawa, director of such classics as
``Rashomon'' and ``The Seven Samurai,'' was awarded an honorary
Oscar. In his acceptance speech the aging master struck a humble
note, saying ``I really don't feel yet that I have grasped the
essence of cinema.''
   The Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award was given to veteran
producer-director Howard Koch.
   Comedian Billy Crystal, host for the festivities, drew laughs as
he came on stage with a reference to last year's widely panned
opening dance sequence between actor Rob Lowe and a life-size fairy
tale heroine. Acknowledging the hearty applause, he asked: ``Is
that for me or are you just glad I'm not Snow White?''
   Besides the references to Beresford, another dig at the
nominating judgment of academy members came from ``Batman'' costar
Kim Basinger. Introducing clips from one of the year's best picture
nominees, she criticized the omission of Spike Lee's ``Do the Right
Thing'' from that list.
   ``There is one film missing from this list that deserves to be
on it because, ironically, it might tell the biggest truth of
all,'' Miss Basinger said of Lee's hard-hitting story of racial
intolerance.
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   Monday night's show marked the first time the Oscars have gone
truly international. Besides the announcements at the Music Center,
envelopes were sent to entertainers for unsealing in four other
cities:
   Art direction by Glenn Close and Mel Gibson in London; foreign
language film by Jack Lemmon and Russian actress Netalya Negoda in
Moscow; sound and sound effects editing by Bryan Brown and Rachel
Ward in Sydney; documentaries and shorts by Charlton Heston and
Norma Aleandro in Buenos Aires.
   ``I looked at every awards show since 1955, and one thing stands
out: how much the Oscars reflect the times,'' said the show's
producer, Gilbert Cates. ``If you wanted to know the history of
1955, you could get a good impression from the show, including what
people wore, what their entertainment was, what was on their minds.
   ``When you consider all the changes that happened last year in
Europe and other parts of the world, it made sense to have a show
that reflected those changes.''
   A win for best picture brings not only glory to the filmmakers
but millions in revenue for the releasing company. Last year's
triumph, ``Rain Man,'' provides an example. Reports Barry Lorie,
MGM-UA marketing chief:
   ``On the week before the Oscars, `Rain Man' was playing in 1,542
theaters and grossed $3,003,521. On the week following the Oscars,
`Rain Man' played in 1,581 theaters and grossed $5,537,165. So it
earned $2.5 million more as a result of the Oscars.
   ``A best-picture Oscar is important in this country, but the
biggest effect can be felt overseas. It is vitally important in
selling a film in foreign countries.''
   Richard Zanuck, co-producer of ``Driving Miss Daisy,'' agrees:
``Being able to advertise `winner of the Academy Award for best
picture' is a tremendous boost overseas, also in the videocassette
and other markets.
   ``Even the nominations gave `Miss Daisy' a tremendous boost. And
we were ready if our picture won the award; 300 more theaters were
added this week.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
