ID: 276	RANK: 6	SCORE: 38.099705
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900214-0095 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-02-14-90 1121EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a PM-Oscars 4thLd-Writethru a0543 02-14 1108</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Oscars, 4th Ld - Writethru, a0543,1138</SECOND>
<HEAD>`Driving Miss Daisy' Leads Academy Award Nominations</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: LEADS with 10 grafs to UPDATE with quotes from Cruise, Kovic
and Pearson, picking up 8th graf pvs, ``Isabelle Adjani...'' SUBS
20th graf, ``Screenplay adaptation...'' to DELETE now redundant
first reference to Kovic.</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto Staffing</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By BOB THOMAS</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>BEVERLY HILLS, Calif. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   ``Driving Miss Daisy,'' the
bittersweet story of a contrary Southern lady and her wise old
chauffeur, led Academy Award nominations today with nine, followed
by the Vietnam film ``Born on the Fourth of July'' with eight.
   ``Glory,'' the epic of black soldiers in the Civil War, and ``My
Left Foot,'' the story of an Irish cerebral palsy victim, followed
with five nominations apiece.
   ``Driving Miss Daisy'' earned nominations for best picture, and
for acting by Morgan Freeman, Jessica Tandy and Dan Aykroyd, but
suprisingly not for its director, Bruce Beresford.
   ``Born on the Fourth of July'' scored for best picture, Tom
Cruise's starring performance, and the direction by Oliver Stone,
who also shared a screenwriting nomination with Ron Kovic, the
disabled veteran-activist whose story the film portrays.
   ``Everyone worked very hard on this film, not only making it but
trying to get it made,'' Cruise said in a statement from the
Daytona, Fla., location of his latest movie.
   Kovic, about to board a plane in New York, called his nomination
``Truly one of the happiest and most triumphant moments of my
life.''
   The Academy voters demonstrated selectivity by nominating for
best actor Kenneth Branagh of ``Henry V'' and Robin Williams of
``Dead Poets Society.''
   Both have been little mentioned in pre-nomination predictions.
   Along with Freeman and Cruise, Daniel Day-Lewis of ``My Left
Foot'' also was nominated for best actor.
   ``My Left Foot'' producer Daniel Pearson said Day-Lewis ran out
in the street when he heard the news at his agent Julian Belfrage's
office: ``He's so thrilled, he's just run out of the building. At
the moment, it's madness in here.''
   Isabelle Adjani of ``Camille Claudel'' was a surprise nominee
for best actress. Other nominees: Pauline Collins, ``Shirley
Valentine''; Jessica Lange, ``Music Box''; Michelle Pfeiffer, ``The
Fabulous Baker Boys''; and Miss Tandy.
   Belying the legend that films released late in the year are
favored in the Oscars, the voters nominated ``Field of Dreams,''
released April 21, and ``Dead Poets Society,'' released June 2, for
best picture of 1989.
   Other nominees for best picture: ``Born on the Fourth of July,''
``Driving Miss Daisy'' and ``My Left Foot.''
   Among the curiosities in today's nominations: No major honors
for the year's top box-office money maker, ``Batman,'' which earned
$251.2 million in 1989. There were no nominations at all for the
critically acclaimed ``Drugstore Cowboy.''
   ``My Left Foot'' director Jim Sheridan and ``Henry V'' director
were nominated for their directorial debuts, a feat that has led to
only four Oscars. Branagh, Freeman and Miss Collins were nominated
for roles they created on the stage; 19 Oscars have been won by
actors repeating theater roles.
   Landau and Miss Pfeiffer are the only repeat nominees from last
year.
   Marlon Brando, who won an Oscar for ``On the Waterfront'' and
rejected one for ``The Godfather,'' was nominated for supporting
actor for his brief role as a liberal South African lawyer in ``A
Dry White Season.''
   Others named for supporting actor: Danny Aiello, ``Do the Right
Thing''; Aykroyd, ``Driving Miss Daisy''; Martin Landau, ``Crimes
and Misdemeanors''; Denzel Washington, ``Glory.''
   For supporting actress: Brenda Fricker, ``My Left Foot'';
Anjelica Huston, ``Enemies, A Love Story''; Lena Olin, ``Enemies, A
Love Story''; Julia Roberts, `` Steel Magnolias''; Diane Wiest,
``Parenthood.''
   For best direction: Along with Branagh, Sheridan and Stone;
Woody Allen, ``Crimes and Misdemeanors''; Peter Weir, ``Dead Poets
Society''; and Jim Sheridan, ``My Left Foot.''
   Best foreign language film: ``Camille Claudel,'' France;
``Cinema Paradiso,'' Italy; ``Jesus of Montreal,'' Canada;
``Santiago, the Story of His New Life,'' Puerto Rico; ``Waltzing
Regitze,'' Denmark.
   Original screenplay: Allen, ``Crimes and Misdemeanors''; Tom
Schulman, ``Dead Poets Society''; Spike Lee, ``Do the Right
Thing''; Steven Soderbergh, ``sex, lies and videotape''; Nora
Ephron, ``When Harry Met Sally...''
   Screenplay adaptation (from another medium): Stone and Kovic,
``Born on the Fourth of July''; Alfred Uhry, ``Driving Miss
Daisy''; Roger L. Simon and Paul Mazursky, ``Enemies, A Love
Story''; Phil Alden Robinson, ``Field of Dreams''; Jim Sheridan and
Shane Connaughton, ``My Left Foot.''
   Filmmaker Michael Moore had as much trouble meeting Oscar as he
did catching General Motors president Roger Smith in his
documentary ``Roger and Me.'' The film failed to win a nomination
in the documentary feature category.
   Recent weeks have brought criticism of Moore's film for its
faulty juxtaposition of time elements and its entertainment values
at the expense of accuracy.
   The nominees for original song: ``After All'' from ``Chances
Are''; ``The Girl Who Used to be Me'' from ``Shirley Valentine'';
``I Love to See You Smile'' from ``Parenthood''; ``Kiss the Girl''
from ``The Little Mermaid''; ``Under the Sea'' from ``The Little
Mermaid.''
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   In awards already handed out, the New York Film Critics voted
``My Left Foot'' as the best film of 1989. ``Enemies, A Love
Story'' won for best director, and ``Drugstore Cowboy'' was awarded
the best screenplay prize by the New York reviewers.
   Film critics in Los Angeles awarded their best film and best
director trophies to ``Do the Right Thing,'' with best screenplay
to ``Drugstore Cowboy.''
   ``Roger &amp; Me'' was named best documentary by the Los Angeles and
New York critics' organizations.
   The National Society of Film Critics chose ``Drugstore Cowboy''
as the best film of the past year and the best directed.
   The Oscar nominations represent judgment by filmmakers' peers.
Each of the Academy's branches votes for its own achievements _
actors nominate actors, directors nominate directors, etc. _ and
all members vote for best picture. Categories such a
foreign-language film, documentaries and shorts are nominated by
committees.
   Screenings of all nominees start Friday at the Academy's Samuel
Goldwyn Theater, and the polls close March 10. The awards ceremony
will be held March 26 and broadcast nationally on ABC-TV.
   After two traffic-plagued years at the Shrine Auditorium, the
awards are returning to the Los Angeles Music Center, which
presents a big problem for the Academy. The Shrine accommodated
5,800 while the Music Center holds only 2,850. ``Tickets are at a
great premium,'' said Academy spokesman Bob Werden. ``A lot of
feelings are going to be hurt.''
   The 62nd-annual show's producer, Gilbert Cates, has promised to
avoid last year's plodding pace and tasteless production numbers,
one of which included Rob Lowe and a ``Snow White'' lookalike.
   The telecast will return to the one-man emcee format, with
quick-witted Billy Crystal doing the honors.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
