ID: 276	RANK: 86	SCORE: 17.707945
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890512-0271 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-05-12-89 1417EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u f BC-Dollar-Gold     05-12 0332</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-Dollar-Gold,0345</SECOND>
<HEAD>Dollar Rises, Gold Mixed</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: A version for AMs is planned by 5:30 p.m. EDT.</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   LONDON (AP)
   The U.S. dollar rose Friday against most major
currencies in busy European trading despite what dealers said was
strong and concerted intervention by central banks. Gold prices
turned mixed.
   The dollar hovered at a 30-month high against the West German
mark in late trading, a 28-month high against the French franc, an
18-month high against the British pound and eight-month highs
against the Japanese yen and the French franc.
   Dealers said central banks sold dollars after the U.S.
government reported U.S. producer prices rose a modest 0.4 percent
in April. Market forecasts had predicted a 0.7-percent rise.
   But despite repeated interventions by the U.S. Federal Reserve,
aided by the West German, British, Swiss, French, Italian, Belgian
and Canadian central banks, the dollar had lost little ground by
the end of trading.
   The dollar's recovery was fueled bye Last Crusade,'' ``Ghostbusters
II,'' ``The
Karate Kid III'' or ``Star Trek V: The Final Frontier''?
   All of them have a fighting chance, since all are sequels to
films that earned more than $100 million in the United States and
Canada. The film industry figures ``Indiana Jones'' and
``Ghostbusters II'' show the most promise for leading the pack,
along with a new version of ``Batman'' starring Michael Keaton and
Jack Nicholson.
   There are other deja vu offerings in this sequel summer:
   Timothy Dalton makes his second coming as James Bond in
``License to Kill.'' Mel Gibson and Danny Glover return to their
Los Angeles Police Department posts in ``Lethal Weapon II.''
Richard Chamberlain, Oliver Reed and Michael York play their old
roles in ``The Return of the Musketeers.'' There's also ``Friday
the 13th VIII'' and ``Nightmare on Elm Street V.''
   What makes a $100 million grosser?
   ``Number one, you need a broad opening in the summertime,'' said
Richard Lederer, who does marketing Warner Bros. and Orion
Pictures. ``You need anywhere from 1,000 to 1,500 theaters
(Paramount has 2,000 for `Indiana Jones').
   ``It's important to open with a bang and continue to run for
weeks; you can't have a drop-off in the second or third week. If a
picture opens to medium business and starts to surprise, it's
important to add theaters right away. Summer is the important time,
and it's imperative to get as many theaters as possible.
   ``Most of the big winners are lighter fare, since that's what is
released during the summer. Strong dramas are usually held for
December.''
   A survey of the $100 million movies of the past five years bears
out Lederer's theories. The only drama on the list is the Academy
Award-winning ``Rain Man,'' which has earned $160 million since its
release last December.
   Here is how the other $100 million movies of the past five years
break down (figures in millions from Exhibitor Relations Co.):
   Comedies and comedy-adventures: ``Ghostbusters'' (1984, $221);
``Beverly Hills Cop'' (1984, $230); ``Back to the Future'' (1985,
$220); ``Crocodile Dundee'' (1986, $175); ``Good Morning, Vietnam''
(1987, $125); ``Beverly Hills Cop II'' (1987, $154); ``Three Men
and a Baby'' (1987, $168); ``Twins'' (1988, $103); ``Crocodile
Dundee II'' (1988, $109); ``Big'' (1988, $113); ``Coming to
America'' (1988, $128); ``Who Framed Roger Rabbit?'' (1988, $153).
   Action-adventures and Fantasies: ``Gremlins'' (1984, $148);
``Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom'' (1984, $175); ``Rambo II''
(1985, $150); ``Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home'' (1986, $109);
``Platoon'' (1985, $137); ``Top Gun'' (1986, $177).
   Thriller: ``Fatal Attraction'' (1987, $157).
   As usual, comedies will be prevalent during the 1989 summer.
   ``Eric the Viking,'' is a spoof from Monty Python's Terry Jones
with Tim Robbins, John Cleese and Mickey Rooney.
   ``Do the Right Thing,'' is another outrageous comedy from Spike
Lee (``School Daze''), starring Danny Aiello.
   ``Uncle Buck,'' stars John Candy and Amy Madigan in a John
Hughes film.
   ``Parenthood,'' features Steve Martin, Tom Hulce and Rick
Moranis, and is directed by Ron Howard (''Cocoon.'')
   ``Weekend at Bernie's,'' is a murder caper with Andrew McCarthy
and Jonathan Silverman.
   ``Turner &amp; Hooch,'' stars Oscar nominee Tom Hanks as a
by-the-book cop, and like the current ``K-9,'' his partner is a dog.
   ``When Harry Met Sally ...'' is a courtship comedy from Rob
Reiner (``Stand by Me''), with Billy Crystal and Meg Ryan.
   The action-adventure junkies will find satisfaction in the
summer fare, aside from Indiana Jones, James Bond, Ghostbusters and
Musketeers, there are the following:
   James Cameron (``Aliens'') is delving into ``The Abyss,'' with
Ed Harris plunging 25,000 feet below the Atlantic Ocean. Kris
Kristofferson and Cheryl Ladd go time-traveling in ``Millenium.''
Clint Eastwood returns as a fugitive on the trail of bail-jumper
Bernadette Peters in ``Pink Cadillac.''
   The Vietnam War is once again explored in ``Casualties of War''
with Sean Penn and Michael J. Fox. Kiefer Sutherland and Lou
Diamond Phillips are a mismatched pair seeking revenge against a
savage murderer in ``Renegades.'' Patrick Swayze plays a legendary
troubleshooter in ``Road House.''
   Dramatic fare won't be entirely overlooked during the
hot-weather months. Robin Williams goes straight as a charismatic
schoolteacher in Australia in ``Dead Poets Society.'' Tom Selleck
seeks vindication after being wrongly sentenced to prison in ``Hard
Rain,'' not to be confused with ``Black Rain,'' with Michael
Douglas as a New York detective delving into the Osaka underworld.
   For Jerry Lee Lewis fans, Randy Quaid will portray the keyboard
thumper in ``Great Balls of Fire,'' the only film resembling a
musical this summer.
   And there's not much for the wee ones, except for a rerelease of
Disney's classic ``Peter Pan.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Fri AMs, May 19</NOTE>
<TEXT>
</TEXT>
</DOC>
