ID: 276	RANK: 94	SCORE: 16.630974
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900521-0217 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-05-21-90 2015EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>a e BC-WKD--FilmReviews Adv00   05-21 1121</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-WKD--Film Reviews, Adv 00,1155</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv00</NOTE>
<NOTE>For Release Anytime</NOTE>
<HEAD>AP WEEKEND ENTERTAINMENT AND ARTS</HEAD>
<HEAD>At the Movies: ``Cadillac Man'' and ``Fire Birds''</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: ``Cadillac Man'' opened May 18; ``Fire Birds'' opens May 25</NOTE>
<TEXT>
   
   ``Cadillac Man'' (Orion. Rated R)
   
   Robin Williams may well be in agreement with the Los Angeles
Lakers on the proposition that you can't win them all.
   Coming off Academy Award nominations for ``Good Morning,
Vietnam'' and ``Dead Poets Society,'' it appeared the hyper comic
could do no wrong. Alas, he throws a piston with ``Cadillac Man.''
   Williams is far too inventive a performer to fail completely.
But his protean talents are straitjacketed as Joey O'Brien, a
charmless, sex-crazy car salesman whose redemption comes too late.
   ``Cadillac Man'' begins promisingly. Under the titles, a
helicopter shot focuses on the New York skyline, then across an
endless landscape of gravestones. On the edge of the cemetery, a
funeral procession is stalled by a disabled hearse.
   Enter Joey, who sells cars with the zeal of Michael Milken
peddling junk bonds. He befriends the mortician and presents a
card. When he tries the same with the widow (Elaine Stritch in a
funny bit), she calls him a sleaze.
   That's what he is, all right. Joey will say anything to sell a
car. Meanwhile, he tries to service two mistresses _ one a married
woman (Fran Drescher), the other a ditsy would-be designer
(Annabella Sciorra) _ placate his ex-wife (Pamela Reed) and stay
out of the clutches of a debt-collecting mafia boss (Bill Nelson).
Joey also faces an impossible sales quota or he's fired.
   The tedium of Joey's travails ends with a crash: Tim Robbins
smashes the showroom door with his cycle. He brandishes an
automatic weapon, madly seeking the lover of his wife, who works at
the agency.
   Are hostage situations a likely source of comedy? After watching
the nightly news you might not think so. Williams and Robbins
strive mightily to make it work, and almost succeed. The rangy,
wild-eyed Robbins, impressive as the feckless minor leaguer in
``Bull Durham,'' somehow ingratiates as the reluctant terrorist.
   The two stars and the large supporting cast get little help from
Ken Friedman's lusterless script or from Roger Donaldson's
haphazard direction. The filmmakers seem to believe that loud is
funny. It ain't.
   The Orion Pictures release was produced by Donaldson and Charles
Roven. The rating is R for vulgar dialogue and simulated oral sex.
Running time: 97 minutes.
   _ By Bob Thomas, Associated Press Writer.
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   
   ``Fire Birds'' (Touchstone Pictures. Rated PG-13)
   
   A sure sign that a movie is doomed from the start is when it
opens with a printed quote from President Bush's September 1989
so-called ``war'' on Colombian drug lords, and the screening
audience giggles.
   ``Fire Birds'' tumbles to the very depths of lousy filmmaking on
that note.
   With a stilted screenplay by Nick Thiel and Paul F. Edwards
(story by Step Tyner, John K. Swenson and Dale Dye) that never
quite figures out if it's a silly love story or a contrived
adventure, ``Fire Birds'' just might be a poor attempt at Hollywood
patriotism.
   Jake Preston (Nicolas Cage) and Billie Lee Guthrie (Sean Young)
are part of an elite Army helicopter corps being trained for a
secret invasion in South America. Their expert mentor is Brad
Little (Tommy Lee Jones).
   Training is partly through computerized simulators, which make
video games look wimpy, and actual flight maneuvers. The shots,
whether computerized or real, are breathtaking, and provide the
only real excitement in the movie.
   Jake, in Muhammad Ali bravura, reminds anyone who'll listen that
he's ``the greatest.'' And next to Little, he is. Guthrie will
remind anyone who'll listen that she's no longer romantically
interested in Jake, who stalks her like a greedy ivory poacher.
   Love in this movie unfortunately does not take a back seat to
the mission, which is to be a strike against a mercenary named
Stoller (Bert Rhine) who is an ace with fighter helicopters. We
know Stoller is the evil bad guy because the honchos sitting around
the Pentagon conference table tell us so. And in a slide
presentation of Stoller helping drug dealers load their stuff for
transport, the Pentagon biggies show us a close-up of Stoller's
eyes. Bert Rhine must have spent hours staring in a mirror to get
just the right menace to his brow.
   But there is no clear-cut enemy in ``Fire Birds.'' It's hard to
cheer on the boys when we haven't seen the bad guys do anything
bad. That part of the story isn't developed; the filmmakers merely
slap a tag on a few people and we're to accept it. It just doesn't
wash, and makes the mission more of a cartoon than anything else.
   What also works against the movie is the romance subplot. It
slows the pacing and provides nothing in terms of moving the plot
or providing a needed dynamic. Cage, with his basset hound
droopiness and crass manners, and the anorexic-looking Young are
possibly two of the most unappealing actors in the business. Both
are difficult to watch, whether alone or together. There is no
electricity between the two, and their heated moments give off a
chill. Definitely bad casting by Mike Fenton and Judy Taylor.
   Jones, however, is a blessed relief with his rapid-fire
presentation and middle-age vulnerabilities. He's Mr. Military all
the way. He even tells his long-suffering wife at one point that he
could have made her a millionaire if he had peddled his talents in
the private sector. But serving his country was more important, he
says.
   David Green has spent most of his years as a filmmaker directing
and producing television dramas and documentaries, including ``Boy
in the Bubble.'' That small-screen experience shows in ``Fire
Birds'' because there is a limited vision and sweep. Richard T.
Stevens as second-unit director does much better with the action
shots, and Stan McClain's aerial photography is stellar.
   The production notes say producers Keith Barish and Arnold
Kopelson wanted to do for the Army what ``Top Gun'' did for the
Navy. They should be court-martialed.
   The Touchstone Pictures presentation of the Nova International
Films release is rated PG-13 for some intense action, adult
situations and some violence.
   _ By Dolores Barclay, AP Arts Editor.
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
   G _ General audiences. All ages admitted.
   PG _ Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be
suitable for children.
   PG-13 _ Special parental guidance strongly suggested for
children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young
children.
   R _ Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult
guardian.
   X _ No one under 17 admitted. Some states may have higher age
restrictions.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Release Anytime</NOTE>
</DOC>
