ID: 276	RANK: 96	SCORE: 16.418961
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910110-0105
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910110-0105.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Film: Weir's Slight but Sweet Love Story
   ----
   By Julie Salamon
</HL>
<DATE>
01/10/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   The director Peter Weir has built a distinguished career
making intelligent, romantic films that enable audiences to
feel both entertained and enlightened. Though he is
Australian, films like "The Year of Living Dangerously,"
"Witness" and, certainly, "Dead Poets Society," fit within a
Hollywood tradition of entertainment as teaching tool.
   The lessons of Mr. Weir's latest film, "Green Card," are
very slight, and that lightness turns out to be the picture's
virtue. Little more than air -- and Gerard Depardieu, and the
pretty lighting on Andie MacDowell's gorgeous face -- hold
this romantic comedy together. You won't find yourself
discussing this bit of ephemera for hours, or even minutes
once it's over.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But "Green Card" is quite pleasant to watch mainly because
Mr. Weir hasn't disturbed its simple virtues with undue
portent. Sometimes a plate of spaghetti with a simple tomato
sauce is just the thing, and this is the movie equivalent of
that.
   Or perhaps I should say it's the equivalent of a simple
hamburger. Mr. Weir -- who wrote and produced as well as
directed the film -- takes great delight in vegetarian
bashing. Mr. Depardieu plays a rough sensualist who is
horrified by the sanctimonious people the woman he loves
associates with. "Get out vegetarian]" he screams at her
boyfriend. "You . . . cucumber." The burly French actor's
earthy charms are so convincing that he makes the idea of a
meal without red meat and red wine seem sinful.
   Mr. Depardieu plays George Faure, a Frenchman who wants to
emigrate to the U.S. but who doesn't have legal immigrant
status. A friend urges him to cut through the red tape by
marrying a U.S. citizen. The friend just happens to have a
woman friend who also needs a quickie marriage. She's a
horticulturist who's found an apartment with a greenhouse --
in Manhattan; however, the co-op board wants a married couple
in the place. Though they plan to separate immediately
following their marriage, suspicious immigration officials
force them to spend time together so they can prove they are
really married.
   Mr. Weir has filmed New York with the friendly warmth of
the outsider who's been charmed rather than dismayed by what
you might call the city's energy. This isn't the knowing
vision of Woody Allen, who romanticizes Manhattan with the
tenderness of a lover who has never lost his sense of that
initial enchantment. Mr. Weir's New York isn't particularly
familiar; it's just a pretty urban backdrop.
   Indeed, this isn't a picture for those who find prettiness
annoying. The first image of Ms. MacDowell shows a pretty
woman sniffing a rose. Many of the shots in the picture
seemed to have been staged simply for the purpose of creating
a tableau centering on the actress's face. Her vivid
portrayal of the repressed housewife in "sex, lies and
videotape" made a lot of people forget that she tended to
ruin her performances when she opened her mouth. In this film
her acting is once again dodgy; she frequently conveys more
with her complexion than with her characterization. Her
complexion, however, is charming.
   Mr. Depardieu, on the other hand, proves here that he is a
great actor in at least two languages. Because he has become
so identified as the contemporary French actor, it was
difficult to imagine what it would be like to hear him
speaking English. Would the nuance of his performance be
diluted by the fact that he was forced to carry on in
English? Not at all. In fact, Mr. Depardieu frequently seems
more at ease handling points of irony than Ms. MacDowell
does, and she's speaking her own language.
   Except for a small part in an obscure movie years ago, Mr.
Depardieu has never before acted in an English-language
picture. I suspect this won't be his last.
   ---
   Penelope Ann Miller is emerging as one of the freshest and
most engaging young actresses working today. At the moment
she is starring in "Awakenings" and in "Kindergarten Cop."
Her appeal is so strong that she has inspired Arnold
Schwarzenegger to appear sincere in a love scene.
   Mr. Schwarzenegger is otherwise predictable in
"Kindergarten Cop," and that is meant as a compliment. He
plays an undercover policeman who must teach kindergarten for
a while in order to catch a vicious killer. Though the film
never quite lives up to the joke of its concept -- big man
overwhelmed by small children -- it makes for an amiable
backdrop to a box of popcorn. Unfortunately, the film makers
have tacked on an ending sequence whose violence seems too
graphic for small children who would otherwise enjoy the
picture.
   Perhaps parents could use the tactic my friend Sara's mom
came up with at "Old Yeller" many years ago. She had taken a
bunch of kids to the movies to celebrate Sara's birthday. But
when she realized the picture was unspooling inexorably
toward the dog's death, she told the children the picture was
over and herded them out of the theater. For years Sara was
convinced "Old Yeller" had a happy ending and would have been
content to believe that forever.
   ---
   VIDEO TIP: When I praised Mr. Depardieu for his
performance in the film "Cyrano de Bergerac," a number of
readers chastised me later for not mentioning the 1950
version of the film, starring Jose Ferrer, which is also
available on video. Fans of another contemporary film,
"Dances With Wolves," might like to compare that overlong
Kevin Costner buffalo opera with a classic film of a similar
story, "Broken Arrow." It stars James Stewart and Jeff
Chandler, and it offers many glimpses of Debra Paget in her
toothsome prime.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
