ID: 296	RANK: 21	SCORE: 14.486237
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910118-0048
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910118-0048.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Media:
   CNN Glories in Coverage From Baghdad
   But Still Finds Steady Audience Elusive
   ----
   By Martha Brannigan and Dennis Kneale
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/18/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   TBSA GE CBS CCB
</CO>
<IN>
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
</IN>
<GV>
DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)
</GV>
<LP>
   Cable News Network, two days into operation "Desert
Storm," has much the same problem as an Olympic athlete: How
does one turn a gold-medal performance into long-term
success?
   CNN's chilling first-hand accounts as the bombs dropped on
Baghdad Wednesday night provided American officials with a
front-row view of the action from reliable on-the-ground
sources.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   And they were riveting enough to propel CNN, for the first
time, well into the ranks of the Big Three networks in the
ratings race. National ratings to be released today may well
show that CNN beat out the No. 3 network, CBS, in prime-time
ratings for its coverage Wednesday night -- even though CNN
covers only 60% of the country, while CBS, ABC and NBC reach
nearly all homes.
   Maintaining that heady position, however, may be tough.
CNN's early advantage was all but wiped out yesterday, when
the Iraqi government ordered CNN to stop its live broadcasts
from Baghdad. Moreover, other networks and affiliates that
had turned to CNN in the rush of events are now using their
own resources.
   Still, CNN's Jerusalem bureau turned in a strong
performance last night during Iraq's missile assault on
Israel, staying on the air throughout the attack.
   The incidents and ratings illustrate both the triumphs and
continued frustrations experienced by Ted Turner's network.
CNN has established itself as the broadcast wire service: the
network to turn to for the most up-to-date news during
moments of crisis. But it has also had trouble transforming
its journalistic successes into a growing, long-term
viewership.
   The question now: Will CNN be able to hold on to its new
viewers, or will the war simply be another blip on the
ratings screen?
   "The Gulf crisis is a defining event, a chance for the
networks to reshuffle," says S. Robert Lichter, co-director
of the Washington-based Center for Media and Public Affairs.
"This is the chance for CNN to become even-up with the Big
Three. If people hear CNN was the place to be at a critical
moment in history, they're going to start watching."
   That will require, however, that CNN continue to "get
scoops out of Baghdad," Mr. Lichter says. The onslaught of
international news -- the fall of the Berlin Wall, strife in
the Soviet Union and now the Persian Gulf -- plays to CNN's
advantage, he adds. "History is conspiring to help CNN."
   The initial results are impressive. A.C. Nielsen Co. data
show that CNN earned the highest ratings in its history
Wednesday. In the prime-time period from 8 p.m. to 11 p.m.,
CNN was seen by 19.1% of its 56.8 million cable households.
That amounts to 10.8 million homes, or a national rating of
11.6% of all homes with TV sets. That prime-time rating,
unprecedented in CNN annals, may well eclipse the rating for
CBS when final numbers are tallied today.
   In the 25 top markets of the U.S., accounting for half of
the nation's TV homes, ABC from 6:30 p.m. to 11 p.m.
Wednesday posted a strong Nielsen rating of 19.5. That marked
a sharp increase from ABC's recent prime-time rating of 12.4%
of the nation's TV homes. NBC drew 15.1% of homes in the top
25 markets. CBS fared less well, being watched by 11.3% of
homes. An equivalent CNN rating in the top 25 markets wasn't
available.
   In cable homes served by CNN, ABC and its affiliates had a
14.4 rating. CBS had a 10.9 rating in those homes, and NBC a
13.8 rating, according to Nielsen data reported by CNN.
   For the 24-hour period from 3 a.m. Tuesday to 3 a.m.
Wednesday, CNN attracted 7.3% of cable homes, or 4.1 million
households, which amounts to a national rating of 4.4% of all
TV homes in the country. Robert Sieber, vice president of
research at CNN's parent company, Turner Broadcasting System
Inc., says the CNN numbers will go even higher when extra
viewers are tallied from local broadcast stations that picked
up CNN reports instead of airing reports from their
respective ABC, NBC and CBS networks.
   For its part, CNN says it may have made a breakthrough.
"The viewership numbers clearly indicate we have reached a
level in the minds of the cable-viewing public of being there
when major news happens," says Paul Amos, CNN executive vice
president for programming. "I have no doubt this is going to
be a tremendous benefit for us over the long haul."
   Over the past year and a half, network executives have
been trying to reposition CNN into a primary network that
will draw a more loyal following with a regular prime-time
newscast and more investigative coverage. But that effort has
been slow to produce results. The network's average
round-the-clock viewership rating remained at 0.7 in the
first nine months of 1990, identical to the year before.
   Clearly, CNN's international crisis coverage is what still
stands out. Its reporting Wednesday night "must make the
other guys just grind their teeth," says John S. Reidy, a
media analyst with Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
   While the three networks were forced to rely on
correspondents in the U.S., Jordan, Israel and Saudi Arabia,
CNN was able to keep three reporters on the air from Baghdad.
   Based in the Al-Rashid Hotel, the reporters brought
Americans a series of chilling accounts about how it feels to
be at the center of a targeted city. As 40 or so other
reporters remained cloistered in the hotel basement, Peter
Arnett, John Holliman and Bernard Shaw offered their view
from the ninth floor. They worked by candlelight much of the
night, often diving to the floor when they heard bombing.
   News officials at other networks yesterday were still
trying to figure out how CNN -- and CNN alone -- had the one
working phone link during the first bombing raid.
Less-sophisticated phone hookups for NBC, ABC and CBS were
cut off at about 7 p.m. EST, and it's unclear whether that
resulted from technical problems or Iraqi governmental
action.
   CNN had the advantage of a government-approved four-wire
phone link, which had two lines coming in and two lines going
out. It used a microwave dish that transmitted to Amman,
Jordan, where the phone traffic was then sent via satellite
into the U.S. All three major networks had asked the Iraqi
government for a similar hookup, but they were refused, said
a spokeswoman for NBC.
   News officials said CNN may have won government approval
because of its much higher profile overseas as the news
service of choice for national heads of state. "CNN is
Saddam's link to the outside world," said one news division
executive.
   But jealous rivals wondered whether CNN offered a rumored
quid pro quo to get the phone line. CNN said it obtained
permission from the Iraqi government ahead of time to operate
the line, but denied it had granted any favors to the Iraqis.
"There's been some speculation some sort of deal has been
cut," says CNN's Mr. Amos. "We're not in bed with the
Iraqis."
   The Iraqi Ministry of Information arrived at the hotel and
ordered CNN to terminate its live satellite coverage
yesterday. The reasons were unclear, but one of the CNN
Baghdad reporters suggested that Iraqis heard U.S. officials
say they were gaining military information through the CNN
broadcasts.
   "It would appear based upon the comments that were coming
in from the CNN crew in the hotel in Baghdad that the
operation was successful in striking targets with a high
degree of precision," said Defense Secretary Dick Cheney at a
briefing Wednesday night.
   At yesterday morning's Pentagon briefing, Gen. Colin
Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, had a similar
response when asked about hits on civilian sites. "We have
been very sensitive to collateral damage in the Baghdad
areas," he said, "and I think the best source of how careful
we have been is listening to the CNN reporters who were
watching it unfold."
   Wednesday night, ABC and CNN were first to go on the air
with reports that an air attack had been launched, followed
by NBC and then CBS. NBC had its reporter in Baghdad, Tom
Aspell, on the air by phone starting at 6:49 p.m., but the
phone link was lost at 7:05 p.m., about the same time ABC's
line went down.
   After the major networks lost their phone communications,
CNN offered to let them interview CNN anchor Bernard Shaw.
Only NBC's Tom Brokaw took up the request. "It wasn't really
a tough decision. You serve the viewer with timely
information out of Baghdad -- that's where events are
unfolding," an NBC News spokeswoman said. And because CNN
reaches only about 60% of the country's households, she
noted, putting Mr. Shaw on the air on NBC expanded his reach
considerably.
   But now that CNN's phone link has been lost, said a
spokesman for CBS News, "we're all back on the same playing
field." The major networks are hoping to regain an edge over
CNN by trotting out their more experienced correspondents and
analysts.
   ABC News may have the most talent, with Peter Jennings and
"Nightline" anchor Ted Koppel leading the team. CBS has
brought out the venerable likes of Walter Cronkite -- after
he first appeared on CNN Wednesday afternoon -- and Charles
Kuralt and "60 Minutes" co-anchors Ed Bradley and Morley
Safer.
   ---
   Kevin Salwen contributed to this article.
   ---
                  CNN Ratings Highlights
                                                                                                       

   CNN's ratings swing widely on major news events. In July,
its average 24-hour rating was 0.5. Iraq's invasion boosted
August's average to 1.1. Here are some of CNN's biggest
ratings days:
                                                                                                       

   EVENT                                DATE        RATING*
                                                                                                       

   War breaks out in Persian Gulf       Jan. 16       7.3
   U.N. deadline for Iraqi withdrawal   Jan. 15       2.9
   TWA hijacking                        June 20, '85  2.5
   Bay area earthquake                  Oct. 18, '89  2.4
   Bombing of Libya                     April 15, '86 2.4
   U.S. invades Panama                  Aug. 2, '90   1.7
                                                                                                       

   *Each rating point currently represents about 568,000
cable households
                                                                                                       

   Source: Turner Broadcasting System
</TEXT>
</DOC>
