ID: 296	RANK: 61	SCORE: 12.563052
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910128-0112
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910128-0112.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Marketing &amp; Media:
   TV Networks Find Gulf War a Big Hit,
   But Ad Revenue May Be Threatened
   ----
   By Kevin Goldman
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/28/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4
</SO>
<CO>
   MDEST CCB GE CBS TBSA
</CO>
<IN>
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)
</IN>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- The 1990-91 television season, criticized for
its lackluster shows, appears to finally have a hit: the
Persian Gulf war.
   Programs produced by the news divisions of the three
networks are soaring in the ratings. Prime-time news specials
are performing better than the entertainment shows they've
replaced. And the networks, for a while, at least, have
expanded the nightly dinner-time evening newscasts to one
hour.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   For the time being, network news programs will draw huge
audiences from a public riveted by the war. But advertisers
are gun-shy about having a product associated with the
coverage and are backing out of commitments. As previously
reported, the networks may lose more than $100 million in
advertiser commitments. And no one knows whether the ratings
success could continue if, as expected, the Gulf war
continues for months, not weeks.
   Indeed, the increased ratings haven't come without a
price. On Jan. 21, for example, a one-hour CBS News program
anchored by Dan Rather replaced the usual 10 p.m.
entertainment show, "The Trials of Rosie O'Neill." Although
the news special finished No. 1 in the A.C. Nielsen Co. for
the time period, network officials said that CBS incurred a
loss of $400,000 in advertising revenue.
   But the network is pleased with the news special ratings.
For instance, a CBS News special on Friday attracted 12.8% of
U.S. homes with television sets, according to overnight
ratings in 25 major cities. CBS usually attracts 8% of the
audience with "Dallas." And an ABC News special, "A Line in
the Sand," finished in the Top 10 last week.
   The network news divisions, which each spent about $3
million in the first week of war coverage and are now
spending about $1.5 million each week, see the heightened
interest in the war as an opportunity to increase
programming.
   "America Tonight," the late-night CBS News show with
Charles Kuralt and Lesley Stahl, scheduled for cancellation
Jan. 18, has been renewed indefinitely. Its ratings jumped
28% to 3.2 million viewers from 2.5 million viewers in the
two weeks before war broke out Jan. 16. ("Nightline," ABC
News's 11:30 p.m. franchise, had a 36% increase in ratings,
to 7.5 million viewers from 5.5 million.)
   Even CBS, for decades an also-ran in the morning, is up
30% in ratings in a two-week period, to 3.5 million from 2.7
million viewers. NBC News' "Today" rose 32% to 5.2 million
viewers from 3.4 million.
   The Gulf war also may present the chance for the news
divisions to finally get a foothold into Saturday morning,
for years dominated by cartoons. For the past two weeks, NBC
News has aired a special "Saturday Today" and ABC News
produced special news shows for children complete with Mr.
Jennings at one point sitting cross-legged chatting with kids
about the war.
   News programs are usually slow to build. It took years for
"60 Minutes" to become a hit. But news divisions are hoping
the heightened interest in news will increase viewer
sampling. Today, NBC News is beginning a half-hour daytime
news show titled "A Closer Look With Faith Daniels." The show
has practically 100% clearances on the NBC affiliates.
   Network news executives cautioned about offering any great
number of new shows, however. One official described the
shows as "on-air pilots," but added: "Everyone's mind and
energy has been on covering the war. You can't really say
what's going to happen in the future because we don't know."
   And yesterday, the NBC News Channel, the 24-hour service
that supplies video to NBC affiliates, was pressed into
action as a back-up news supplier. During a news briefing by
Operation Desert Storm's commander, Gen. H. Norman
Schwarzkopf, NBC decided to return to regular programming, a
National Basketball Association game. However, the NBC News
Channel continued to supply the news conference to NBC
affiliates so that they had a choice. It was anchored by
Garrick Utley.
   The idea is to provide stations that want it with
continuing coverage and not have NBC affiliates that are also
affiliated with the all-news Cable News Network switch away
from NBC to CNN, the only American-owned network that is
broadcasting directly from Iraq. There are 53 of the more
than 200 NBC affiliates also affiliated with CNN, a unit of
Turner Broadcasting System Inc.
   Says Don Browne, NBC News executive vice president: "This
gives us and our affiliates the best of both worlds."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
