ID: 296	RANK: 79	SCORE: 12.111302
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910121-0121
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910121-0121.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   TV: CNN Winning Electronic War
   ----
   By Robert Goldberg
</HL>
<DATE>
01/21/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A9
</SO>
<LP>
   It began on TV, at 6:35:26 p.m. EST, Wednesday. Saddam
Hussein labeled it "the mother of all battles," but he was as
wrongheaded about that as about everything else. There hasn't
been much maternal, or even human, about this conflict or its
coverage so far. Welcome to the first electronic war.
   Of course, the battle in the Gulf is the most widely
anticipated war in history, and TV heralded it with all the
ceremony of a really good game. First, there was the pre-game
show. ABC, CBS, CNN, NBC all had their countdowns: "Are we
half an hour from war?" CBS asked as the deadline neared.
"The minutes are ticking away." Players were introduced in
video postcards ("Corporal John Solomon, Fort Wayne,
Indiana"), and game plans discussed by military Maddens,
charting out their Xs and Os on the desert sands: "Their
basic strategy here is along the lines of their war with
Iran. They used strong fixed fortifications to protect troops
and slow down attacking forces, coupled with heavy artillery
fire. . . ." Even the soldiers were talking football: "Of
course we're nervous," said one. "It's like before the big
game."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Fittingly, the kickoff came right on time for the evening
news. ABC's Gary Shepard cut into the broadcast with a report
from Baghdad ("Something is definitely up -- the whole sky is
lit up with flashes"), but soon the big three networks had
been shut down. That's when CNN, with its special "four-wire"
phone linked to a satellite, came into its own.
   Without a doubt, Wednesday night will mark the moment CNN
came of age. As the aerial bombardment swept over Baghdad,
John Holliman, anchor Bernard Shaw and New Zealander Peter
Arnett, one of the old-style war correspondents, stared out
the window of the Al-Rashid Hotel, describing the scene --
the bombs erupting, the tracer fire strung out like pearls
across the night sky.
   Ironically, in this, one of TV's finest moments, there
were no pictures. Like some throwback to the days of World
War II, it reminded the TV generation of the power of radio,
where words create the images, and imagination fills in the
rest: "The deep glow of night becoming dawn. . . . We've
spent the night on our stomachs, hands and knees . . . here
at ground zero, feeling the ground rumble, hearing the
thunder. . . ."
   More than one hundred hours of war have now gone by, and
CNN has scored several triumphs. (Secretary of Defense
Richard Cheney calling it his best source of intelligence was
good, NBC's Tom Brokaw being reduced to interviewing Bernard
Shaw for information on Iraq was even better, and Peter
Arnett being the only remaining U.S. reporter in Baghdad as
of Sunday is best of all.) Yet CNN's weakness in analysis has
also been exposed. Breathlessly up to the minute, the network
rarely has time to discover what something means. For
example, the aptly named Pentagon correspondent Wolf Blitzer,
normally quite reliable, reported on the first night that
"virtually the entire Iraqi air force has been decimated." He
was only off by a few hundred planes. On subsequent nights,
CNN held its breath as it showed something streaking across
the Tel Aviv sky, which turned out to be a harmless Soviet
booster rocket.
   For more analysis, then, I've turned to the networks,
primarily ABC. With Peter Jennings, once posted for so many
years in Beirut, one has the sense of someone who knows the
Middle East, where the souks and the ministries are. Dan
Rather, despite a commendable caution, has come across
curiously flat ("That's speculative. Nobody knows. It may,
underline the word may . . ."), then overinflated ("It takes
your breath away. It's like a movie. . . . But it's not a
novel, not a movie . . .").
   Around the dial, all the networks have had strong
analytical performances: NBC's Fred Francis from the
Pentagon, ABC's Cokie Roberts from Capitol Hill, CBS's Fouad
Ajami and Robert Krulwich (zinging the oil companies for
gouging the market and posting huge quarterly profits). As
the conflict has heated up, the four networks have brought on
retired colonels, major generals, generals, in a battle of
the military analysts. Then too, CBS has trotted out its own
really big guns, like Mike Wallace, Ed Bradley, Connie Chung
and, strangest of all, Walter Cronkite. Maybe CBS thinks we
need Uncle Walter in a crisis.
   Five days into the war, it's perhaps most fascinating how
all the networks, how TV itself, has become such a player in
this conflict. In the global living room, everyone has been
watching the same shows, even our leaders. "The Pentagon is
learning about this as we are, by watching television," said
ABC's Bob Zelnick of the missile attacks on Israel. "The best
source of information Saddam Hussein may have is from
American television," commented one military expert.
   In place of the red phone, diplomacy is now conducted by
television interview: Israel's Benjamin Netanyahu sends a
message to George Bush, the Iraqi ambassador to France floats
a trial balloon, Jordan's King Hussein requests a "pause for
peace." It's a nonstop video feedback loop, where the
protagonists watch themselves, and every act inspires 10
commentaries.
   As in any good war, there are plenty of commercials.
Despite all the talk to the contrary, the networks went to
ads within 12 hours -- pet food, spaghetti sauce and the
Dynatrim weight-loss method, right between the bombs. Who
says bloodshed and commerce don't mix? In fact, after only a
day-and-a-half, ABC, CBS and NBC had jettisoned their
round-the-clock coverage altogether, and gone back to
"Another World" and "One Life to Live," friendlier
environments for their advertisers.
   Maybe it was just as well. The networks had been reduced
to Joan Lunden interviewing Mr. Rogers on how kids feel about
the war. For all the air time, there was, and is,
surprisingly little information. The Pentagon is keeping a
tight lid on the U.S. side and, over the weekend, both Israel
and Iraq imposed censorship. Combat pictures are in even
shorter supply than facts. Mostly, this is news by press
release.
   Five days in, with all the statistics, all the diagrams,
all the whiz-bang microchip wizardry, TV makes it too easy to
think of this as war by remote control. Most of the footage
the Defense Department has released looks like a video game.
Only occasionally are we shocked by the real face of battle
-- the hours of monotony punctuated by minutes of intense
fear -- as when reporters in Israel and in Saudi Arabia
frantically strapped their gas masks on, and waited and
waited for the missiles to fall.
   Now begins the long haul of battle. Maybe when the ground
war opens, and the blood really starts to flow, TV will
finally remember this isn't just an electronic war -- this is
people dying.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
