ID: 238	RANK: 10	SCORE: 9.841575
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910517-0085
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910517-0085.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Sports:
   Antitrust Suit
   Could Rewrite
   NFL Playbook
   ----
   By William M. Bulkeley
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
05/17/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
</IN>
<NS>
ACQUISITIONS &amp; MERGERS, TAKEOVERS, BOARD BATTLES (TNM)
</NS>
<LP>
   A former team owner thinks the NFL should be flagged for a
penalty -- a $348 million penalty.
   An antitrust suit against the National Football League by
former New England Patriots owner, William H. Sullivan, could
open the gates for corporate ownership of football teams and
send franchise values soaring.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Mr. Sullivan, longtime owner of the Patriots, filed suit
in federal court in Providence, R.I., charging that in 1987,
the NFL unfairly prevented him from selling a 49% stake in
his team to an investment bank that would have resold
interests to the public.
   Mr. Sullivan says he was blocked because of an NFL rule
that prohibits selling any interest in an NFL team to "any
company not involved in the business of professional
football." In the suit he says that's a violation of the
Sherman Antitrust Act. He also complains that selective
enforcement of the rule provides a way for the league
commissioner to control independent franchise owners,
"depending on pure whim, caprice, favoritism or devious
maneuvering."
   If he wins, the ban on corporate ownership would
presumably be effectively overturned, opening the league to
potentially vast changes. Unique among major professional
sports leagues, the NFL has tried to limit ownership to
individuals and partnerships. That provides a clubby
atmosphere and forces owners to control expenses because they
generally can't write off losses on football against profits
in other lines of business.
   "This is certainly not a frivolous lawsuit," says Martin
J. Greenberg, a sports attorney and director of the National
Sports Law Institute at Marquette University in Milwaukee.
Because few individuals can afford the potential $150 million
cost of a professional football franchise, if Mr. Sullivan
prevails it could boost demand and value "by creating a new
community of potential owners."
   In a statement, the NFL said, the charges, "are totally
without merit." It added that "The NFL's ownership policies
were always applied fairly to Bill Sullivan and the New
England Patriots."
   Mr. Sullivan sold the team in 1988 to electric razor
magnate Victor Kiam and a partner, in a a deal valued at
about $65 million. Most of the transaction consisted of Mr.
Kiam's assuming $20 million in bank debt, as well as other
debt and contingent liabilities. Mr. Sullivan says in the
lawsuit he received $2.5 million at the time and an
additional $2.1 million over three years. Mr. Kiam also paid
$400,000 for Mr. Sullivan's Patriots memorabilia.
   Mr. Sullivan and the team were debt ridden because of a
disastrous decision to manage a concert tour for pop singer
Michael Jackson and because the franchise had never been well
capitalized. Mr. Sullivan said he filed the lawsuit after
finding out last year that the NFL had allowed the San
Francisco 49ers to be sold to its owners' real estate
development corporation.
   There isn't any assurance that Mr. Sullivan will win.
However, his attorney, former San Francisco Mayor Joseph
Alioto, has successfully challenged NFL rules on antitrust
grounds three times since 1957. Most recently, Mr. Alioto
represented Oakland Raider owner Al Davis, who won $18
million from the NFL owners in an antitrust suit over rules
that kept him from moving his franchise to Los Angeles.
   Mr. Greenberg, the Milwaukee attorney, notes that the
courts might conclude that the NFL is a voluntary association
that makes and interprets its own rules. "If these
{ownership} rules are the rules of the majority, maybe they
have to prevail." However, he said, "Nobody can tell how
courts will rule with claims made on antitrust grounds."
   Earlier this year, when reports of the impending suit
first emerged, NFL Commissioner Paul Tagliabue, was quoted in
the Boston Globe, "Bizarre -- there's no other way to explain
it." He recalled that Mr. Sullivan had bought out public
shareholders of the Patriots in the 1960s, and testified in
later court suits in favor of the league's prohibition of
outside ownership.
   In fact, many observers think the NFL is likely to open up
to corporate ownership in any event. This past fall, Mr.
Tagliabue said the league would review its ownership
standards to see if they remain appropriate. "It's more
historical than anything else," says a league spokesman. "The
philosophy is that a business whose primary interest was not
sports, may not be in the best interest of the league."
However, the spokesman notes that corporate ownership is
permitted in other sports.
   Indeed, the Chicago Tribune owns baseball's Cubs; Turner
Broadcasting owns baseball's Atlanta Braves and basketball's
Atlanta Hawks, and CBS Inc. once owned the New York Yankees.
   Glenn Wong, head of the Sport Management Program at the
University of Massachusetts at Amherst, says, "With publicly
traded corporations as owners, there would be many more steps
in league decisionmaking and it would allow lots more
information to become public."
   Unlike many of the current wealthy generation of sports
team owners, Mr. Sullivan's main business was football. At
the time he ran into his worst financial troubles in 1986,
the Patriots were achieving their greatest triumph, going to
the Super Bowl.
   Mr. Alioto, who is married to Mr. Sullivan's daughter,
notes that the Boston Celtics had just sold a minority stake
to the public, and Mr. Sullivan saw a sale of 49% of the
Patriots as a way to realize at least $40 million and pay off
his debts and get working capital for the team. Mr. Alioto
says that Smith Barney -- which had handled the Celtics deal
-- Allen &amp; Co. and others "were all ready to go." However,
the other NFL owners prohibited the plan at a meeting in
October 1987.
   In the suit, Mr. Sullivan says his case was bolstered by a
story that appeared in Forbes magazine last year giving
details of how in 1986, Edward J. DeBartolo Jr., owner of the
San Francisco 49ers, transferred ownership to Edward J.
DeBartolo Co., a closely held shopping mall developer in
Youngstown, Ohio. The article disclosed that then league
Commissioner Pete Rozelle had been aware of the move and
allowed it.
   This past fall, the league fined Mr. DeBartolo a record
$500,000 for the action but let the ownership arrangement
stand, pending completion of a review of league policy. Some
owners have charged that the 49ers success in the 1980s
reflected Mr. DeBartolo's ability to pay high wages for free
agent back-up players because he could write off the costs
against profits of the development company. Mr. DeBartolo
declined to comment.
   In the suit, Mr. Sullivan also says that the NFL itself is
contemplating selling to the public a 49% stake in the
lucrative NFL Properties unit that licenses team memorabilia.
The NFL declined to comment.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
