ID: 238	RANK: 27	SCORE: 8.421887
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911231-0075
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911231-0075.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Japan Plays Football
   (Amefuto, for Short)
   In the High Style
   ---
   Fashionable Japanese Await
   This Friday's Rice Bowl,
   And a Chance to Dress Up
   ----
   By Christopher J. Chipello
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
12/31/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
CLOTHING AND FABRICS (CLO)
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)
LEISURE TIME SERVICES AND PRODUCTS (REQ)
TEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX)
</IN>
<RE>
FAR EAST (FE)
JAPAN (JA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   TOKYO -- It's show time in the Japan corporate football
league.
   With the Onward Oaks trailing the Sunstar Finies 10-7, and
with time running out in the first half, the Oaks have driven
deep into Finie territory.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "Touchy-down, touchy-down," implore the Onward
cheerleaders, in their rhinestone-studded yellow and blue
outfits. Oaks partisans leap to their feet, waving yellow
pompons. Across the packed Tokyo Dome, Finie fans brandish
their little plastic megaphones, tomahawk-chop style.
   It is the fifth annual Tokyo Super Bowl, and 53,000 fans
are on hand to see Onward Kashiyama Co., a major Tokyo
clothing maker, do battle with a club sponsored by Sunstar
Inc., an Osaka toothpaste powerhouse, for bragging rights in
the 79-team salarymen league. But in the burgeoning world of
Amefuto, as American football is known here, there's as much
action off the field as on it.
   Amefuto is in fashion in Japan these days -- and fashion
is the word. "The action is tough, yet the cheerleaders and
uniforms look sharp. It's the perfect combination," explains
Toshiyuki Noda, general manager of football and public
relations at Onward. Football's "air of youthfulness" is
important to fashion companies, says the natty Mr. Noda.
Onward is "determined to be No. 1."
   A look around the Tokyo Dome shows why. A young
consulting-firm employee in a double-breasted suit slips his
arm around his date while he explains some of the game's
finer points. A woman in a short skirt and knee-high boots
sashays up the aisle, past a trio of unseasonably tan young
men in soft business suits and narrow ties. Football aside,
the place is a fashion show.
   In the chic new Town of Greenwich boutique in Tokyo's
Shibuya district, 18-year-old Tomoko Isaku is about to shell
out 22,000 yen ($170) for an official National Football
League jacket -- if only she can decide whether to go for
Philadelphia Eagles green or Seattle Seahawks blue. The
highschool senior has never actually seen a football game.
But she thinks the jackets are cute.
   "Most Japanese know very little about football," says Sam
Kusunoki of Japan Marketing Services Inc., which handles NFL
marketing efforts here. "But the sport scores high on image
surveys," just a rung below skiing and golf. Like those
colorful outdoor sports, football is kakko ii, or "cool,"
especially to young consumers.
   "So we must try to tie the sport to fashion," says Mr.
Kusunoki.
   It looks like a winning strategy. A chain of NFL specialty
shops opened last year has 31 outlets across Japan, with
products ranging from helmets to highlight videos. Satin
jackets are the biggest sellers, with Raiders black
threatening to overtake 49ers gold as the color and logo of
choice, says Katsushi Takahashi, planning chief for K.K. East
Point, which runs the NFL shops under license.
   The growing array of NFL accessories includes such
novelties as Miami Dolphin and New York Giant watches (made
by Seiko) and NFL-brand men's toiletries by Kanebo Ltd. Sales
of NFL stuff are expected to reach $39 million in the next
year, according to Mr. Kusunoki.
   For many years after the first game, in 1934, between
Tokyo college students and the Yokohama foreign club, Amefuto
languished. It was played on a few Japanese campuses -- with
about the status Rugby has in the U.S. But the advent of NFL
exhibition games in Japan in 1976 gave the game a boost. NFL
reruns from the U.S. have become a staple of late-night TV.
   The company league, meanwhile, has more than tripled from
the 29 teams extant in 1985. And the Tokyo Super Bowl is but
one of a string of post-season bowl games for company and
student leagues.
   The biggest of all, the Rice Bowl, will be held this
Friday, matching Onward, the Japanese corporate champs (and
winner of the Tokyo Super Bowl), and the collegiate champs.
The college men usually run away with the game. Although
company contenders such as Onward and rival fashion-house
Renown are stocked with former all-Japan players, the
full-time salarymen practice after work and can't match the
six-hour-a-day training regimens of the top college squads.
   Unlike some sports, such as basketball, foreign ringers
aren't allowed to play in the Amefuto company league. There
is talk of eventually admitting U.S. small-college alumni,
but authorities worry that the Japanese players would be
overpowered by Americans. Even U.S. Ivy League squads have
trounced Japan's best college players.
   "Our sumo wrestlers could go head-to-head with NFL
linemen, and our best baseball players would make quick
backs," but not enough young athletes here get into football,
says Hideki Matsuoka, Renown's star running back and
underwear model.
   The talent pool is swelling, however. Proliferating school
leagues now include 216 college teams and 123 high-school
squads. There is even an 18-team medical-school conference.
   The growing appeal of football to young males may have
something to do with young females. Miwako Fukasawa saw her
first football game in college, on a date, and was taken with
the spectacle of "men crashing into each other with such
force." In their shoulder pads and helmets, the players "look
big and powerful," Ms. Fukasawa says. "It's kakko ii."
   Now a 22-year-old Onward office worker, Ms. Fukasawa is
head cheerleader for the Onward Oaks.
   One reason the level of play is rising too is the arrival
of foreign coaches such as Dave Powroznik, a former
University of Southern California quarterback who supervises
Onward's offense. Mr. Powroznik fortified his players with
weight-training, new plays and a get-tough style. In the
U.S., "you've got the Dick Butkus type {of player} who wants
to hit people hard enough to take their heads off," he says.
"Here they'll say, `Sumimasen -- sorry -- are you OK? I hit
you too hard.' In the states, that's absurd."
   Not that Amefuto players are wimps. Tadashi Odera,
Renown's center and captain, is brawny, nearly 5-foot-10 and
weighs 209 pounds. The 29-year-old Mr. Odera, rubbing his
thick neck, says he used to be slightly taller but shrank
from the battering by beefy opponents.
   Commercially, it isn't just fashion houses like Onward and
Renown that are wrapping themselves in pigskin. Mitsubishi
Electric Corp. hired Joe Montana to pitch its new video
cameras because the 49ers quarterback projects "speed,
intelligence and youth," says a company spokesman. The ad
campaign could also inspire Mitsubishi's own team, the
Socio-Techs.
   What's kakko ii today, of course, can be passe tomorrow.
Tennis was all the rage in the mid-1980s, when young women
slung rackets over their shoulders purely for show as they
walked around Tokyo. Today, tennis is just another sport.
   Very few Japanese actually play football, but as a fashion
trend Amefuto is going strong. East Point is planning to open
20 more NFL shops early next year to promote its new "Team
NFL" women's wear. There, the Ivy League look will be out. In
will be California feel-loose pants, shirttails sticking out,
and cute logos, says Mr. Takahashi. The new made-in-Japan
line, he says, will give the NFL chain a "total American
image."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
