ID: 238	RANK: 70	SCORE: 7.827164
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910830-0052
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910830-0052.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Marketing &amp; Media:
   Tip for Tailgaters: Bring Plenty of Cash
   When NFL Kicks Off Its Season Sunday
   ----
   By Mark Robichaux
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
08/30/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)
</IN>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Some advice for the several hundred thousand football fans
heading for their local stadiums for the start of the NFL
season Sunday: Bring more money.
   A family of four will spend an average of $151.55 to
attend a National Football League game this year, up almost
5% from last year, according to a new survey. Ticket prices
alone are up 5.2% to a league average of $25.21 a pop --
double what the price was 10 years ago. Hot dogs are selling
for $1.85.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The survey, conducted by the Chicago-based sports-business
newsletter Team Marketing Report, well underscores the thrill
of victory and the agony of defeat.
   The perennial winners at the San Francisco 49ers jacked up
ticket prices by a healthy 17% this season to the highest in
the league. Every ticket in the house will cost a cool $35.
The 49ers fans will see the most expensive games in the
league this year: $197.50 for a family of four, hot dogs and
parking included.
   A team spokesman defends the increase, citing the team's
14-2 record last season. "A 49ers game is a happening," says
Keith Simon, the 49ers' vice president of business
operations. "Besides, we've been sold out since 1981."
   Not so at the hapless New England Patriots, which had good
reason to avoid boosting ticket prices this year. "The team
was 1-15 last year. We had the poorest attendance in the NFL.
I don't think for one second the thought of ticket increases
crossed anyone's mind here," explains a chagrined Patriots
spokesman. The Patriots could have used the extra money: The
team recently asked the NFL to let it increase its borrowing
limit $10 million, to $45 million.
   Indeed, the Team Marketing Report survey also shows 17 of
the NFL's 28 teams didn't raise ticket prices for the new
season -- some winners, some losers, and some in between. The
New York Giants, last season's Super Bowl champions, held
prices constant at an average of $24.50.
   Some fans nonetheless call the NFL pricing highway
robbery. "These increases are obscene," fumes Sidney Siller,
founder of the United Sports Fans of America. "It's way out
of reach for the average family. The owners are putting it to
the fans -- and the fans are letting them."
   Not that any fan uprising looms: Mr. Siller's group
dissolved in part because of lack of interest, he says. He's
now building membership for a group he started called the
National Organization for Men.
   Based on a survey of all 28 NFL teams, the newsletter
developed a Fan Cost Index, reflecting the cost of four game
tickets, four soft drinks, four hot dogs, two beers, two
caps, two game programs and parking.
   The results show that even while the 49ers' winning ways
may allow price increases with impunity, America's Team --
the Dallas Cowboys -- were able to chopblock their fans, too,
despite last season's 7-9 win-loss record. The study says
attending a Cowboys game costs a bracing $184.33 for a family
of four, second only to the San Francisco 49ers. It will cost
$181.50 -- the third highest -- to see the Washington
Redskins.
   But fans of the Detroit Lions get a break, given their
team's 6-10 record last season. They will pay the lowest
total for a four-person outing this year -- $107.67, or close
to half the cost of seeing the 49ers in San Francisco. Lions
ticket prices alone, averaging $18.17, are the lowest in the
NFL.
   The Lions, too, charitably avoided raising ticket prices
this season. Alan Friedman, editor and owner of the Team
Marketing Report, says reasons vary as to why some teams held
prices down. For one thing, some of them had already lifted
ticket prices in recent seasons. For another, ticket sales
contribute less than one-third of an NFL club's overall
revenue.
   Television fees -- $3.6 billion over four years divided by
the 28 teams -- provide the lion's share.
   But the teams that did raise ticket prices did so with a
jolt. The Pittsburgh Steelers increased them nearly 26% on
average, to $29.25, the biggest average boost in the league
despite the Steelers' lukewarm 9-7 record last year. A team
spokesman counters that the study is flawed. More than 80% of
the seats in the stadium cost only $25, he says, albeit that
still is up $5, or 25%, from last year.
   "We've had very few complaints from ticket holders," the
Steelers spokesman says. "For the most part, they probably
expected it, because we haven't raised ticket prices in three
years."
   Even when teams don't raise ticket prices, fans have to
pay the piper in other ways. Parking costs a pricey,
league-high $10 a car at the stadiums of four teams -- the
49ers, the Patriots, the Los Angeles Raiders and the Miami
Dolphins. Parking is the cheapest -- $3 a shot -- in Atlanta
-- but the Falcons raised ticket prices a hefty 23% this
year, to $24.67 on average.
   The league's most expensive hot dogs can be had watching
the Chicago Bears at Soldier Field and the Phoenix Cardinals
at Sun Devil Stadium: $3 a dog. And fittingly, attending
games of New York's two teams, in an area where everything is
expensive, will cost you the most for a beer -- $3.90 a brew.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
