ID: 238	RANK: 85	SCORE: 7.592385
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910312-0135
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910312-0135.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Sports:
   NFL Hopes Offshoot Scores in Europe
   ----
   By John Helyar
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
03/12/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   CCB PCI MC CANDA EUROP
</CO>
<IN>
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)
</IN>
<LP>
   Here's something you don't figure to see on any given
Sunday in Europe: American football teams running frantic
no-huddle offenses up and down the gridiron, the quarterbacks
talking to the sidelines by helmet radio, the cheerleaders
chanting sis-boom-bahs in their native tongues.
   It's all going to happen starting this month, though, with
the kickoff of the World League of American Football. Created
by the National Football League and supported largely by U.S.
television, the new circuit will begin play March 23.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But is the world ready for the World League? It is an odd
mix of six mostly second-tier U.S. cities and three major
European ones, with a Canadian entry thrown in for good
measure. It is trying to capitalize on the NFL's growing
presence and popularity on European TV without quite being
the NFL. Put together against a backdrop of war and terrorism
fears, it is starting up in the midst of recession.
   "If you picked a year to start a new international league
since World War II, you couldn't have picked a worse one,"
admits Mike Lynn, the World League's president.
   The fact that it's starting up at all tells much about the
NFL's global aspirations. Like other pro sports, the league
fears it may be exhausting sources of growth in the U.S. and
is seeking new ones overseas. It has played exhibition games
abroad regularly since 1986 and exports weekly highlight
shows to about 30 countries.
   The most immediately inviting market is Europe, on the
cusp of 1992 market unification and with a growing number of
TV networks hungry for programming. In start-up form, the
World League has sold broadcast rights to three European
outlets. If the league catches on, "the TV revenues available
to it will be greater than those available to the NFL," says
Robert Sillerman, owner of the new league's New York/New
Jersey Knights franchise.
   For now, however, the World League is being underwritten
mainly by ABC Sports and the USA Network, which have paid a
combined $48 million for broadcast rights to its first two
10-game seasons.
   So far, the World League has been a tough sell to
advertisers, with only about half of its TV ad time sold to
date. "The biggest problem is that, except for New York,
these teams aren't in media centers," says Bill Croasdale,
national broadcast director of Backer, Spielvogel Bates, a
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi unit. "If you're in Chicago or New York, do
you really care about Sacramento and San Antonio?"
   The even bigger question: If you're European, do you
really care about what looks suspiciously like minor-league
football? "They have an uphill battle," says Michael Carlson,
who heads European operations for major league baseball.
"It's one thing to do well with TV highlights and another to
bring people out to stadiums to see foreign players."
   There's no stampede so far. They're yawning in Barcelona,
Spain. "I read about it once in the newspaper," says Gerardo
Seeliger, who runs an investment advisory firm there.
"Unfortunately, I think there's no interest at all here."
   They're snakebit in Frankfurt, Germany, where the team had
been counting on attendance by lots of U.S. troops, now in
the Persian Gulf or confined to bases to avoid terrorists.
The Frankfurt Galaxy has sold only 450 season tickets, though
with the war over and a concerted sales drive beginning,
ticket sales are picking up.
   They're doing better in London, where nearly 10,000
tickets have been sold for the opening game. In the U.S., the
Birmingham, Ala., Fire has sold about 10,000 season tickets,
the Sacramento, Calif., Surge 10,500. The Montreal Machine
sold 5,000 season tickets the first day they went on sale
last week. But those figures leave room for tens of thousands
of empty seats.
   The fact that many teams are getting a late start on
selling tickets is symptomatic of a broader problem. This is
a league thrown together in a hurry and rushed to market. It
was conceived when an international rival was trying to get
started. The NFL quashed that with the World League, but in
turn created pressure on itself to get the league off the
ground fast.
   As recently as last fall, when Mr. Lynn became president,
many in NFL circles favored waiting for a 1992 launch -- two
years behind the original plan. Instead, Mr. Lynn reduced the
number of foreign teams to four from six and convinced his
brethren that the scaled-back league could go in '91. "I
thought we would have lost all credibility" by delaying
further, says Mr. Lynn, who doubles as executive vice
president of the NFL's Minnesota Vikings.
   To overcome the late start, the league has turned to what
the NFL does best: public relations. It has flown two dozen
or more European sportswriters to the U.S. to see an NFL game
last fall, the Super Bowl in January and, now, World League
training camps in Florida. It has played up its Operation
Discovery, with former Denver Broncos coach John Ralston
combing Europe for native athletes who could be made into
football players.
   But generating press and some public curiosity will get
the league only so far. It may soon need some meaningful
European players or risk going the way of soccer in the U.S.:
condemned to indifference for lack of identification with the
players. "If this is just Americans from London playing
Americans from Frankfurt, they'll have a hard row to hoe,"
says Lance Cone, an American expatriate who is president of
the British American Football Association.
   Yet the World League is pinning a lot of its hopes on
Europeans' fascination with things American. Taking a page
from such U.S. cultural exports as "The Cosby Show" and Walt
Disney movies, it will make its games family-oriented and
spectacle-heavy, with cheerleaders and marching bands. (The
London Monarchs cheerleaders, trained by an American
choreographer, will be called the Crown Jewels.)
   That strategy positions the sport directly counter to
European soccer's hooliganism. Many people feel "they can't
take their family" to soccer games, says Walter Kreutner,
editor-in-chief of Touchdown, a German football magazine, so
"the market is there for something new."
   The league is also adapting the game so the action will
flow more continuously, like European favorites soccer and
rugby. A standard playbook for all teams calls for hurry-up
offenses, with only minimal pauses between plays. The league
also will forgo instant-replay reviews of close calls, a
game-slowing feature of the NFL.
   The standard playbook is just one facet of a highly
centralized operation. The league hands teams their marketing
plans, assigns their uniform colors and recommends personnel.
It keeps half the TV revenue, pays the players' and coaches'
salaries and sets a standard wage scale: low. Base pay ranges
from $15,000 to $25,000, plus incentives.
   The structure is meant to ensure there won't be
loose-cannon owners paying huge sums to lure stars, like
Donald Trump in the late United States Football League. But
it may also mean there won't be any stars.
   "The irony is that because it is funded by the NFL, it's
not going to compete with the NFL," says Michael Trager,
chairman of Sports Marketing &amp; Television International Inc.,
a consulting firm. "That could be detrimental to the fan, who
likes to see some marquee players. Eventually, the fans want
heroes."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
