ID: 111	RANK: 18	SCORE: 7.277606
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911108-0103
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911108-0103.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
   Charlie O. and His Sporting Inventions
   ----
   By Frederick C. Klein
</HL>
<DATE>
11/08/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   Chicago -- Charlie Finley was called a lot of things
during the 20 years he owned the Kansas City and Oakland
Athletics, but asleep at the wheel was never one of them. He
was the fella who brought white shoes and brightly colored
uniforms to baseball. Also the designated hitter and night
World Series and All Star games. He plumped for baseballs to
be bright orange, so people could see them better.
   And he still had time to put together the A's teams that
won consecutive World Series titles in 1972 through '74.
Those were the best teams of the post-Yankee (after-1964)
era, I think; they had better pitching than the 1975 and '76
Cincinnati Reds.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "I'll tell ya something else I did in baseball that few
others did -- I made money every year I was in the game but
one, and that included some pretty bad clubs as well as my
good ones," rasped the bushybrowed Charlie O. in his office
here the other day. "I was sensible about what I paid my
players even though some of 'em didn't appreciate it, and I
didn't do like a lot of the owners did, which was hire 100
people to do the work of 10. Something needed to be done,
often as not I'd do it myself."
   Finley sold the A's in 1980 and now, at age 73, he's
mostly doing what he did before he became a sports mogul,
which is peddling insurance. He made his initial bundle by
pioneering the sale of group insurance to organizations of
physicians and other professionals. He has not, however,
ceased thinking originally about the games people play, or
turning his own hand to them. On this day, he sat twirling
his latest brainchild, the Double Grip football. "I'd say it
was the football of the future, but the future's started
already," he declared.
   The ball is being made by Rawlings Sporting Goods Co., but
it's really Charlie's. It's his name and his design, which,
like all great innovations, is simple. Instead of the tiny
raised pebbles on the surface of the conventional football,
those on the Double Grip are inverted, like the dimples on
golf balls. The intention is to make the ball easier to
handle.
   "I played high school football in Gary, Ind.," Finley said
by way of explanation. "I wanted to play quarterback, but I
had small hands and couldn't control the ball very well, so
they made me a guard. Guard was the worst position on the
team. I got all battered up and never got my name in the
paper.
   "I never thought much more about that until a couple years
ago," he went on. "I keep sports stuff around my office, and
was fiddling with a football while I was talking to some
guys. All of a sudden it occured to me: Who says the pebbles
have to stick up? Why can't they be inverted?
   "I called Rawlings and Wilson. Had 'em each make up
$100,000 worth of footballs; paid for 'em myself. Then I
called a bunch of coaches and asked 'em to give the ball a
try. Just about all of 'em loved it. I got a patent and made
a royalty deal with Rawlings. So there you have it."
   Finley flipped me a ball. I remarked that it felt tacky.
"People always ask me if I put stickum on it. There's nothing
on it; that's just how it feels," Charlie chortled. "It's
great for throwing and catching. I've been told it plays
great in the rain, too. Northwestern used it a couple weeks
ago against Illinois in a real downpour. They had no
turnovers and pulled a big upset. The coach there calls it
his rain ball."
   The Double Grip debuted last season and was used in eight
college bowl games, among others. Some 30 college teams now
have adopted it. Finley says he's dickering with several
manufacturers to put the idea to work on basketballs. "Had
some made up and passed around, and you know who liked 'em
best? The girls] Said it really helped 'em handle the ball.
It'll be a winner."
   Charlie tired of that subject and produced another
football. This one sported fluorescent-yellow stripes along
its four seams as well as the inverted pebbles. The stripes
are another of his ideas, and he has commercial plans for
what he calls his High Visibility ball.
   "Did you know that 90% of high school football fields have
inadequate night lighting?" he asked. "Most schools play on
Friday nights, which means that a lot of time the players
can't see the ball, and the fans can't, either. With this
ball, that'll be no problem. It's just such an obviously good
idea, it can't miss.
   "You know," he mused, "I got into baseball as a fan, not
an insider type, but I still did OK, and I've always thought
that if you gave the fans a say in running sports they'd be a
whole lot better than they are. All the changes I proposed in
baseball were designed to make it better for the fan, and I'd
have done more if the mossbacks had let me.
   "Take the designated hitter; I pushed it through to help
correct the huge imbalance in favor of the defense that was
hurting the game, but it didn't go far enough. You've got
pitchers today who are 6-foot-6. They can throw 95 mph, and
they've got such long arms they can just about tickle a
batter's mustache with their fingers after they let the ball
go. What chance does a hitter have?
   "If I had my way, they'd award walks after three balls,
not four, so the pitchers'd have to come over the plate more.
I proposed a designated runner who could enter a game three
times without the players he replaced being eliminated.
Wouldn't you rather see a really fast guy run the bases than
some big, heavy catcher or first baseman?
   "I took a lot of heat for my orange-baseball idea, but I
still like it, for the same reason as the
fluorescent-stripped football: The fans and the players --
especially the hitters -- will be able to see it better. And
the story that baseball shot me down on that is untrue. I
never formally proposed it, because I never found a way to
color a ball orange properly.
   "Baseballs aren't painted or dyed, you know; the cowhide
turns white when its processed with something called alum,
and there's no alum that can turn a ball orange. But lemme
tell you, I've got people working on that. As soon as they're
successful, you'll hear from me again."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
