ID: 111	RANK: 30	SCORE: 6.837927
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910717-0126
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910717-0126.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
   Baseball at the Bargaining Table
   ----
   By Frederick C. Klein
</HL>
<DATE>
07/17/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A7
</SO>
<LP>
   Around Christmas 1965, some Major League baseball
veterans, concerned about the game's pension plan, determined
that the association that had been representing them in a
desultory manner should be beefed up by the hiring of a
full-time executive director. To that end, they arranged an
interview with Marvin Miller, a well-regarded bargainer for
the United Steelworkers of America.
   At the outset of his new book, "A Whole Different Ball
Game: The Sport and Business of Baseball" (Birch Lane Press,
430 pages, $21.95), Mr. Miller relates that at the meeting
the players informed him that if he were hired they had in
mind someone to assist him as general counsel: Richard M.
Nixon.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   With such a mind-set, it was remarkable that the players
would offer the job to a hard-core unionist like Mr. Miller.
And, given that glimpse into the baseball psyche, it's more
remarkable that he took it (without, as it turned out,
committing himself to accepting the aid and comfort of Mr.
Nixon).
   Most remarkable, though, was the association's record
during the Brooklyn-born economist's 17 years as its leader,
ending in 1983. During his tenure, impartial arbitration was
substituted for owner-imposed settlements of grievances, the
"reserve clause" that bound a player to his team at the
team's pleasure was ruled invalid, and the player salary
average began its rocketlike ascent from $19,000 to today's
nearly $900,000. It's certainly a whole different ball game,
in ways that still are evolving.
   Mr. Miller's book, written with the help of Allen Barra,
details the struggles that led to those gains, and these were
remarkable, too. To say the owners had things their own way
before he came along would be an understatement. The lords of
the baseball were (and still are) exempt from the nation's
antitrust laws, never gave the players copies of many of the
documents that bound them, and, when they felt changes were
in order, simply had their appointed commissioner announce
them unilaterally. A player running afoul of the game's
powers-that-be was in the same situation as a stranger
arrested in "one of those tiny towns where the sheriff also
turns out to be the judge and the mayor," Mr. Miller writes.
   Moreover, as he notes in several contexts, some of the men
he represented were ignorant of or hostile to the role of
unions in protecting workers' interests, and many were
apathetic over issues they perceived as not directly
involving them. For instance, no player showed up in court to
give moral support to Curt Flood in his 1970 legal assault on
the reserve clause, or to hear arguments in the owner's
(unsuccessful) suit to overturn the five-years-later
arbitrator's ruling that killed the infamous rule and allowed
the players to flex their market muscle.
   But he goes on to say that years of labor strife in
baseball, including the strike of 1972 and the lockout of
1976, paid off in player solidarity during the 50-day, 1981
walkout over the owners' bid for "warmbody" compensation for
lost free agents. Given the fact that most players never
perform long enough to attain free agency, Mr. Miller calls
the '81 strike the "most-principled" he'd been associated
with in a 40-plus-year labor career.
   Mr. Miller opines that his union did have allies, but not
ones you'd expect. Team owners, he says, always could be
counted upon to do or say things that would stiffen members'
backbones at crucial times.
   He continues that the players' best friend -- next to
himself, of course -- was Bowie Kuhn, baseball's commissioner
for most of his time with the players' group. Mr. Miller's
low regard for and asserted gratitude to the starchy Mr. Kuhn
punctuates his book. "If Bowie Kuhn had never existed," he
summarizes, paraphrasing Voltaire on God, "we would have had
to invent him."
   That view is payback for Mr. Kuhn's assessment of Mr.
Miller in his 1987 book, "Hardball," in which he called the
union chief "sly," a "mean-spirited badger," and -- insult of
insults -- "not a fan." Marvin, however, one-ups Bowie by
making him seem pathetic as well as inept. I mean, where else
in the annals of labor relations has a management rep (Kuhn)
been depicted as approaching a union negotiator (Miller)
before contract talks and asking for leniency because "the
owners need a victory"?
   Such lack of sportsmanship is only one bone I have to pick
with this book. Mr. Miller repeatedly lumps news people as
the owners' lackeys when my own observation was that his
union's positions received a fair airing from much of the
press. And he spends much space defending his credentials as
a baseball fan instead of merely noting that they were
irrelevant to the job he was hired to perform.
   It's clear, though, that the players did better than they
knew when they hired Mr. Miller, and his story is well worth
our attention. He brought to a very public enterprise the
sort of honestly adversarial relationship between labor and
management that we hold up as desirable, and that benefits us
all.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
