ID: 111	RANK: 32	SCORE: 6.714057
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910212-0152
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910212-0152.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
   Bumping Hips and Heads in Box Lacrosse
   ----
   By Frederick C. Klein
</HL>
<DATE>
02/12/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   Philadelphia -- The Indians of the American Northeast
invented the sport of lacrosse more than 500 years ago. They
called it "baggataway," which meant "bumping hips." The game
has undergone many changes since, not all of them in the
direction of greater refinement.
   On Sunday, for example, the Detroit Turbos of the Major
Indoor Lacrosse League journeyed to the City of Brotherly
Love to play the hometown Wings, and their contest was marked
by several fights, all of which involved the bumping of more
than hips.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "A guy jumps you, you gotta defend yourself," said husky
Paul Gait, the Detroit rookie star, who bumped his fist
against the face of the Wings' equally husky John Tucker in
the third quarter of the 14-12 Turbo win, and had his face
bumped by Tucker's fist in return. "That's the kind of game
this is," Gait added, unneccessarily. "You can't show your
skills if you're intimidated."
   Gait et al. had just showed their skills to a near-full
house of 16,622 in the Spectrum on this sunny Sunday,
indicating either that lacrosse is catching on or that folks
hereabouts lack other entertainments. Its promoters weren't
fussy about which. "This is great]" enthused Chris Fritz, the
league's president. "It shows we're on track to make lacrosse
America's No. 5 sport." Right behind baseball, football,
basketball and luge, I guess.
   In case you've never seen lacrosse, I'll explain it to
you. The outdoor game is played on a large, grassy field with
lots of players, most of them from Baltimore. The indoor
version, the one the MILL plays, is Canadian in origin,
invented to give hockey rinks some utility during that
nation's brief summer. Its name there is "box lacrosse,"
suggesting a link with the pugilistic sport.
   Artificial turf covers the ice and there are six players
to a side, including a goalie. All the others are called
forwards, perhaps so as to not confuse them about the
direction of the opposition's goal.
   Each player carries a stick with a netted loop on its end.
The stick is used to catch, throw and shoot the ball (it must
be shot rather quickly; there's a 40-second clock) and to
whack other players. Hitting a ball carrier is permissible so
long as the blow does not land on his head or below the
knees. Nonetheless, players distrust each other's aim and
wear stout helmets with full-cage face masks.
   The MILL now is in its fifth campaign, and has teams in
New York, Baltimore, Pittsburgh and Worcester, Mass., in
addition to Motown and Philly. Each plays a 10-game,
weekends-only schedule ending March 23, followed by a
championship game matching the winners of the league's two
divisions. There are only three of those, so no one finishes
worse than third.
   The league owns all the teams, and turned a profit last
season, thank you. This is partly because it holds players'
base salaries to a modest $125 to $300 a game. Even with
season-ending performance bonuses, that comes to less
annually than Roger Clemens loses behind his sofa cushions.
   The MILL also thrives because it has confined itself
largely to the Northeast, where a lacrosse-fan base exists.
Leaguewide attendance has been good, averaging 11,000 a game
last season, and about the same so far this one. According to
MILL demographic research, it's a well-heeled crowd, the
average fan being a 30-year-old bond trader who drives a BMW,
reads Playboy, has 2.6 girlfriends, carries an immense load
of credit-card debt and enjoys watching people beat one
another with sticks.
   Many of the players also fit the yuppie mold, thanks to
their Eastern-collegiate backgrounds and day jobs. Some are
lawyers, bankers, stockbrokers or real-estate developers.
Others have respectable jobs.
   The two fellas that may make the thing go, though, still
are undergraduates at Syracuse University. They are the
twin-brothers Gait, Paul and Gary. The 23-year-old natives of
Victoria, B.C., were All-Americans on Syracuse teams that won
several NCAA titles. Their college eligibility expired before
they got their degrees, and they have stayed on to get same
while performing with the pros.
   The Gaits are the Michael Jordans of lacrosse, noted for
their stick-handling and acrobatic skills. Among the moves
they have pioneered is the "Air Gait," in which they leap out
from behind the hockey-like goal and fling in the ball as
they fly past, without violating the "crease" area, into
which only the goalie may tread.
   They're so good that their addition has lifted the Detroit
team from the league's worst last season, with a 1-7 won-lost
record, to first place currently, at 5-1. Paul's two goals
Sunday set his season total at 30, breaking the league's
single-season record with four games yet to play. Gary had
three assists to break that mark, plus three goals.
   "You wonder how good we'd be if we could practice together
more," mused Medo Martinello, the Turbos' coach. He explained
that the Gait boys rarely make it to Detroit for workouts,
and that the occupational obligations of team members who
live locally also interfere. "Even I can't make it
sometimes," noted Martinello, who owns a couple of pizzerias
in Windsor, Ont.
   But if rehearsal was lacking, Sunday's production came off
well. Besides the pushing, shoving and hacking, the players
handled the ball with considerable flair; most notable were
Turbo breakaways begun by long passes from goalie Ted Sawicki
that would have done Dan Marino proud. Detroit jumped to a
3-0 lead and saw the Wings rally to an 11-10 edge before
breaking the game with four consecutive last-period goals.
   And afterward, icing their bruises, the players spoke not
of their meager salaries but of how good it was to be able to
continue their sport at all. "If it weren't for the league,
most of us would be playing for nothing," said Turbo forward
Jacques Monte, a coach at the College of Wooster in Ohio. "Of
course," he added, "that's just about what we're doing now."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
