ID: 111	RANK: 57	SCORE: 6.374508
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910709-0055
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910709-0055.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Enterprise:
   Seller of Velcro Ball and Mitts Hits Homer
   ----
   By Suzanne Alexander
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
07/09/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)
</IN>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
FAR EAST (FE)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
SOUTH KOREA (SK)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   An updated version of a childhood staple is scoring as
this season's hot toy.
   Called the Super Grip Ball, it comes covered in Velcro,
accompanied by two flat Velcro-covered mitts. Paliafito
America Inc. markets the games, and many stores can't get
enough of them. Toys "R" Us Inc., the nation's largest toy
retailer, says it's "very low in stock." Sharper Image calls
the game one of the company's "hottest selling items."
Brookstone, a specialty retailer, is selling several thousand
daily. And two competitors have begun marketing similar
products.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "You look at something like this and say, `Boy, it seems
so brainless. Why didn't I think of that?'" says Stephen
Sandberg, owner of toy distributor Sanco Toy Co., in Foxboro,
Mass.
   Indeed, some of the best product ideas are also the
simplest. And if they are fads that don't last long -- like
the Pet Rock -- entrepreneurs can still get pretty rich.
   Main Street Toy Co., of Simsbury, Conn., hit the jackpot
last summer with Slap Wraps. Kids snapped up 3.5 million of
the wraps, which are long, thin pieces of fabric-covered
steel that wrap around wrists like bracelets when they are
slapped on. Retailing for $1.99, they were a cheap buy.
   Similarly, giant orange garbage bags with jack-o'-lantern
faces became an overnight sensation when they were introduced
in the fall of 1989 by Sun Hill Industries Inc., a holiday
products manufacturer in Stamford, Conn. The bags, filled
with fallen leaves, now sit on suburban lawns throughout the
U.S. at Halloween. "As soon as it hit the streets, it became
the next Hula-Hoop," says Benson Zinbarg, Sun Hill president.
"We had a winner."
   For Paliafito, the Super Grip Ball is "a dream come true,"
says Gregory Waylock, executive vice president. Since the
game was introduced in March, Paliafito, based in Walnut,
Calif., has sold 600,000 sets, which retail for $15 to $20
each. The company has orders for 800,000 to one million games
over the next two months and hopes to sell a total of three
million by year end.
   Joseph and Jennifer MacKenzie, of Jaffrey, N.H., like
Super Grip Ball because, unlike other ball and mitt games, it
doesn't force them to waste time chasing the ball. Moreover,
the toy is the only ball game they're allowed to play in the
house. "It's neat how the ball sticks so easily," says
Jennifer, 12 years old. "We play during boring cartoons and
during commercials with our dad." Adds Joseph, 10, "Super
Grip is great for teaching little kids not to be afraid of
the ball. My three-year-old niece always misses balls when we
throw them. But she can catch this."
   Super Grip Ball wasn't Paliafito's idea. South Korean
manufacturer Mantae Ltd. bought an earlier version of the
game from its inventor in Korea several years ago, when the
inventor couldn't get the game's paddles to catch correctly.
Mantae improved the game and in the spring of 1990 began
selling it in the U.S. through a number of small distributors
and under a number of different names, including Grip Ball,
Super Catch and Magic Catch.
   But the product never really took off, says Mr. Waylock.
Last October, Mark Paliafito -- who operated a summer
baseball camp in Wisconsin and was a friend of Mr. Waylock --
heard about the product through friends who knew a
distributor in California. "Mark saw the product had
potential, and the ideas started racing through his head,"
Mr. Waylock says.
   In January, Mr. Paliafito outbid three other companies for
national marketing rights to the game -- by, among other
things, promising to spend at least $1 million on
advertising. "We knew it was a good product, but we had no
way of predicting it would sell at this magnitude," Mr.
Waylock says.
   Paliafito gave away thousands of games on beaches in Texas
and Florida during the traditional spring break week this
year. It also sponsored radio giveaways and is running
television commercials in 20 cities nationwide, including New
York, Miami and Dallas. "Mantae was waiting for people to
call and order the game. Our emphasis is to get out there and
demonstrate it," Mr. Waylock says.
   Like plenty of others in the fad business, Paliafito is
finding success breeds competition. While the company claims
that Mantae holds a U.S. patent for the game, several other
companies produce similar, and very popular, versions of
Super Grip Ball.
   General Sportcraft Co., based in Bergenfield, N.J., is
selling its Magic Mitts to retailers nationwide, including
Kmart Corp. And Dry Branch Inc., in New York, sells another
version, Scatch. "We will be suing some of the imitators,"
says Richard Hart, an attorney for Paliafito. General
Sportcraft says it doesn't infringe on Mantae's patent. Dry
Branch couldn't be reached.
   Another problem is that Super Grip Ball has become almost
too popular. "We have accounts calling us every day, but our
warehouse is empty," laments Mr. Waylock. Like many small
companies, Paliafito has been limited by cash-flow
constraints. "We're a small company," Mr. Waylock says, "and
we have to pay cash in advance to get the product." While the
Paliafito family has financed the venture so far, the company
is looking for more investors, he adds.
   By definition, fads fade quickly. Main Street Toy expects
to sell only 1.5 million Slap Wraps this year -- a 57%
decline -- even though it has come out with a new Slap Wrap
digital watch attachment. Sun Hill, trying to extend the life
of its decorative garbage bag business, came out with a whole
line of Halloween bags last year, including witches, ghosts
and bats. "When you have a winner, you should cover the
waterfront," contends Mr. Zinbarg. Still, he concedes that
the original jack-o'-lantern is his best seller.
   Paliafito, seeking to build its business, now offers Super
Grip Ball paddles with corporate logos on them. So far, the
company has few takers. But whatever the future holds, for
now Paliafito is enjoying its success. Says Mr. Waylock:
"We're having a ball."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
