ID: 111	RANK: 6	SCORE: 11.085488
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910408-0161
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910408-0161.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Imagine Romania,
   Of All Places, Having
   A Shortage of Bats
   ---
   Ceausescu Would Turn Over
   In His Grave If He Knew
   That Baseball Had Arrived
   ----
   By Roger Thurow
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
04/08/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)
</IN>
<RE>
EUROPE (EU)
</RE>
<LP>
   BUCHAREST -- As a new Major League Baseball season opens
with millionaire outfielders whining about their measly
wages, spare a cheer for a league so impoverished that the
batters have to wear their own motorcycle helmets to the
plate.
   "We would have liked to start our season in April or May,
but we don't have enough equipment yet. So maybe we will
start in June," says Cristian Costescu, the president of the
Romanian Baseball Federation. "Some teams have only one bat.
We need more balls. But our biggest disaster is gloves. Some
teams don't have a full set. It is very difficult to practice
when you have to share gloves."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   As spring comes to the Balkans, Romania is taking its
first swing at America's national pastime. The league
president is a former national champion swordsman who has
never played an inning of baseball. Enough coaches have
signed up to form 29 teams around the country, but there are
only six proper fields. The amateur players are veterans of
"oina," the beloved sport of Transylvania that is played on a
rectangle instead of a diamond and bears as much resemblance
to baseball as Babe Ruth does to Dracula.
   But never mind all that. "What the Romanians lack in
equipment and expertise, they make up for in desire to play,"
says Allen Docal, the American Information Center director in
Bucharest and unofficial talent scout. "They know they aren't
Reggie Jackson and the New York Yankees."
   They aren't even the Chicago Cubs. But at least it is a
start, which, given baseball's history here, is quite an
achievement.
   "We are orphans in Romania, too," says Mr. Costescu,
comparing his fledgling league to the thousands of babies
abandoned during the Communists' reign, when both birth
control and baseball were officially banned. "As we start
with our baseball activity, you can put a big 0 on our
scoreboard."
   Pitching the shutout was that renowned spoilsport, Nicolae
Ceausescu, the Communist dictator who feared that if baseball
came to Romania, capitalism would be sure to follow. For
various other reasons, he also banned Scrabble, bridge,
martial arts and field hockey.
   Mr. Costescu, a stocky man with silver hair, lives, eats
and drinks baseball in a little office at the end of a dark
corridor on the seventh floor of the gloomy Ministry of
Sports building, where the elevator rarely works. A miniature
cardboard cutout of former New York Mets Manager Davey
Johnson looks on from the bookshelf. A wooden ball sits on
the desk, like a paperweight. On the wall behind hangs a
banner from Topps, the American baseball-card maker. "Team
U.S.A. today, big leagues tomorrow," it says.
   Even though it is only 8 in the morning, Mr. Costescu
offers an American visitor a glass of plum schnapps. "A
Romanian tradition," he explains. He proposes a toast to
baseball and settles into his chair.
   "I saw my first game in 1985. It was in Italy," he says,
beginning the saga of baseball in Romania. Mr. Costescu, then
the head of the oina federation, returned home with tales of
what he had witnessed, a baseball instructional video and a
rule book, all of which he shared with a couple of physical
education teachers. For the next two years, this group
covered the rudiments of the game, translating the rules into
Romanian, scouting potential fields and publishing some
articles in the local sports newspapers to whip up interest.
A few trial games were even played under the nose of the
security police, who figured it was a mutant strain of oina.
   In 1988, Mr. Costescu committed an error. He boldly
approached Romania's sports officials with an application to
set up a baseball federation, which would have made the sport
eligible for government funding. He didn't get to first base.
   "They told me, `No, baseball is a capitalist sport and we
will never allow such propaganda for capitalism in Romania,'
" recalls Mr. Costescu. "You see, the government knew
baseball is a sport very much loved by American people. It
isn't a Soviet sport, but an American sport. And America is
the No. 1 capitalist country."
   The baseball advocates argued that the game is also the
national sport of Cuba. They also pointed out that Romanians
play volleyball and basketball, two other American sports. To
no avail. "After that, we had to go underground," Mr.
Costescu says with a conspiratorial grin. Clandestinely, he
and the others continued to plan for the day when baseball
would be free. They drew up a mock schedule based on a
fantasy league. It was the longest off-season in history.
   Then, during Christmas of 1989, a popular revolution
overthrew the Communists and Mr. Ceausescu was executed. On
Feb. 4, 1990, the Romanian Baseball Federation was born.
   Soon, Mr. Costescu, with the sponsorship of the U.S.
Information Agency, was off to Williamsport, Pa., home of
Little League Baseball, to watch and learn. Next stop was
Tennessee to visit the U.S. Olympic baseball training
operation. Then it was on to Italy with 13 other Romanians
for a two-week coaching clinic. Back in Romania, practice
started for the first season. But the troubles weren't over.
   "You know the economic situation in Romania," Mr. Costescu
moans. "There isn't enough money for all the sports, so the
authorities give aid only to federations with good results.
They told us to find some sponsors, but the sponsors are only
interested in championship teams. It is a vicious circle.
Without sponsors there is no possibility to develop. Without
development, there are no sponsors." He has the desperate
sound of a man caught in an eternal rundown.
   Enter the Americans. Mr. Docal, who has been named
honorary president of the baseball federation, found some
equipment in the attic of the embassy. The International
Baseball Association, based in the U.S., sent some bats and
balls. Mr. Costescu wrote letters to American
sports-equipment companies. One replied. It sent umpiring
gear.
   Still woefully short of the basics, Mr. Costescu is now
turning to the free market, just as the old dictator feared.
He has taken a bat to a Romanian wood carver and some gloves
to a Romanian shoemaker and has asked them to see what they
can do. He would like to work out a joint venture with an
American partner to make sports equipment in Romania.
   Why not just use oina equipment, he is asked. Mr. Costescu
pours another glass of schnapps and proceeds to diagram an
oina game. "It is difficult to explain to a foreigner," he
cautions.
   The oina bat is thin and equally proportioned, like a
stickball bat. The ball is soft, stuffed with horse hair. No
one uses gloves. There are two teams of nine players, one at
bat, one lined up in three rows on a rectangular field. The
batter hits the ball, pitched by a member of his own team,
and proceeds to run between the rows of fielders. The
fielders try to hit the runner by throwing the ball at him.
If they do, they get two points. If they don't, the batter
gets two points. When all the batters are out, the teams
switch sides. They play one inning. Then the game is over.
   Mr. Costescu opens a filing cabinet and retrieves a stack
of papers that tell a curious story. It seems some military
officers from Transylvania emigrated to the U.S. about 150
years ago. There, they put on an oina exhibition. Perhaps one
of the onlookers, so goes the Romanian tale, was Abner
Doubleday, a U.S. Army officer who is traditionally credited
with inventing baseball.
   "Maybe oina had some influence on baseball. Who knows?"
says Mr. Costescu. "We say oina is the Romanian national
sport, but we don't know who invented it. Some say it was
invented in the Turkish empire."
   Still, baseball has something oina doesn't. "From the
beginning I loved baseball because it has a moral quality,"
says Mr. Costescu. "Fair play is the fiber of baseball. It is
a game that can teach you many things."
   He gets misty-eyed as he talks about his favorite element
of baseball. "The sacrifice bunt," he proudly announces. "One
player sacrificing himself to help another. I think it is a
very nice play."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
