ID: 111	RANK: 7	SCORE: 10.288327
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910712-0107
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910712-0107.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
   An Old-Time Board Game
   ----
   By Frederick C. Klein
</HL>
<DATE>
07/12/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A9
</SO>
<LP>
   In an era when "expensive" and "entertainment" go
together, even (especially?) when children are involved, it's
nice to see that All-Star Baseball is marking its 50th
birthday this year in good style.
   I don't mean the real baseball game that teams
representing the National and American leagues played Tuesday
night in Toronto. I mean the board game, produced by Cadaco.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The game is a classic, not in the sense of those
every-week golf tournaments in places like Hattiesburg,
Miss., and Coal Valley, Ill., but by the Webster's New World
Dictionary definition (No. 6) of "continuing in fashion
because of its simple style." Come to think of it, it also
meets the dictionary's definition No. 1, "of the highest
class." Best, it's cheap, usually retailing between $11 and
$15. That's a miniscule price to pay for endless hours of
pleasure.
   I experienced many such hours as a boy, happily choosing
lineups from among the game's best active players (DiMaggio,
Williams, Musial, Kell, Robinson, Schoendienst, Spahn,
Roberts) or such golden oldies as Ruth and Cobb, inserting
the cardboard discs containing the heroes' offensive
propensities into the holder, and plinking the spinner to
determine their, and my, fate.
   This was before (long before) computer games, where
players made of colored dots pitch, hit and run the bases
before our very eyes. But All-Star Baseball is better,
because it's played in the stadium of the mind. What pile of
dots, however animated, can match the thought of Robinson
stealing second base in a cloud of dust, or Musial uncoiling
to slash a double down the right-field line?
   As a lad plinking away, I didn't know, or much care, how
this wonderful game came to be. As a reporter, I found out.
That's a wonderful thing about being a reporter.
   Turns out that All-Star Baseball was invented by a
baseball player; not an All-Star, perhaps, but a very good
one nonetheless. He's Ethan Allen, who spent 13 seasons in
the outfields of the Major Leagues, from 1926 through '38,
with six different teams. Among his achievements was a .300
career batting average. His best season was 1934, when, as a
Philadelphia Phillie, he hit .330 and tied for the National
League lead in doubles with 42.
   Batting .300 is a bigger thing now than in that hit-crazy
period, but the Cincinnati native still stood out, for his
scholarly bent. At a time when collegians were rare in
professional baseball, he earned a bachelor's degree in
education from the U. of Cincinnati in 1927, while a
Cincinnati Red, and a master's degree from Columbia, in 1932,
while a New York Giant.
   Later, he produced films and wrote books on baseball
strategy and technique, and spent 23 years -- from 1946
through '68 -- as baseball coach at Yale. Among his players
was George Bush, a first baseman on the 1947 and '48 squads.
   "George was an excellent fielder and good team man, but
mediocre at bat," says Allen, now 87 years old and living in
Tucson, Ariz. And no, he did not vote for Mr. Bush for
president. "I'm an ex-Republican," he declares.
   Allen got the idea for All-Star Baseball while still
wearing spikes. "It occurred to me that a player's batting
record could be graphed on a circle -- his percentage of
singles, home runs, walks, strikeouts and so forth," he says.
"Once I hit upon that, putting the game together wasn't
difficult."
   Selling it was harder: "Every big toy executive threw me
out of his office at least once," Allen notes. Then, in 1941,
he visited Cadaco, a fledgling Chicago-based firm owned by
the brothers Charles and Donald Mazer and named for their
first initials (C and D and Co.). "Don Mazer heard me out,
banged his desk and said `Good idea] We'll make it]'" the
inventor recalls.
   Allen cemented the deal by delivering agreements from the
top players of the day to use their names and records. No
money changed hands. "I drew up a little form and asked them
to sign," he says. "The ones who did I thanked. To the rest I
said, `We'll do without you.'"
   There's more to that now, of course. A Cadaco contract
with the Major League Baseball Players' Association covers
active players for a 7% royalty, and separate permissions
must be obtained to use such late greats as Ruth, Cobb,
Wagner, Gehrig and Clemente. The Babe's estate collects an
annual fee of $2,000.
   Cadaco still is in Chicago, a division of Rapid Mounting &amp;
Finishing Co., which makes sales-display materials. In
addition to All-Star Baseball, Cadaco produces BasKet, a
basketball game utilizing baskets, spring-operated levers and
a ping-pong ball, and Photo (formerly Photo-Electric)
Football, which uses offensive and defensive play
transparencies to simulate gridiron action. I played both in
boyhood. They're wonderful, too.
   Waymon Wittman, a toy industry veteran, is Cadaco's
president. He says the company doesn't know how many All-Star
Baseball games have been sold, but believes the number surely
runs to several million. Annual sales in recent years have
ranged between 75,000 and 165,000 units. "When Nintendo gets
hot, we drop, and vice versa," he explains. "It also helps
when Toys `R' Us or Kmart features us in their ads."
   All-Star Baseball has its cult aspects, with leagues and a
newsletter. The game is on display at the Baseball Hall of
Fame in Cooperstown, N.Y. Nostalgia, too, plays a role in its
prosperity. "At every toy show, at least one buyer'll corner
me to say how much he loved the game as a kid," Wittman says.
"We get letters from men who say their dads played it, they
did, and now their children do."
   There have been attempts to change All-Star Baseball over
the years, with inventor Allen in the lead. He'd like to see
it become more complex, and to that end has fashioned a
multidisc version that provides for balls and strikes,
squeeze bunts, pickoff plays and the like. It was marketed
for a time as Strategic All-Star Baseball, but was withdrawn
for poor sales.
   "The game succeeds for two main reasons: It's simple and
playable," observes Wittman. "After 50 years, I think we'll
keep it the way it is."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
