ID: 280	RANK: 48	SCORE: 15.690988
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890909-0024 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-09-09-89 0328EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r w PM-Reagan-HealthChronology     09-09 0858</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Reagan-Health Chronology,780</SECOND>
<HEAD>With PM-Reagan Surgery</HEAD>
<DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Here is a chronology of President Reagan's
health difficulties:
   _1967: While he was governor of California, Reagan had
approximately 30 seed-like stones removed from his urinary tract. He
had a transurethral prostatic resection, the same kind of operation
performed during his second presidential term in 1986.
   _1979: He complained of pain in the right thumb, which was
determined to be osteoarthritic.
   _March 30, 1981: A bullet fired at Reagan in an attempt on his
life hit him in the upper chest below the left arm, traveled
downward and was deflected into the left lung, coming to rest an
inch from his heart. He was rushed to George Washington University
Hospital, complaining of soreness in the rib cage. He collapsed in
the hospital corridor. The bullet was removed during three hours of
surgery and Reagan returned to the White House after 12 days in the
hospital.
   _April 1, 1982: Reagan underwent a routine urological examination
at Bethesda Naval Hospital after complaining of discomfort. Doctors
found no evidence of malignancy.
   _Sept. 7, 1983: Reagan, having grown noticeably hard of hearing,
was seen wearing a small hearing aid in his right ear when he
appeared before a group of business and education leaders. He has
attributed his hearing loss to the firing of a handgun too near his
ear on a movie set many years ago. Reagan later began wearing a
hearing aid in the left ear as well.
   _May 18, 1984: A small polyp was discovered in the president's
colon, but an examination showed the polyp was noncancerous and it
was not removed.
   _March 11, 1985: The White House disclosed that doctors examining
Reagan earlier that month found evidence of blood in his stool and a
growth in his lower intestine. A statement said tests of occult, or
hidden, blood in the feces were positive but that ``physicians
believe this may be from the polyp or from diet and will be
monitored.''
   _March 29, 1985: Reagan suffered a burst blood vessel in his left
eye, causing it to fill partially with blood and appear red. White
House spokesman Larry Speakes said no treatment was needed.
   _July 12, 1985: Doctors removed a small, benign polyp from
Reagan's colon and found another, larger one that was removed the
next day along with 2 feet of the president's intestinal tract. The
larger, 2-inch, polyp was found to be cancerous, but doctors said
the cancer had not spread beyond the tissues that were removed.
   _Aug. 1, 1985: The White House, responding to questions, said an
irritated patch of skin had been removed from Reagan's nose two days
earlier. A statement said the tissue ``was submitted for routine
studies for infection, and it was determined no further treatment is
necessary.'' Four days later, he told a news conference that the
``pimple'' had been skin cancer.
   _Jan. 17, 1986: Reagan had three small polyps removed from his
intestine during a six-hour visit to Bethesda in his first major
post-cancer colonoscopy checkup. They were described as ``very
small,'' measuring 1 millimeter to 2 millimeters in size.
   A shaving of facial tissue from a growth on the right side of
Reagan's face was also taken. Lab tests showed that the three polyps
and facial tissue were benign.
   _June 21, 1986: In a five-hour visit to Bethesda, Reagan had two
small polyps removed from his colon. The growths, ranging in size
from 1 millimeter to 1.5 millimeters, were benign.
   Reagan also had an eye examination and a dermatological
examination of his nose, from which he has had two small skin
cancers removed.
   _Jan. 4, 1987: Reagan had four benign polyps removed from his
colon by doctors at Bethesda, and the president's physician, Army
Col. John Hutton, said tests ``show no evidence of a recurrence of
the cancer found in July 1985.''
   _Jan. 5, 1987: Reagan underwent successful prostate surgery. The
surgery, which removed nearly an ounce of tissue, was to relieve
what a spokesman called ``mild, recurring discomfort'' apparently
due to an enlarged prostate, a gland surrounding the urethra at the
base of the bladder.
   _June 26, 1987: Reagan had two small polyps removed from his
colon during an examination in the physician's office in the White
House. They were found to be benign. Hutton said a routine prostate
exam was also performed as a follow-up to the president's January
surgery, and it ``was found to be entirely normal.''
   _Jan. 7, 1989: Reagan underwent surgery on his left ring finger
to correct a curvature known as Dupuytren's Contracture, a common
but deforming condition that caused his finger to fold inward.
   _July 4, 1989: Reagan, an accomplished rider, was thrown from a
horse while visiting a Mexican ranch near Cananea, about 30 miles
south of the Arizona border. He was flown by Army helicopter to a
U.S. military hospital in Arizona and kept about four hours,
declining a doctor's suggestion that he remain overnight for
observation.
   _Sept. 8, 1989: Reagan undergoes hour-long surgery at the Mayo
Clinic in Rochester, Minn., to drain fluid on his brain, a condition
doctors say probably resulted from the July 4 fall from the horse.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
