ID: 280	RANK: 85	SCORE: 12.635586
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920109-0147
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920109-0147.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Radical Gambit:
   Some Healthy Women
   Undergo Mastectomies
   To Avert Breast Cancer
   ---
   Fearing the Disease That Hit
   Her Mother and Sister,
   Tricia Davis Has Surgery
   ---
   One Surgeon Calls It `Crazy'
   ----
   By Hilary Stout
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/09/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
</MS>
<IN>
HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)
</IN>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- Tricia Davis, a 39-year-old executive and
mother of two, checked into Georgetown University Hospital
last July for a double mastectomy, an operation tens of
thousands of women have each year to fight cancer.
   But this case was different. Ms. Davis didn't have breast
cancer. She was having the surgery so she wouldn't get it.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Her decision is an example of a controversial response to
a terrifying disease. "Prophylactic" mastectomies are
uncommon -- but that any women at all get them shows just how
frightening a prospect breast cancer remains, despite gains
in detection, treatment and even prevention.
   A slender, energetic woman, Ms. Davis had worried about
breast cancer from the time she was 14. It was then that her
mother, 44, was diagnosed with it and underwent a double
mastectomy. Doctors told her and her two sisters they were at
increased risk of someday developing the disease. From then
on, she began checking her breasts regularly for lumps.
   In a self-examination about seven years ago, Ms. Davis
felt what she'd always dreaded. It was a tiny lump, so minute
her physician at first couldn't feel it. Doctors disagreed on
what to do. Some said just watch it carefully. But Ms. Davis
didn't want to take chances. She had it removed. It was
precancerous.
   Then, a year ago, doctors found a malignant breast tumor
in Ms. Davis's fraternal twin. The twin had a double
mastectomy, removing the healthy breast along with the
cancerous one. That made two of Ms. Davis's primary relatives
who had had breast cancer before menopause. For Ms. Davis,
the frightening one-in-nine odds U.S. women face of getting
breast cancer suddenly rose to one in two, some doctors said.
   "I was totally freaked out," she says. "Totally freaked
out."
   After consulting with doctors, Ms. Davis decided to fight
the specter of breast cancer through the most radical measure
of all -- she decided to have her breasts removed. Living
with high odds, she decided, was worse than losing part of
her body.
   "I felt a tremendous sense of relief," Ms. Davis says,
recalling her first moments of consciousness and physical
pain after the long operation.
   Her story underscores the fear and hopelessness that still
surround breast cancer, even as patients' odds improve
through earlier detection, higher cure rates and a potential
preventive drug. But other factors stir up gloom.
   Inexplicably, breast cancer is on the rise. Cases
diagnosed annually rose 26% between 1982 and 1988 in the
U.S., according to the National Cancer Institute. Advances in
detection may account for some of the increase. Still, this
year more than 44,000 Americans will die of breast cancer.
   As scientists identify genetic factors in the cancer, more
women are becoming convinced they are ticking time bombs.
   Sandi Reese, who was 12 when her mother was diagnosed with
breast cancer and 22 when it took her mother's life, says
that from early adolescence "my mother never went out of my
mind. My breasts never went out of my mind. . . . I decided I
was going to die when I was 45. I never planned past 45." In
1990, Ms. Reese had a preventive double mastectomy. "Now I
plan for the future. . . . It's changed my entire life."
   In the medical profession, prophylactic mastectomies are
highly controversial. "I think the idea of removing a body
part preventively is really crazy," says Susan Love, a
surgeon who is head of the Faulkner Breast Center in Boston.
   Figures on how many such operations are done are elusive
because no major medical organizations track them. Doctors
say the number is small.
   Of the roughly 800 patients undergoing mastectomies
annually at New York's Memorial Sloan-Kettering hospital, a
major cancer center, about 20 have prophylactic mastectomies,
says Jeanne Petrek, a surgeon there. At Boston's Brigham and
Women's Hospital, only two or three of the 450 mastectomies
done each year are for women without cancer, says Timothy
Eberlein, chief of surgical oncology, who discourages the
procedure. The Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., does
prophylactic mastectomies, but doesn't track them apart from
other mastectomies.
   So it also isn't clear whether the number of women taking
this radical course is rising or falling. Some doctors see a
drop, while others say a growing number of women are asking
about the operation. Some say mounting evidence of a
hereditary link to breast cancer may lead more women to
consider the option.
   Most physicians say they recommend mastectomies for
healthy women reluctantly, usually only for patients with at
least two primary relatives who had breast cancer. "It's
never recommended unless you have a really profound situation
on your hands," says Dennis Slamon, head of clinical research
at the Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center at UCLA's medical
school.
   Others won't do it. "What we need to do is find out
exactly what causes breast cancer and what the initiating
steps are so we can then eliminate them in a much more subtle
way," says Dr. Love at the Faulkner Breast Center.
   Adding to the controversy is the fact that prophylactic
mastectomies won't guarantee against getting breast cancer,
since doctors can never remove all the breast tissue.
"Reducing the breast tissue by 90% does not mean your risk is
necessarily reduced by 90%," says Dr. Love. There's also the
small risk that a healthy woman having the operation may die
of complications from the surgery itself.
   Some doctors who argue against the operation point to
advances in detection -- low-radiation mammograms that can
spot a lump two years before it can be felt. Cure rates are
rising, too. Between 1981 and 1987, 77% of breast cancer
patients survived at least five years after diagnosis, says
the National Center for Health Statistics. That's up from
74.4% in 1977 to 1980.
   Most encouraging of all is a relatively new drug,
tamoxifen, that has proved effective in preventing cancer in
the unaffected breast of women who have cancer in one breast.
Researchers believe it may ward off breast cancer altogether,
and a large-scale trial is being prepared to find out, using
healthy women with a family history of the disease.
   Nevertheless, preventive mastectomies continue. Doctors
say some women literally beg for one. "I certainly have seen
women who are so terrified at the prospect of getting breast
cancer that they have opted for the procedure when their risk
was relatively low," says Marc Lippman, director of the
Lombardi Cancer Center at Georgetown University Hospital.
   Kelman Cohen, a Richmond, Va., plastic surgeon who did
reconstructive surgery on Ms. Reese, says he has dissuaded
60% of those who have consulted him about the operation from
having it done. He sent Ms. Reese away for a year to think
about it. He blames doctors for some of the eagerness.
   "The plastic surgeon sees the patient who has an
insatiable desire for this operation," Dr. Cohen says. "She
goes to the general surgeon anytime she sees an irregularity
in her breast. The general surgeon, who's done a biopsy six
or seven times, says, `Do a mastectomy. . . . Get her off my
back.'"
   Doctors say they try to act in the best interests of their
patients. "There are women who have had four to six biopsies,
and the process has driven them beyond the pale," says Dr.
Lippman, an oncologist, who Ms. Davis consulted. "They're
terrified . . . their quality of life has been affected." He
adds, "If I thought someone was being overly responsive to
fears . . . I would try to put their risk in perspective."
   In financial terms, the choice is costly. Doctor and
hospital fees, including for reconstructive surgery, can
total $20,000. While Ms. Davis's insurance company covered
her bills, most insurers are reluctant to do so for healthy
women.
   For Ms. Davis, it was her sister's diagnosis that
persuaded her to take action. "It conjured up images of my
mother who suffered so much her last few years," she says in
her native Alabama accent. "And the thought of that possibly
happening to my sister and then the thought that it could
possibly happen to me or my other sister. It just became more
real."
   Her husband, Tim Davis, was anxious. "I began to get
worried that there was something going on in that family," he
recalls. Secretly, on the recommendation of a friend, he made
a call to Dr. Slamon of UCLA. He wanted to know what more his
wife could do to be extra vigilant. Mammograms twice a year
instead of once a year, he wondered? He never expected what
Dr. Slamon suggested.
   "He almost immediately -- though he made the appropriate
disclaimers -- suggested we ought to consider a prophylactic
mastectomy," Mr. Davis says.
   Mr. Davis was stunned. "I'd never heard of anything like
that," he says.
   But he didn't dismiss the idea. He consulted other
doctors. Most said it was an appropriate measure to consider.
But when he called his old family physician in Tulsa, Okla.,
the doctor said he was crazy. Later that doctor called back,
saying he'd talked to some colleagues and that it wasn't such
an outrageous idea after all.
   As he made phone call after phone call, one killer
statistic kept running through Mr. Davis's mind. "Everyone
was talking 50/50, a one-in-two chance," he recalls. "Those
are about the worst odds I can imagine."
   But how could he suggest a preventive mastectomy to his
wife -- the very procedure that makes getting the disease so
horrifying to many women? "I was scared to raise it," he
says. "I knew that Tricia was a pretty strong person, but
we're dealing with emotions here I'd never had to confront
before."
   Ms. Davis recalls how one evening last December her
husband sat her down and recounted what the doctors had been
suggesting. She didn't say much. Mr. Davis says she was
"shocked." She says, "I guess I was astonished only in that
he appeared to go through all that trouble. I don't know -- I
was just really touched more than anything. I was really
touched."
   But Ms. Davis was interested from the beginning. She
recalls feeling, "I almost think it would be a blessing to
have this surgery done." Though an attractive woman, she says
she never fretted much over her appearance, and vanity wasn't
a factor in her decision.
   She reflected for a few more months, then went to see Dr.
Lippman at Georgetown. She says he didn't try to persuade her
one way or the other, just laid out her options. After
consulting other doctors, including a plastic surgeon, she
decided to go ahead.
   She told her father. "I was totally shocked, nearly out of
my mind," he recalls. But after talking to his longtime
family physician and other family members, he "called her up
and said I realize it's your and Tim's decision, but I want
you to know that I think you're right."
   Today Tricia Davis is cheerfully back at work high up in a
suburban Washington office building. She's convinced she
saved her life.
   Her twin is doing well too. But their older sister is
wrestling with the same dilemma Tricia did. She can't decide.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
