ID: 280	RANK: 88	SCORE: 12.481728
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910130-0105
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910130-0105.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Medicine:
   Cancer Patients
   Receive Trial
   Gene Implants
   ----
   By Marilyn Chase
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/30/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<IN>
MEDICAL AND BIOTECHNOLOGY (MTC)
</IN>
<GV>
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES (HHS)
</GV>
<LP>
   After years of experiments and months of regulatory
scrutiny, a historic cancer trial was launched yesterday when
two patients were implanted with genes designed to produce
cancer-fighting agents in the body.
   Steven A. Rosenberg and colleagues at the National
Institutes of Health gave genetically altered cells to a
29-year-old woman and a 42-year-old man suffering from
malignant melanoma, an aggressive and fatal skin tumor. All
conventional treatments have failed to halt the malignant
growths.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The experiment is the second attempt by American
researchers to use gene therapy to fight disease. "I'm
relieved . . . we're under way," Dr. Rosenberg said in an
interview, adding, "I'm optimistic, but this is really a
beginning. Genetherapy is just a tool. This is a first
attempt, but it's not the last."
   Dr. Rosenberg, chief of surgery at the National Cancer
Institute, led a team that included R. Michael Blaese of the
cancer institute, and W. French Anderson of the National
Heart Lung and Blood Institute. Drs. Blaese and Anderson
began a related gene therapy trial last summer in a child
with an inborn immune deficiency, and reported preliminary
improvement.
   Gene therapy in Dr. Rosenberg's trial aims to kill cancer
by arming a patient's own tumor-fighting cells with a potent
natural toxin. Doctors first harvest the tumor-fighting cells
from the patient's body, and then implant a gene for the
toxin, called tumor necrosis factor (TNF). These gene-spliced
cells are bathed in growth factors until they multiply to
several hundred billion cells, and then they are reinfused
into the patient. The hope is that the altered cells will
flock to the tumor site, and persist in pouring out enough
toxin to erode the cancer.
   Tuesday morning, at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda,
Md., doctors hooked up intravenous bottles of a milky looking
fluid containing 100 million of these beefed-up cancer
fighting cells. As required by the Food and Drug
Administration, doctors will increase the dose every three
days over the next month, gradually building up to a peak
dose of 200 billion to 300 billion cells.
   Describing the patients as "resting quietly" after the
treatment, Dr. Rosenberg reported no immediate side effects
of the experiment so far. In practice trials using a marker
gene, the most serious reaction was fluid retention caused by
interleukin-2, the growth factor used to multiply the cells.
Severe fluid buildup can stress the heart and lungs,
contributing to a mortality risk of 1%.
   TNF causes tumors to dissolve in mice, but it so far has
failed to help people. Moreover, when given in straight
infusions, it can cause severe wasting of the body. But Dr.
Rosenberg hopes that using a cancer-fighting cell to deliver
TNF right to the door of the malignant cell will enable
scientists to boost doses to levels comparable to therapeutic
mouse doses -- without toxic side effects.
   Results of yesterday's experiment won't be known for at
least a month or two, Dr. Rosenberg said. He has federal
approval to treat as many as 50 patients -- several of whom
now already have their gene-altered cells multiplying in the
incubator.
   In addition, he disclosed the team is planning future
experiments that will implant other genes, including genes
for immune system-boosters such as alpha interferon and
interleukin-2. "The lab is working day and night to develop
new treatments" for cancer, Dr. Rosenberg said in an
interview.
   First greeted with largely uncritical publicity, Dr.
Rosenberg's research later weathered a storm of criticism by
medical skeptics like Charles Moertel, a professor at the
Mayo Clinic, and litigation by watchdog groups like Jeremy
Rifkin's Foundation on Economic Trends.
   Dr. Rosenberg ventured that he hopes this trial "will make
a real impact on the patients' cancer." But he stressed this
is a process still in its infancy. "We're trying to open a
door," he said.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
