ID: 280	RANK: 95	SCORE: 12.178012
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900718-0183 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-18-90 2148EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-Obit-Menninger 1stLd-Writethru a0668 07-18 1111</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Obit-Menninger, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0668,1142</SECOND>
<HEAD>Karl Menninger, `Dean of American Psychiatry,' Dies at 96</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: INSERTS 4 grafs after 11th graf pvs, `The Menninger
Clinic...,' to UPDATE with quotes from Norman Cousins. ADDS one
graf at end on services.</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos NY85, TK1</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By LEW FERGUSON</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>TOPEKA, Kan. (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Dr. Karl Menninger, the dominant figure in
American psychiatry for six decades and a major influence in prison
and mental health reform nationally, died Wednesday of cancer. He
would have been 97 on Sunday.
   Menninger, who argued that insane people could be treated, died
at Stormont-Vail Regional Medical Center, said Judy Craig,
spokeswoman for Menninger, the psychiatric center he helped found
in 1925. He was admitted to the hospital June 12 and diagnosed with
abdominal cancer two weeks later.
   Funeral plans were incomplete, but services were expected to be
here on Saturday.
   Menninger was one of the first psychiatrists to integrate
psychoanalytic theory into their practice, said Dr. Elissa Benedek,
president of the American Psychiatric Association of Washington,
D.C.
   ``He wrote and spoke the language of the average American,
making mental illnesses more understandable and less feared,'' she
said.
   Dr. Gertrude Ticho, a member of the American Psychoanalytical
Association, also said from Washington, ``His greatest contribution
was the pioneering of psychoanalytical principles and thoughts.''
   A nephew, Dr. Walter Menninger, said, ``He consistently conveyed
a message of hope for the mentally ill.''
   ``He was curious about everything imaginable and unimaginable on
this planet,'' said a close friend, Andrew J. Gray of Topeka.
   Menninger was once hailed by the American Psychiatric
Association as the nation's ``greatest living psychiatrist.'' A
forceful, outspoken maverick, he jolted popular thought with his
theories on crime, prisons and child abuse.
   He was credited with convincing the American public that mental
disorders could be treated and cured. And he wrote ``The Crime of
Punishment'' in 1968 to argue that ``you don't rehabilitate a man
by beating him.''
   The Menninger Clinic, which he founded with his father in
Topeka, is one of the world's most famous hospitals for the
mentally ill. He co-founded the Menninger Foundation, a non-profit
organization for training, research and public education in
psychiatry and psychology. Its name was shortened to just Menninger
in 1989.
   Norman Cousins, a longtime friend of Menninger who has written
on health for the layman, explained the psychiatrist's choice of
the midwest rather than a more stylish big city.
   ``I think in going out to Topeka, he was able to demonstrate the
fact that ideas can come out of the heartland and not just the
periphery,'' Cousins said in an interview from Los Angeles. ``He
inspired me in that respect. When we edited the Saturday Review, we
saw as the intellectual center as the Midwest, rather than either
coast.''
   Cousins said Menninger explained that mental and physical health
problems are inseparable and must be treated that way.
   ``He showed the aim of the wise physician is to help the patient
achieve a `vital balance'... that what could go wrong in the mind
could affect the body and what could go wrong in the body could
affect the mind.''
   Menninger received the nation's highest civilian honor, the
Presidential Medal of Freedom, in 1981. The inscription read, in
part: ``With the wisdom of his years, he truly does represent the
ideas of another generation _ the future, rather than the past.''
   In recent years, he still went to his office daily, meeting with
students, having lunch with friends, receiving guests and sometimes
fretting about his place in history.
   He took no credit for attaining age milestones: ``I thank God I
lived as long as I did. It's more his doing than mine. And I had
good parents, you know.''
   Karl Augustus Menninger was born July 22, 1893, in Topeka, the
eldest of three sons of Dr. Charles F. Menninger. He considered
newspaper work or banking, then decided to join his father in
medicine and in 1917 graduated with honors from Harvard Medical
School.
   He interned in Kansas City and taught briefly at Tufts Medical
School. In 1919, after the death of Dr. Ernest Southard of Boston
Psychopathic Hospital, ``one of the great inspirations of my
life,'' Menninger joined his father's practice.
   He soon became what was then called a nerve specialist.
Menninger once recalled that he and his father established their
clinic in 1925 because ``I saw you couldn't do psychiatry alone;
you needed others around you.''
   ``My chief purpose in the beginning was to show you could treat
`insane' people. Everybody thought they were untreatable. But I
said they were being treated every day. We demonstrated you could
treat people in a better way.''
   In December 1925, his brother, William, returned from New York
and joined the clinic in a two-story frame home in west Topeka. The
building was designated a national landmark in 1974.
   In 1941, the Menningers set up the Menninger Foundation. Karl
Menninger served as its president from 1941-43, director of its
education department for a time and chief of staff from 1952-1956.
He became chairman of the board of trustees in 1954.
   Menninger was hot-tempered and excitable, and the force of his
personality frequently startled those meeting him for the first
time.
   ``I guess I always have been a bit of a curmudgeon, but I liked
things done right,'' he once said.
   His greatest ambition was to do what he could to help mankind.
   ``I've always believed in amelioration, improving the lot of
man,'' he said.
   By his own admission, he sometimes ``tilted at windmills,''
especially in his criticisms of the nation's prison system. Yet, he
lived to see prison reform becoming reality, much like the changes
that swept through the nation's mental institutions in the 1940s
and 1950s.
   Crime and reform dominated his thinking in later years.
   He moved to Chicago in 1966, serving as a consultant on prison
affairs and helping set up a mental health center in downtown
Chicago. He moved back to Topeka in 1974.
   As he grew older, he turned to painting and studying
American-Indian history for relaxation. He also wrote 14 books,
including ``Sparks,'' ``The Human Mind,'' ``Love Against Hate'' and
``The Vital Balance.''
   In December 1976, he underwent surgery at the Mayo Clinic in
Rochester, Minn., for removal of a brain tumor. It left a portion
of his face paralyzed and his speech slurred. However, he amazed
associates by bringing both back to nearly normal through
biofeedback and exercise.
   Survivors include his second wife, Jeanetta Lyle Menninger, whom
he married in 1941; a son, three daughters and nine grandchildren.
   Funeral services were scheduled Saturday at the First
Presbyterian Church, near the state Capitol, followed by a private
graveside service.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
