ID: 171	RANK: 19	SCORE: 9.933519
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910917-0138
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910917-0138.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
   Adventuress in Africa
   ----
   By Lee Lescaze
</HL>
<DATE>
09/17/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14
</SO>
<LP>
   This woman is impossible. In the middle of the night, she
wakes her lover to complain. He has resumed the bedtime
ritual she loves best, reading poetry to her. It's unfairly
seductive, she tells him. He agrees, makes no protest, goes
back to sleep. So, she wakes him again to apologize for
waking him the first time. Miraculously, he doesn't shoot
her.
   If things are going well for the never-named, first-person
narrator of Norman Rush's "Mating" (Knopf, 477 pages, $23),
she worries. If they're going badly, she worries in
overdrive. She lives to talk, amusing her lover at one point
by saying she's bored when she's silent. Should she have a
child, she imagines she would be impatient for it to begin
talking, and pets aren't for her because they don't talk.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Her seatmate on a short flight, say Boston-New York, might
find her entertaining. If the flight were any longer, he
would have a headset on and the country music channel pumping
at top volume.
   She is in her early 30s, an anthropologist whose Ph.D.
thesis is going nowhere. In her journal, she writes things
like: "I think what I want is the feeling I got when I first
read David Hume, when I felt something like a cold light
bathing me." (Flight attendant] Here's the headset back,
bring me a parachute.)
   To call attention to what a special case she is, her
narration is sprinkled with simple German, Latin and French
words plus enough obscure English vocabulary to give a
diligent reader's dictionary a workout.
   For all her infuriating habits, she also has a sense of
humor, a keen eye for cant in others and great daring. In the
first sections of "Mating," there is much to like. The
narrator is biding her time in Gabarone, Botswana's capital,
being wry and funny about everything from expatriate life in
Africa to anthropology to her own appearance. "Not that I'm
so beautiful, unless hair volume determines beauty."
   She is looking for a little repose and a bit of sexual
adventure after a disastrous time in the remote Tswapong
Hills where she went to pursue a thesis on nutritional
anthropology among primitive gatherers only to find that she
had been misinformed. "Gathering was a dead issue in my part
of the bush. Normal-type food seems to have percolated
everywhere," she explains.
   Enter Nelson Denoon. He is one of the world's most famous
and controversial experts on development. She calls him the
Orson Welles of the field, since he reached an early zenith
with a book that outraged development professionals and won
adoration from undergraduates. Denoon fires verbal bullets at
the right and the left, declaring that "Capitalism is
strangling black Africa: Socialism will bury her]"
   He is in Botswana running a top-secret experiment in the
Kalahari Desert and our woman, after meeting him briefly in
Gabarone, sets out to bag him.
   To do so, she has to walk several days across the desert,
a brave trek that she barely survives. Once safely at
Denoon's model community, Tsau, she finds it has been built
around women, many from the lowest social strata. The
female-run project seems an ingenious and thriving success
although water supply is always precarious.
   Mr. Rush is a high-stakes gambler. For a man to make an
intellectual, insecure, independent, overly introspective
woman the narrator of a novel is a risk. He succeeds quite
brilliantly in the creation of a character, but he abruptly
runs out of story. Once Denoon has been brought to bed, the
wheels come off "Mating." In fact, the novel fails because
Tsau and Denoon, not our impossibly demanding narrator, don't
command attention.
   Early on, our woman noted that Denoon badly needs an
editor -- a polite way of saying he is a bore. Alas, he
becomes less and less interesting the more deeply our
narrator explores his mind and body. The novel loses its
early charm and Mr. Rush, who five years ago published
"Whites," a lively and powerful collection of stories about
expatriates in Africa, seems to take less and less care with
his writing.
   "I was scribbling away when mes amis said koko," reads one
sentence, koko being a word meaning "knock-knock." Bushmen
are described as people "who had nothing except lice but were
happier than we were." So it goes in Tsau.
   The love affair goes as flat as the prose. Having bagged
her man, our narrator wants to leave Tsau and make little
Denoons. That doesn't appeal to the Great Man. Doubts fill
the desert air.
   She has already warned us that mating is a tricky
business: "Assortative mating shows there has to be some
drive in nature to bring equals together in the toils of
love, so why even in the most enlightened and beautifully
launched unions are we afraid we hear the master-slave
relationship moving its slow thighs somewhere in the
vicinity?" she says, bemoaning how hard it is to find love
between equals.
   And if anyone ever had sharp ears for bad-news thighs
coming over the horizon, it's our narrator. Meanwhile, the
traumas in Tsau build. They leave Denoon passive and ready
for marriage and babies. But, a passive Denoon isn't what our
woman wants. She splits. Only to have second thoughts. Of
course, for her, second thoughts are but a beginning. There
will be thirds, fourths, thoughts without number. For those
we will have to await "Mating: The Sequel."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
