ID: 171	RANK: 69	SCORE: 5.652263
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890425-0229 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-04-25-89 1333EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>s i BC-SouthernAfrica Adv07   04-25 1108</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-Southern Africa, Adv 07,1140</SECOND>
<HEAD>$Adv07</HEAD>
<HEAD>For Release Sunday, May 7 and Thereafter</HEAD>
<HEAD>Economies of Southern African Nations Stuck in Low Gear</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: An accompanying story is BC-Southern Africa-Zambia, b0663.</HEAD>
<HEAD>An AP Extra</HEAD>
<HEAD>With LaserPhoto</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By GREG MYRE</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>GABORONE, Botswana (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   ``If I needed shoes and South Africa
was the only place I could get shoes, I would do without them,''
former President Julius Nyerere of Tanzania once said. ``But if I
needed corn and South Africa was the only place to get corn, I
would go to South Africa.''
   Millions of people in southern Africa are both barefoot and
hungry these days, and though their leaders are reluctant to admit
it, they depend on South Africa for commerce so conditions won't
get any worse than they are.
   From war-ravaged Angola and Mozambique to tiny, overcrowded
Malawi, the region includes some of the poorest and least developed
nations in the world.
   Almost a decade after nine black-ruled states joined forces in
an ambitious effort to lessen their reliance on South Africa, they
have yet to tap their economic potential and still are inextricably
linked to their southern neighbor.
   ``In many ways the countries are worse off now than in 1980,''
said Tom Kennedy, a South African-based researcher who recently did
a study on economic conditions in southern Africa. ``Due to wars,
bad internal policies and poor management, there's been very little
progress in the region.''
   The nine regional states are Angola, Mozambique, Zimbabwe,
Zambia, Tanzania, Malawi, Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland, which
make up the Southern African Development Coordination Council
(SADCC).
   SADCC concentrates on the region's two most pressing problems,
transportation routes and food supplies. Since it was founded in
1980, the organization has helped increase trade among member
states, improved the flow of technology and research, and currently
is involved in almost 600 projects that will cost some $7 billion.
   But successes have been limited. Almost three-quarters of the 75
million people in SADCC countries remain subsistance farmers and
per capita income in the region is less than $500 a year, according
to World Bank figures.
   South Africa remains the leading trading partner for seven of
the nine SADCC countries. Its roads, rails, ports, power stations
and communications networks are essential to their economic
survival.
   South Africa's 28 million blacks have higher average incomes
than in any SADCC country. More than a million workers from
neighboring countries earn their livings in South Africa, while the
traffic in the opposite direction is minimal.
   The black-led countries want to reduce reliance on South Africa
not only because they oppose its apartheid policies, but also to
take advantage of potentially more efficient trade routes.
   Malawi, where annual per capita income is about $200, spends an
extra $100 million a year exporting its tobacco, tea and nuts
through distant South Africa because railway lines in neighboring
Mozambique are mostly inoperative because of guerrilla sabotage,
according to Kennedy's estimates.
   Zaire, more than 600 miles north of South Africa, receives more
than half its imports via South Africa although it has its own
Atlantic Ocean port.
   Five major railways connect landlocked nations of southern
Africa to the Indian and Atlantic Oceans.
   However, four pass through Angola or Mozambique, where civil
wars dating to the mid-1970s have halted or sharply reduced traffic.
   ``The region will never have secure food supplies until we can
make these rail lines work,'' said Nkwaki Ng'wanakilala, a
spokesman at SADCC's headquarters in Gaborone. ``And that won't be
possible until the fighting stops.''
   The region's fifth rail line, which links Zambia to the port of
Dar es Salaam in Tanzania, has been unaffected by war. But poor
management has kept it from operating anywhere near full capacity
since it was built by the Chinese in the 1970s. About half its 75
locomotives are out of service.
   Farm-to-market roads throughout southern Africa range from
primitive to non-existent. Crops in the fertile region often rot in
the fields.
   The region has the potential to feed much of the continent, but
farmland is often under utilized. Farmers are almost exclusively
small-scale growers with little training, equipment or access to
government services.
   Zimbabwe is the only SADCC country that has more than 100
private commercial farms of several hundred acres or more,
according to regional agricultural officials.
   The Southern African Economist, a magazine published by SADCC,
noted that regional governments ``blame the decline in food
production on a host of factors ranging from adverse weather,
escalating costs of fertilizers and longer transport routes to
disruption of agriculture by South African-backed terrorists.''
   But, it added, the ``blame also lies with the governments
themselves, for maintaining subsidies and setting unrealistic
producer prices which give farmers no incentive to produce more.''
   Despite the gloomy picture, there have been two recent
developments that could strengthen southern African economies in
the long-term.
   South Africa has been trying to improve relations with black
Africa and expressed eagerness to cooperate on development
projects. It has agreed to grant independence to Namibia and says
it has stopped supporting guerrilla movements in Angola and
Mozambique.
   SADCC has estimated that South African military actions in the
region have cost more than $10 billion during the 1980s.
   The more peaceful climate has eased the international pressure
for sanctions against South Africa, which inevitably would damage
its neighbors as well.
   Also, several countries have begun to pursue market-oriented
economies and are moving away from ``African socialism'' and
centralized economies.
   Tanzania, long hostile to free enterprise, has been implementing
austerity measures backed by the International Monetary Fund since
President Ali Hassan Mwinyi came to power in 1985.
   ``IMF conditionalities are painful,'' Mwinyi said last year.
``But we have to make a choice between two sharp-pointed spears. It
is either we go forward with shops full of expensive commodities or
we revert to the days of empty shops.''
   Malawi has pursued similar reforms, while Mozambique and
Zimbabwe, both officially socialist, are talking less about
ideology and offering some encouragement to foreign investors.
   At present, SADCC's only economic standout is the arid nation of
Botswana, where diamond wealth has transformed the country from one
of the poorest in the world into one of Africa's wealthiest states
in 22 years of independence.
   The economy has been growing at roughly 10 percent a year
throughout the 1980s and Botswana has foreign reserves of $2.3
billion, equal to South Africa's.
   The government's formula has been a commitment to free
enterprise, support for foreign investors and a fiscal policy that
is probably the most conservative in Africa. Officials warned of
spending curbs this year when the projected budget surplus dipped
below $200 million.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Sunday, May 7</NOTE>
</DOC>
