ID: 171	RANK: 85	SCORE: 5.410174
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890407-0229 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-04-07-89 2219EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-Namibia 2ndLd-Writethru a0824 04-07 0775</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Namibia, 2nd Ld-Writethru, a0824,0796</SECOND>
<HEAD>Pretoria Plans To Activate More Troops; Postpone Elections</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: INSERT graf after 4th graf, `He said...' UPDATING with Security
Council development. Picks up 5th pvs, `Newspapers in...'</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By LAURINDA KEYS</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>WINDHOEK, Namibia (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   South Africa said Friday it will use
all the force needed to crush an incursion by black nationalist
guerrillas, and the territorial administrator said U.N.-sponsored
elections set for November may not be held.
   Louis Pienaar, installed by South Africa, said there is a ``de
facto suspension'' of the U.N. idependence plan, which also calls
for combatants to be confined, and ``it has become impossible to
contemplate such elections under the prevailing circumstances.''
   R.F. Botha, the South African foreign minister, said he had
informed U.N. Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar of the
decision to activate more soldiers, but he did not specify the
number.
   He said a major reason was that some guerrillas of the
South-West Africa People's Organization were approaching areas
where white farmers live.
   In New York the U.N. Security Council held private consultations
on the crisis Friday. The council president, Soviet Ambassador
Aleksandr M. Belonogov, said later that after reading Botha's
letter, the council is satisfied that South Africa is committed to
granting independence to Namibia .
   Newspapers in Harare, Zimbabwe said the six ``front-line
states'' ofered the U.N. peacekeeping force up to 6,000 soldiers to
help stop the fighting _ 1,000 each from Angola, Botswana,
Mozambique, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
   They said the decision was made Thursday at an emergency summit
in Luanda, Angola.
   South Africa's military said it ordered out warplanes for the
first time Friday and reported SWAPO had brought its first tanks
across the border from Angola. Spokesman Col. Japie Dreyer said
four jet fighters fired on SWAPO positions Thursday, killing 17
guerrillas.
   Botha flew to Windhoek for emergency talks Saturday with
officials from the United Nations, Cuba and Angola. Senior U.S. and
Soviet diplomats will observe.
   The fiercest fighting seen in the 23-year confrontation raged
across northern Namibia on Friday, a week after a U.N.-supervised
truce was to end the war.
   At least 261 SWAPO guerrillas and 28 security force members have
been killed since Saturday, South African police officials said.
   On Thursday, SWAPO said 38 guerrillas died and nine were
missing. The guerrilla organization charges many of those killed by
security forces are civilians.
   South Africa says SWAPO has sent more than 1,900 guerrillas into
northern Namibia this week, in violation of an accord requiring the
insurgents remain at bases in Angola, at least 100 miles from its
border with Namibia.
   The United Nations has allowed South Africa to deploy up to six
units of troops to support paramilitary police, but Botha said
Friday the security forces ``at the present level are not able to
stem the incursion.''
   Anton Lubowski, one of SWAPO's few white officials, told a
Windhoek news conference the head of the U.N. operation in Namibia,
Finland's Martti Ahtisaari, should be replaced immediately.
   ``They (U.N. officials) are coming with exactly the same
arguments as South Africa that the guerrillas must be disarmed,''
Lubowski said. ``It is clear they are working with the South
Africans and are in the South Africans' pocket.''
   Botha said of Ahtisaari: ``He's in an awful position. It was
never his task to handle a violation of (U.N. Resolution) 435.''
   The U.N. task is ``to observe, patrol and prevent border
infiltration of a very limited nature,'' Botha said.
   The United Nations authorized 4,650 troops for Namibia, but has
been criticized because less than 1,000 have arrived.
   U.N. spokesman Francois Giuliani said military observers will
begin pouring into Namibia during the weekend.
   An 850-member contingent of Finnish observers will be airlifted
by the U.S. military Saturday to Monday, and other arrangements are
being made to fly in 850 Malaysian and 850 Kenyan troopers, he said.
   U.N. officials say the independence plan made no provision for
SWAPO bases in Namibia. Even Angola's President Jose Eduardo dos
Santos, whose country has hosted the guerrillas since 1966,
criticized SWAPO.
   ``I regret the SWAPO leadership was not able to exercise total
control over its guerrillas at the critical moment of the start of
Resolution 435, by stopping anyone crossing the Angolan-Namibian
frontier,'' dos Santos said Thursday.
   SWAPO leaders contend most of the guerrillas had been in Namibia
for some time and have no intention of accepting a surrender offer
South Africa says will expire Saturday. A U.N. report blames the
guerrillas for a ``major incursion,'' according to British Prime
Minister Margaret Thatcher.
   Several captured guerrillas have said they returned to Namibia
in search of U.N. personnel and expected no confrontations with
security forces.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
