ID: 168	RANK: 10	SCORE: 21.114189
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900802-0004 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-08-02-90 0003EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-Trinidad 7thLd-Writethru a0801 08-02 0943</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Trinidad, 7th Ld-Writethru, a0801, a0793,0977</SECOND>
<HEAD>Coup Leader, 112 Trinidad Militants Surrender, Free 46 Hostages</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: LEADS throughout to UPDATE with deputy prime minister saying
rebels had surrendered unconditionally and Robinson still prime
minister; DELETES outdated material. No pickup</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos POS100,101, LaserColor POS201</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By SUSANA HAYWARD</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   PORT-OF-SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) _ Coup leader Abu Bakr and 112
militant Moslem followers surrendered Wednesday and freed 46
hostages they seized five days earlier in a failed bid to overthrow
the government, officials said.
   State radio said a wounded hostage freed on Saturday died on
Wednesday in a hospital. That raised the death toll in the uprising
to at least 10.
   Deputy Prime Minister Winston Dookeran said the rebels, who
appeared not to have any significant support among the people,
``surrendered unconditionally'' and were under heavy guard at an
army base.
   He said they would face ``the appropriate charges,'' but did not
elaborate.
   Dookeran told reporters that Prime Minister Arthur N.R. Robinson
had not resigned, as he had offered to while held hostage.
   ``Prime Minister Robinson is the prime minister of Trinidad and
Tobago,'' Dookeran said. ``There is no intention to resign.''
   ``We have made no deals with this extremist group,'' said
Dookeran, who was held hostage on the first day of the coup attempt.
   Bakr released Dookeran on Saturday, saying he wanted the deputy
prime minister to head a caretaker government that would hold new
elections in the Caribbean nation.
   The attempted coup began Friday when armed rebels stormed the
state television station and the Parliament building, taking top
government officials and other captives.
   Bakr had demanded the resignation of Robinson, whom he accused
of corruption.
   The 63-year-old prime minister was freed Tuesday and
hospitalized for treatment of a leg wound suffered in the takeover
as well as exhaustion and glaucoma.
   Bakr blamed Robinson for widespread poverty in this former
British colony of 1.3 million people. Bakr was among the rebels who
surrendered at the television station, where the first group of
hostages was freed.
   Government spokesman Gregory Shaw said 113 rebels, including
Bakr, took part in the coup. He said 46 hostages held at Parliament
and the TV building one mile away were released Wednesday.
   Shaw and army spokesman Maj. Dave Williams said all hostages and
rebels had been evacuated and taken to separate army bases.
   State radio identified the former hostage who died Wednesdey as
Leo des Vignes, a junior minister. It said he died of a heart
attack in the hospital after being shot in the heel during the
takeover.
   The rebels released him on Saturday, the broadcast said.
   The radio said heavy gunfire was reported Wednesday evening in
Champs Fleurs, about 10 miles east of Port-of-Spain. There was no
official explanation, but soldiers have been firing blank bullets
to scatter would-be looters for several days.
   The 29 captives at the TV station were all station employees.
The remaining 17 hostages at the Parliament building included seven
Cabinet ministers.
   In a live broadcast, state radio described the haggard-looking
captives filing out of the television station, one by one.
   Soldiers searched each one in the street, because the militants
had claimed at one point to have wired the captives with explosives
and threatened to blow them up.
   After the prisoner release, witnesses said about 50 rebels left
the television building, dropped their weapons and surrendered to
soldiers.
   Witnesses said Bakr emerged wearing a fez, a white tunic and
white trousers. Like the other rebels, he dropped his gun and put
his hands behind his head.
   After boarding an army bus, Bakr shouted: ``Allahu akhbar!'' or
God is great.
   Hostages began leaving the Parliament building at 5:10 p.m. EDT.
The first to leave was a woman who held a white handkerchief to her
face.
   An army truck rolled up to the red, colonial-style building to
provide cover for soldiers who escorted her down the street.
   A few minutes later, the finance minister, Selby Wilson,
emerged, followed by another man who had a white handkerchief tied
across his face. The two men walked unescorted to a security van.
   The hostages walked along a sidewalk to a security area at the
end of the street, where they emptied their pockets and were
searched before getting onto an army bus. Some of the hostages
jogged down the street; others walked.
   Justice Minister Selwyn Richardson, reportedly shot in the leg
during the Parliament takeover, walked with a noticeable limp.
Applause broke out as he boarded the bus.
   State radio said the rebels were taken to army headquarters at
Chaguerames in northwest Trinidad and the freed hostages to Camp
Ogden, an army base about five miles west of Port-of-Spain.
   A local reporter who spoke with the former hostages at Camp
Ogden said they told him they had not eaten since Friday but were
otherwise OK. They were all undergoing medical exams in a tent.
   At Ogden Camp, freed hostage Grensell Kissoon, told a reporter,
``I'm glad to be alive.''
   TV station worker Raul Board held onto a post, saying he feared
he might faint from hunger. ``You know why I'm holding the post?
I'm afraid I might fall.''
   The capital was quiet Wednesday. A 6 p.m.-to-noon curfew
remained in effect throughout most of Trinidad following earlier
widespread looting.
   Bakr's Jamaat al-Muslimeen group, which means the Moslem Group
in Arabic, was founded in 1984 and is believed to have 250 to 300
members. It is also believed to have received financing from Libya.
   Gargano had said 200 troops from neighboring Caribbean nations
were on neighboring Barbados and ``could be here in 45 minutes,''
but that Trinidad and its sister island of Tobago had not asked for
help.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
