ID: 168	RANK: 11	SCORE: 21.059355
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900728-0068 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-28-90 1158EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i PM-Trinidad-Uprising 5thLd-Writethru   07-28 1005</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Trinidad-Uprising, 5th Ld-Writethru,a0489,1033</SECOND>
<HEAD>Black Moslems Take Prime Minister and Cabinet Hostage; Claims Coup</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Leads with 11 grafs to UPDATE with state of emergency,
buildings on fire, some ministers reported freed, comment from Bush
spox. Abu Bakr is pronounced AH-boo BAH-kuhr. Pickup 10th, `Bakr,
a...'</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By ALISTER HUGHES</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   PORT-OF-SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) _ A group of black Moslems who
kidnapped the prime minister and some Cabinet members in a coup
attempt said today the captives may be harmed if the government
moves against a rebel-held TV station.
   One report said three people were killed in the first hours of
the rebel strike, which began Friday on the former British colony
of two islands that lie off the Venezuelan coast.
   ``The government has been overthrown,'' the coup leader, Abu
Bakr, said on government TV Friday evening after the station was
seized by his followers.
   But government radio said today that a state of emergency had
been declared and that police were moving into the streets of the
capital of this southern Caribbean nation to restore order.
   Gunfire was heard in the direction of the television station,
located in northeastern Port-of-Spain about two miles from the
Parliament building and the main police station. Buildings also
were burning in eastern Port-of-Spain.
   Education Minister Clive Pantin said on government radio that he
had not been captured by the rebels and that the mutineers had
already released two unidentified ministers and four civilians they
had been holding.
   The Barbados-based Caribbean News Agency, or CANA, said three
people had been killed as the coup attempt began with an explosion
at the police station and rebels bursting into Parliament firing
weapons.
   It said a news reporter had seen the body of a woman Parliament
worker in the Parliament building, and it quoted witnesses as
saying they saw two bodies in front of the building.
   In Washington, a State Department official said it appeared
``the active elements of the insurrection are limited to the
television station and the parliament building.''
   ``We understand there has been some looting'' in the streets,
``but nothing affecting the safety of our embassy or foreign
nationals,'' said the official, who spoke on condition of
anonymity. Trinidad's island of Tobago is a popular vacation site
for Americans and others.
   In Kennebunkport, Maine, President Bush and National Security
Adviser Brent Scowcroft were ``following the situation carefully,''
said deputy press secretary Alixe Glen. She said the U.S.
government had not yet received a request for international aid,
but would consider it once it arrives.
   Bakr, a former policeman who heads a group called Jamaat
al-Muslimeen, Arabic for the Moslem Group, has said he doesn't
recognize ``man's law,'' only ``the law of almighty Allah.''
   The Moslem group is known to have connections to Libya that are
said to include some funding. News reports say Abu Bakr has visited
Libya.
   Bakr's group has an estimated 250 followers. The mostly Hindu
and Roman Catholic country of 1.3 million people has a 1,500-member
army and a 5,000-member police force.
   The State Department said earlier that the United States would
``deplore any attempt to overthrow the democratic government of
Trinidad.''
   Prime Minister Arthur Robinson's National Alliance for
Reconstruction won parliamentary elections in December 1986. The
next elections are due in 1991.
   British West Indies Airways and American Airlines canceled
commercial flights into Trinidad on Friday evening. Piarco
International Airport remained under control of government security
forces but was closed early today.
   When Bakr broadcast his claim of a takeover, he did not disclose
the whereabouts of Robinson and the other captured officials. It
was not known how many Cabinet ministers were taken hostage with
Robinson, 63, a veteran political leader, lawyer and economist.
   But the news director at the captured government television
station went on the air this morning and said the prime minister
and the other officials were alive and being ``well treated.''
   The news director, Jones Madeira, said some of the officials
were being held at the TV station and others at the Parliament
building, Red House.
   But he warned that the television station's signals were being
tampered with and ``this could endanger the lives of those people
being held.''
   Roman Catholic Archbishop Anthony Pantin told government radio
he had spoken to Madeira by telephone.
   ``He asked me to emphasize the request not to interfere with the
television channels, because if they do something may happen,'' the
prelate said.
   Several government ministers were seen on the rebel-controlled
television. Government radio, the National Broadcasting Service's
Radio 610, said the capital's police station was blown up and
burned out of control for hours.
   It said no one attempted to put out the fire, and there were
several explosions of what was assumed to be ammunition in the
station.
   Bakr first appeared on television at 6 p.m. Friday to announce
the uprising. He said his followers planned no violence, looting or
retribution against civilians, and promised ``free and fair''
elections within 90 days.
   Government radio said before dawn today that there had been some
looting and police had moved into the streets.
   Bakr, in his mid-40s, has been arrested several times in the
past on charges of contempt of court and illegal demonstrations.
   He lives with 200 to 250 followers, their wives and children in
a commune on the western side of Port-of-Spain. Members of the
sect, founded in 1980, are widely perceived in Trinidad as violent
outlaws, though the group's rhetoric is highly moralistic.
   In 1988, police raided the commune, seizing weapons and
ammunition and arresting 34 members of the sect on charges of
larceny, robbery, illegal possession of weapons, rape and murder.
Bakr said then his vigilantes were waging a war against ``the
menace of cocaine.''
   ``We will stop the incest, robbery, and drugs which there was no
hope for the present regime to stop,'' he said in Friday's
broadcast.
   The rebel group in the past year has been occupying some
government land in western Port-of-Spain. Recently, the government
had denied customs approval of a shipment of medical supplies
donated to Bakr by Libya.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
