ID: 168	RANK: 18	SCORE: 19.747782
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900730-0076 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-30-90 1527EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i PM-Trinidad 4thLd-Writethru a0537 07-30 0970</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Trinidad, 4th Ld-Writethru, a0537,1006</SECOND>
<HEAD>Gunfire Breaks Out Near TV Station, Parliament</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Leads with 13 grafs to UPDATE with colonel's briefing,
negotiator saying peaceful solution likely. Pickup 9th pvs, `Attiba
said...'</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos POS1,2</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By DAN SEWELL</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   PORT-OF-SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) _ Gunfire and explosions broke out
today around the government television station and Parliament,
where Moslem extremists held the prime minister and 30 other people
hostage for a fourth day.
   Later today, an Anglican minister negotiating between the
government and the rebels said a settlement was likely.
   The heaviest shooting was centered on the television station,
whose employees were taken hostage Friday. Automatic rifle and
machine-gun fire was punctuated by what sounded like artillery
booms.
   One witness said he heard four explosions that sounded like
bombs.
   ``A major firefight is going on,'' said a diplomatic source, who
spoke on condition of anonymity.
   The shooting at the station appeared to be coming from two
directions, but it was not clear whether security forces had tried
to storm the building.
   Earlier, automatic weapons fire rang out near Parliament, about
a mile from the television station, where rebels seized Prime
Minister Arthur N.R. Robinson on Friday. Witnesses said they heard
what sounded like heavy artillery booms.
   A ham radio operator in Trinidad said he monitored a radio
communication indicating security forces had stormed the television
station and were moving on Parliament.
   But Col. Ralph Brown of the Trinidad-Tobago Defense Force denied
the station was attacked.
   He told reporters that troops had fired on the TV station when
the rebels tried to leave the building. ``Some of his men tried to
come out and we are not letting them out.''
   An Anglican minister who was negotiating between the rebels and
the government, the Rev. Knolly Clarke, also spoke with reporters
early this afternoon.
   When asked if a peaceful solution was likely, he said, ``Yes,
today. The end is in sight.''
   One of the rebels inside Parliament, Kwasi Attiba, said by
telephone that a tentative agreement with the government had been
reached to end the siege.
   Attiba said the accord called for Robinson to resign immediately
and be replaced by Deputy Prime Minister Winston Dookeran. Attiba
gave no indication when Robinson and other other hostages would be
released, and no government official could be reached to confirm
his report.
   An agreement was also reported Sunday by a television executive,
Jones Madeira, who was held at the station. He said in a telephone
interview that under the plan, Robinson would turn over power to an
interim government, which would rule until elections in three
months.
   Robinson won the 1986 parliamentary elections by a landslide,
and the next elections are not scheduled until 1991.
   The rebels claim Robinson's government is corrupt and
responsible for widespread poverty in this once oil-rich country.
They claimed Saturday to have wired Robinson with explosives and
threatened to blow him up if a rescue attempt was made.
   Attiba said the gunfire at Parliament came from police ``who
have been attempting to thwart'' negotiations.
   Attiba said the rebels were holding eight government ministers
along with the prime minister.
   Energy Minister Herbert Atwell said Sunday the two sides were
far from a settlement. But Attiba said: ``We are very hopeful for
an amicable solution.''
   Security forces patrolled the capital with orders to shoot
looters on sight.
   Abu Bakr, leader of a black Moslem commune, stormed Parliament
on Friday and captured Robinson and most of his Cabinet. Bakr is
believed backed by Libya but has little general support.
   Simultaneously, the rebels seized the government television
station and its employees.
   Unconfirmed reports said more than 20 people had been killed in
the fighting. A medical officer at the state hospital said today he
could confirm only five deaths, including that of a police officer.
   Fires burned in the capital of Port-of-Spain on Sunday. There
was scattered gunfire and widespread looting. Convoys of cars and
pickup trucks were loading up with everything from looted powdered
milk to refrigerators, electric stoves and television sets.
   The government sent police and military patrols to re-establish
order and continued a nationwide curfew that was imposed Saturday.
   Atwell, representing the government, appeared on national
television late Sunday with an official statement saying: ``I am in
no position to offer any hope that the situation will be resolved
speedily and-or amicably.''
   He confirmed reports that Robinson and Justice Minister Selwyn
Richardson had each been shot in the leg.
   State-run radio 610 said Nolli Clarke, an Anglican priest, was
the official mediator with help from Anglican Bishop Clive Abdullah
and Roman Catholic Archbishop Anthony Patin.
   The Red Cross sent mobile units to take blood donations from
people too frightened to leave their homes.
   Radio 610 estimated damage downtown at $50 million as thousands
of people looted stores, shopping centers, warehouses and
industrial plants.
   A spokeswoman for President Bush said Sunday that American
citizens and tourists on Trinidad and Tobago did not appear to be
in danger.
   ``Obviously we support the government and are coordinating
closely with them until the situation is resolved,'' a State
Department official said in Washington. The official did not want
to be identified.
   Bakr is a former policeman in his mid-40s who converted to Islam
in 1980 while living in Canada.
   He founded Jamaat al-Muslimeen, which means the Moslem Group in
Arabic, in 1984 and set up a commune on land he said had been
donated to Moslems by the late prime minister, Eric Williams.
   Bakr built a mosque, a school and a kitchen to feed the
homeless. Some 250 to 300 Moslems live there.
   Bakr has visited Libya several times and is believed to have
received assistance from that country.
   He has said the coup was intended to stop ``poverty and the
destruction'' of Trinidad and Tobago, which has high unemployment
and skyrocketing food prices.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
