ID: 168	RANK: 2	SCORE: 24.105326
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900728-0042 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-28-90 0557EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i PM-TrinidadUprising Bjt   07-28 0834</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Trinidad Uprising, Bjt,0863</SECOND>
<HEAD>Black Moslems Take Prime Minister and Cabinet Hostage</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By ALISTER HUGHES</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   PORT-OF-SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) _ A black Moslem leader said his
rebels captured Prime Minister Arthur Robinson and his Cabinet in
the Parliament building Friday, and claimed to have toppled the
government of this southern Caribbean nation.
   But government radio early today broadcast a condemnation of the
uprising and said police had moved into the streets of the capital
to bring order in this mainly Catholic and Hindu country. There
were no immediate reports of casualties.
   The attack on Parliament came Friday as the capital's police
headquarters was blown up and explosions and gunfire were heard in
the direction of the government's television station, which the
rebels seized.
   ``The government has been overthrown,'' leader Abu Bakr of
Jamaat al-Muslimeen, Arabic for the Moslem Group, said on
government television.
   He promised ``free and fair'' elections within 90 days in
Trinidad and Tobago, a former British colony of 1.3 million people
on two islands that lie off the Venezuelan coast.
   ``We will stop the incest, robbery, and drugs which there was no
hope for the present regime to stop,'' he said.
   Bakr's group has an estimated 250 followers. The country has a
1,500-member army and a 5,000-member police force.
   British West Indies Airways and American Airlines canceled
commercial flights into Trinidad Friday evening, but the Piarco
International Airport remained under control of government security
forces.
   The National Broadcasting Service's Radio 610, the government
radio station, said Robinson and his Cabinet were being held in the
Red House, the Parliament building across the street from the
central police station.
   Radio 610 said the police station was blown up and burned out of
control for hours. Announcer Dennis McComie said no one attempted
to put out the fire and there were several explosions of what he
assumed was ammunition in the station.
   Bakr first appeared on television at 6 p.m. to announce the
uprising by Jamaat al-Muslimeen.
   In Washington, State Department Spokesman Dave Denny said, ``We
would deplore any attempt to overthrow the democratic government of
Trinidad.''
   Denny said the U.S. Embassy had reported gunfire and explosions
in the vicinity of the TV station, which is several miles northwest
of the parliamentary building, but only a few blocks below the
hillside Hilton Hotel.
   Denny said he had no word about the situation of Americans in
Trinidad and Tobago. The smaller island of Tobago is a popular
vacation site.
   Bakr said there was no plan for violence, looting or retribution
against civilians.
   Acting President Emmanuel Carter told Radio 610 that people
should pray for a solution to the situation.
   ``Stay at home and let the protected (police) forces do their
jobs,'' he said.
   McComie said at 3 a.m. today that there had been some looting
and police had moved into the streets for the first time since the
country's leading officials were seized.
   Radio 610 broadcast a statement from David Coore, Jamaican
foreign affairs minister, deploring the uprising. His comments were
heard on Radio 610 on a relay from Radio Jamaica.
   ``We call urgently and directly on those responsible for this
totally unacceptable situation to release the hostages
unconditionally and pursue whatever complaints they have by the
regular processes of constitutional democracy which are the
hallmark of our Caribbean Community,'' Coore said.
   Caribbean heads of state and their ministers were to meet this
weekend in the Jamaican capital of Kingston for the annual meeting
the Caribbean common market. Trinidad Foreign Affairs Minister
Sahadeo Basdeo is in Kingston.
   It could not be ascertained how many ministers were taken
hostage with Robinson, 63, a veteran political leader, lawyer and
economist.
   Bakr, in his mid-40s, is a former Trinidad policeman and has
been arrested several times in the past on charges of contempt of
court and illegal demonstrations.
   He lives with 200 to 250 followers, their wives and children in
a commune on the western side of Port-of-Spain. Members of the
sect, founded in 1980, are widely perceived in Trinidad as violent
outlaws, though the group's rhetoric is highly moralistic.
   Abu Bakr has said he doesn't recognize ``man's law,'' only ``the
law of almighty Allah.''
   In November of 1988, police raided the sect's sanctuary and
seized weapons and ammunition. Bakr said then he was waging a war
against ``the menace of cocaine.''
   The Moslem group is known to have connections to Libya that are
said to include some funding. Trinidad published reports say Abu
Bakr has visited Libya.
   Trinidad and Tobago gained independence from Britain in 1962. It
is an English-speaking country with a large populace from India.
   About a third of the people are Roman Catholic and a quarter are
Hindu. Only about 6 percent are Moslem, most of them East Indians.
There is great tension between the black and Indian Moslems.
   The rebel group in the past year has been occupying some
government land in western Port-of-Spain. Recently, the government
had denied customs approval of a shipment of medical supplies
donated to Bakr by Libya.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
