ID: 168	RANK: 22	SCORE: 18.693214
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900730-0005 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-30-90 0129EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-Trinidad 5thLd-Writethru a0403 07-30 1260</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Trinidad, 5th Ld-Writethru, a0403,1295</SECOND>
<HEAD>Prime Minister Agrees to Resign and Hold Elections</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: SUBS 18th graf to CORRECT times for national curfew. Picks up
19th pvs, `Some of...'</NOTE>
<BYLINE>LaserPhotos NY8, BDG1
^By DAN SEWELL</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   PORT-OF-SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) _ Prime Minister Arthur Robinson
offered Sunday to resign and call early elections if black Moslem
rebels free him and about 30 other hostages and end their coup
attempt, an official said.
   At least 27 people have reportedly been killed in the violence.
However, there was no official toll.
   Robinson apparently made his offer as he and other government
officials remained wired to explosives and threatened with death.
They were taken captive Friday when several hundred rebels with
automatic weapons seized control of broadcast buildings and the
Parliament.
   Government radio said the rebels were optimistic about reaching
a settlement with Robinson but that they also wanted immunity from
prosecution.
   However, Energy Minister Herbert Atwell appeared on national
television late Sunday with an official statement offering no hope
for a quick settlement.
   ``I am in no position to offer any hope that the situation will
be resolved speedily and-or amicably,'' Atwell said. ``The
situation in Parliament remains a touch-and-go one with relation to
the hostages and their captors,'' he added.
   Acting Police Commissioner Leonard Taylor announced during the
same broadcast that joint police and military patrols had been
dispatched to control widespread looting along the 25-mile-long
corridor from the capital to its international airport and outlying
communities.
   A journalist who was inside the Parliament building when it was
stormed said Sunday the rebels shot Robinson in the leg and also
shot in the leg the minister of justice, Selwyn Richardson. The two
were being treated by Minister of Health Emmanuel Husin, a medical
doctor who was in the building.
   The journalist, released by the rebels Saturday night, spoke on
condition of anonymity.
   State-run Radio 610 said Nolli Clarke, an Anglican priest, was
assisting in the negotiations at the Parliament. Hundreds of
government troops were patrolling around the building.
   Coup leader Abu Bakr, a former policeman in his mid-40s, claims
Robinson's government is corrupt and undemocratic. He said on
television Friday that the coup was intended to stop ``poverty and
the destruction'' of Trinidad and Tobago, a Caribbean nation with
high unemployment and skyrocketing food prices.
   As negotiations continued Sunday, the Port-of-Spain area was
beset by fires, scattered shooting and widespread looting in some
areas.
   Hundreds of looters ransacked stores and factories in several
eastern suburbs, making off with food, refrigerators, videocassette
recorders and television sets. Some loaded their cars with stolen
goods and drove off.
   Looters also hit the five-square-block downtown shopping
district, where damage and losses were estimated at $50 million,
Radio 610 reported. It did not say how the figure was calculated.
   Anglican Bishop Clive Abdullah broadcast an appeal for the
looting to stop.
   ``My heart goes out to those who are hungry and have to enter
places to take foodstuffs. I can perhaps ask God's forgiveness for
this,'' he said. ``But when you line up a convoy of vehicles to
take away items like refrigerators, television sets and videos,
that is not right.''
   A spokeswoman for President Bush, who was in Kennebunkport,
Maine, said Saturday that he was ``following the situation
carefully'' and that American citizens and tourists on Trinidad and
Tobago did not appear to be in danger.
   A government curfew, imposed Saturday by a state of emergency
that mobilized the country's 5,000-member army and 1,500-member
police force, was extended Sunday to 18 hours, from 6 p.m. to noon.
   Some of the 11 Americans staying at the harbor-side Holiday Inn
three blocks from the Parliament building said they were more bored
as a result of the curfew restrictions than afraid of the violence.
   ``Unfortunately, I came at the wrong time. There's nothing to
do. The hotel is nice, but I didn't come here to sit inside a hotel
doing nothing,'' said Rhonda Isaacs, a native of Guyana now living
in New York City.
   Ms. Isaacs said her two children, 11 and 13, have been spending
their time swimming in the hotel pool or watching television. The
family had intended to return home from a three-week vacation on
Aug. 9, but now wanted to leave as soon as possible, she said.
   Radio 610 said ``scores'' of people had been injured in fighting
associated with the coup. The Red Cross urgently appealed for blood
donations to treat the wounded, but most residents were too afraid
to leave their homes.
   An administrator at the Port-au-Spain General Hospital said at
least five people wounded during the overthrow attempt died Sunday.
   The Caribbean News Agency, quoting police and hospital sources,
said on Saturday that at least 22 people have died in fighting
since the coup attempt began, but exactly where the fighting
occurred remained unclear.
   The offer Robinson reportedly made to the rebels was described
by Jones Madeira, director of the government television station and
himself a hostage.
   Madeira said in a telephone interview from a television station
seized by the rebels that Robinson agreed to turn over power to an
interim government that would rule until elections are held in
three months.
   Robinson won the 1986 parliamentary elections by a landslide and
the next elections were not scheduled until 1991.
   ``My information is that Prime Minister Robinson has agreed to
step down and that an interim government of major political parties
will run the country until elections are held in 90 days,'' he said.
   The rebels were holding Robinson with several Cabinet ministers
in the Red House. Madeira said he and 30 other employees were being
held at the television station, which is several miles north of the
Parliament, known as Red House.
   He said 10 other people were inside of Radio Trinidad in a
building near the TV station, but it was unclear if they were being
held captive, as reported earlier, or whether they were staying
inside because of snipers.
   Bakr heads a group of about 250 black Moslems called Jamaat
al-Muslimeen, which means the Moslem Group in Arabic.
   Bakr lives in Canada for several years in the early 1980s, where
he took up Islam and worked for a while with the Canadian
Broadcasting Corp. He returned to Trinidad in 1984, said Haroon
Salamat, head of the Toronto and Region Islamic Congregation.
   Bakr's group had formed its own paramilitary squad to raid known
drug dealers, Salamat said.
   Salamat told the Toronto Star that he thinks the coup attempt
resulted from ``years and years of frustration and government
harassment.
   ``All of this _ drugs and social justice _ has concerned him
because he saw the government just ignore the problems. He must
have thought that drastic action was necessary.''
   Moslems, most of them East Indians, make up about 6 percent of
the population of 1.3 million people of the Caribbean nation off
Venezuela.
   The general population is mainly Hindu and Christian and is
about 40 percent East Indian and 40 percent of African descent.
   Trinidad and Tobago, a former British colony, suffered serious
economic decline in the 1980s as the world price for oil, the main
export, plummeted.
   Unemployment is estimated at around 22 percent and food prices
have skyrocketed by about 25 percent in the past year.
   On Saturday, Roman Catholic Archbishop Anthony Pantin talked
with Bakr by telephone. Afterward, Pantin quoted Bakr as saying the
prime minister and the hostages at the Parliament building ``are
wired up with explosives.'' Pantin said the rebels threatened to
blow up the captives if government troops move on the building.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
