ID: 168	RANK: 29	SCORE: 16.909554
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900802-0107 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-08-02-90 1249EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i PM-Trinidad 2ndLd-Writethru a0599 08-02 0751</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Trinidad, 2nd Ld-Writethru, a0599,0777</SECOND>
<HEAD>30 Died in Coup Attempt; Trinidad Will Prosecute Rebels</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: New thruout with government saying 30 people died during the
coup attempt, no deals struck with rebels will be honored. TRIMS.
No pickup.</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By DAN SEWELL</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   PORT-OF-SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) _ A failed coup attempt by Moslem
extremists and widespread looting that resulted left at least 30
people dead and 150 wounded in Trinidad, a government spokesman
said today.
   The authorities expect to find more bodies in Parliament, where
the prime minister and other government ministers were held
hostage, and in a police station that was gutted by a car-bomb and
fire, spokesman Gregory Shaw said.
   Previous reports had said about 20 people died in the coup
attempt, which began Friday with a raid on Parliament and a
government TV station.
   Shaw also confirmed for the first time that Prime Minister N.R.
Robinson, after being shot in the leg, signed agreements to resign,
turn over power to a caretaker government and grant amnesty to the
rebels.
   ``All the agreements were signed under duress, all under
gunpoint, all of which are completely invalid,'' Shaw told
reporters at a news conference.
   Shaw said that the coup leader, Abu Bakr, and his band of 111
militants had dropped their demands before surrendering on
Wednesday and releasing their remaining 46 hostages. A total of 55
hostages had been held.
   ``They caved in completely,'' he said. ``They surrendered
unconditionally.
   Officials have said they will press charges against Bakr and
those who joined him in the coup attempt.
   Shaw said soldiers expect to go into Parliament and the nearby
police station on Friday to search for bodies and unexploded bombs.
Soldiers standing outside the buildings said they were waiting one
day to go inside because of fears of time-delayed explosives.
   The security forces also evacuated 2,000 to 3,000 people from
the vicinity of the government television station, where 29
hostages were held after the building was seized last Friday. That
building also will be searched.
   Shaw said the dead included looters shot by the security forces,
but he gave no breakdown.
   The capital was quiet this morning. People remained indoors,
under a 6 p.m. to noon curfew that remained in effect.
   State radio said Leo des Vignes, a junior government minister
taken hostage Friday and released a day later, died of a heart
attack Wednesday in a hospital. He had been shot in the heel.
   Deputy Prime Minister Winston Dookeran said Wednesday that
``appropriate charges'' would be brought against the militants.
   Asked whether the charges would include murder and treason,
Dookeran said it would be up to the judicial authorities to decide.
   Bakr, a former policeman who converted to Islam and considers
himself a champion of the downtrodden, was under heavy guard along
with the other 111 rebels at army headquarters in Chaguerames in
northwest Trinidad.
   The freed hostages spent the night at Camp Ogden, another army
base near the capital of Port-of-Spain, for medical exams and
treatment.
   Bakr had demanded Robinson's ouster, accusing him of corruption
and blaming him for widespread poverty in this once oil-rich
Caribbean nation of 1.3 million people.
   The 63-year-old prime minister was freed Tuesday and
hospitalized for treatment of a leg wound suffered in the attack as
well as exhaustion and glaucoma.
   The defense chief, Col. Joe Theodore, said Bakr had agreed to
surrender Tuesday night, four days after the siege began.
   ``I just think they were worn down,'' he said of the rebels.
``They just wanted out. They had come to the conclusion they had
failed.''
   The defense chief said the rebels had agreed to leave all their
explosives and ammunition on the speaker's table in the Parliament
building.
   Officials said the rebels had been armed with AK-47 assault
rifles, vintage World War II rifles, pump-action shotguns, pistols
and grenades.
   The coup attempt began Friday when armed rebels stormed the
state television station and the Parliament building, taking top
government officials and others captive. They also bombed and
burned down the police station.
   The attack set off a wave of looting.
   Hundreds of people took to the streets, ransacking stores and
warehouses and carrying away everything from food to television
sets. Damage was estimated at $50 million and food and medicine
were beginning to run short. It was the country's worst violence
since a black power uprising in the early 1970s.
   Dookeran said a state of emergency, including the islandwide
curfew, would remain in effect until the country gets back to
normal.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
