ID: 168	RANK: 3	SCORE: 23.306986
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900728-0020 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-28-90 0150EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-TrinidadUprising 6thLd-Writethru a0415 07-28 0910</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Trinidad Uprising, 6th Ld-Writethru, a0415,0936</SECOND>
<HEAD>Moslems Said to Seize Trinidad Parliament, Hold Prime Minister</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Leads with 3 grafs to CORRECT name of group to Jamaat
al-Muslimeen, or Group of Moslems. Pickup 4th graf `An
announcer...'</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By ALISTER HUGHES</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   PORT-OF-SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) _ Moslem militants said they
captured the prime minister and his Cabinet in the Parliament
building on Friday in this Caribbean capital. There were reports of
gunfire and explosions in the city.
   Abu Bakr, head of the black rebel group, said in a nationwide
radio and TV broadcast late Friday that the government was toppled.
The claim could not be independently confirmed.
   Earlier, Bakr had a station newscaster read a statement on
national television about 6 p.m. EDT in which Bakr announced the
uprising by the group Jamaat al-Muslimeen, which is Arabic for the
Group of Moslems. He claimed to be holding captive in Parliament
the prime minister, Arthur Robinson.
   An announcer on Radio 610, Dennis McComie, quoted Bakr as having
said on TV that ``the government has been overthrown'' and promised
elections within 90 days. Bakr did not mention what he had done
with the prime minister and his Cabinet.
   Bakr was quoted as saying his motive for moving against the
government was ``poverty and the destruction of Trinidad. ... We
will stop the incest, robbery, and drugs which there was no hope
for the present regime to stop.''
   There has been no official reaction from the government but late
Friday in Washington, State Department spokesman Dave Denny said,
``We would deplore any attempt to overthrow the democratic
government of Trinidad.''
   He also said, ``Our embassy reports gunfire in the vicinity of
the TV station. Explosions and gunfire have been heard downtown.''
   There were unconfirmed reports of casulaties in this city of
300,000 residents though Denny said he had no word about the
situation of Americans in Trinidad. Trinidad's smaller island of
Tobago is a popular vacation site.
   Bakr said there was no plan for violence, looting or retribution
against civilians, McComie told The Associated Press.
   The Moslem group claims to have 200 to 250 members. They are
known as a small militant group with connections to Libya that are
said to include some funding.
   The rebel statement said the Cabinet also was being held hostage
with Robinson, 63, a veteran political leader, lawyer and
economist, but it could not be ascertained how many were inside the
Parliament building.
   Trinidad's ambassador to the United States told CBS Radio in
Washington that Robinson and the entire Cabinet, which had been
meeting at the time, were believed in the custody of the rebels.
   A radio station in Trinidad, government-owned National
Broadcasting Service, said that police headquarters in downtown
Port-of-Spain also had been blown up Friday by the rebels. The
rebels are based in St. James, outside the capital, and near police
headquarters.
   McComie said the central police station was on fire and there
had been several explosions that he assumed was ammunition. No one
was trying to put the fire out and it was spreading to surrounding
structures, he said, adding that it appeared headed for the
telephone company.
   Trinidadian James Fadelle of Miami said he had spoken with a
friend in Port-of-Spain by telephone earlier Friday evening.
   ``They're all locked up in their houses. They cannot go
outside,'' Fadelle said. He added that his friend, Peter Lambie,
had told him some civilians had been killed in the downtown area
and two police stations had been blown up.
   McComie said he was in the street by the radio station at 6 p.m.
when he heard gunshots inside Red House, which is the parliament
building. He said he returned safely to the station, but two gunmen
entered and set fire to the engineering department.
   McComie said radio employees were able to extinguish the fire.
   ``We can see people in the streets with guns,'' he said.
   The leader, Bakr, is a former police officer in Trinidad. Little
is known about him. Trinidad published reports say he spent some
time in Libya.
   Trinidad, the larger of the two islands in the nation of
Trinidad and Tobago, has a population of about 1.3 million, and is
just off the northeast coast of Venezuela. Trinidad and Tobago
gained independence from Britain in 1962. It is an English-speaking
country with a large populace from India.
   About a third of the people are Roman Catholic and a quarter are
Hindus. Only about 6 percent are Moslem.
   The island in recent years has suffered from a recession, with
closing of oil refineries, devaluation of the local currency and a
new, unpopular 15 percent value-added tax, according to locals.
   The rebel group in the past year has been occupying some
government land in western Port-of-Spain, creating controversy and
tensions on the island.
   The 1,500-member army has not entered into the fray yet, and is
said to be in northwestern Trinidad.
   The broadcast statement said the rebels were in touch with the
army but it was not known what that signified.
   The police force on Trinidad has about 5,000 members.
   McComie said he and his crew had locked themselves inside the
building and considered themselves ``in considerable danger.''
   Although station personnel felt in danger, they continued to
broadcast a live broadcast of a soccer game at the national stadium
in Port-of-Spain.
   A security guard at the Trinidad Guardian said the newspaper
building had been evacuated. He said that most likely there would
not be a Saturday edition.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
