ID: 168	RANK: 30	SCORE: 16.720858
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900801-0135 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-08-01-90 1528EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>b i PM-Trinidad 5thLd-Writethru   08-01 0914</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Trinidad, 5th Ld-Writethru,a0665,0942</SECOND>
<HEAD>URGENT</HEAD>
<HEAD>Militants Surrender in Trinidad, Ending Coup Attempt</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Leads with 7 grafs to UPDATE with Bakr reportedly
surrendering, hostages put at 42, all of them out of TV station.
Pickup 10th, `Earlier today...'</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By DAN SEWELL</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   PORT-OF-SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) _ Moslem militants surrendered
today and began freeing their 42 hostages, ending a six-day coup
attempt that seriously threatened the government and reportedly
left at least 20 people dead.
   The 25 people who had been held hostage since Friday at the
government television station left the building one by one, were
searched in the middle of the street by soldiers, then taken away
on an army bus, state radio said.
   A short time later, the leader of the coup attempt, Abu Bakr,
and about 50 rebels left the building, dropped their weapons in the
street, put their hands behind their heads, and surrendered to
soldiers, witnesses said.
   Government spokesman Gregory Shaw said another group of soldiers
was heading over to the Parliament building, about a mile away, to
take the remaining rebels into custody and evacuate their 17
hostages, who included seven Cabinet ministers and other officials.
   Shaw said it was his understanding that Bakr and his group of
about 100 Moslem extremists had surrendered unconditionally.
   The hostages initially included the prime minister, Arthur N.R.
Robinson, but he was freed on Tuesday after offering to step down,
call new elections and grant the rebels amnesty. It was not
immediately clear whether the government would fulfill that pledge
since it was made while Robinson was held captive.
   Details of the final negotiations that produced the rebel
agreement to surrender and free all their hostages were not
immediately available.
   Earlier today, Bakr had described the coup attempt as a ``small
family squabble'' and said that an accord had been reached to end
the standoff.
   Speaking in an interview with the British Broadcasting Corp.
from the Caribbean nation, Bakr had indicated that the hostages
would be freed soon.
   ``The negotiations are over. We already have a signed
agreement,'' he told the BBC. ``We are making preparations now for
the evacuation of all the people, all the people at the television
house and the people who are at the Parliament building.''
   At least 20 people were reportedly killed in fighting and
looting associated with the coup attempt. The capital was reported
quiet today, but a government spokesman said there were explosions
overnight.
   ``It's very calm,'' said the spokesman, Bernard Pantin. He said
he did not know the cause of the explosions but said they were not
near the Parliament or the television station, where the captives
were being held.
   Bakr had blamed Robinson for widespread poverty in the once
oil-rich nation of 1.3 million people near Venezuela. He said in
today's interview he was seeking a ``new beginning in Trinidad.''
   Bakr's Jamaat al-Muslimeen group, which means the Moslem Group
in Arabic, was founded in 1984 and is believed to have 250 to 300
members. It is also believed to have received financing from Libya.
   The U.S. Ambassador, Charles Gargano, said no sign of popular
support surfaced for Bakr's extremist sect.
   ``This is not a revolution,'' he said. ``It is a hostage
situation.''
   Although Bakr said in the BBC interview that everyone being held
by his followers would be freed, he also denied that the people
were in fact hostages.
   ``We don't have any hostages, sir. We never had any hostages,''
he told the BBC interviewer. ``You'll have to rephrase that
question.''
   Asked whether the people in question were then free to leave,
Bakr responded: ``There's a curfew. They can't walk about in a
curfew.''
   A 6 p.m.-to-noon curfew remained in effect throughout most of
Trinidad following earlier widespread looting.
   When the interviewer expressed disbelief that only the curfew
was stopping the prisoners from leaving, Bakr also mentioned that
bus service had been disrupted.
   He said of the coup attempt, ``It was a small family squabble...
I'm saying that emphatically.''
   Robinson was allowed Tuesday to leave the besieged Parliament
building. It was not clear whether he would continue as prime
minister.
   Fifteen government officials were held hostage in the Parliament
building and 25 others in the government TV station.
   At least nine people were killed when Bakr and his followers
took over both buildings on Friday. Robinson, 63, was hospitalized
for treatment of a leg wound suffered in the takeover, as well as
for exhaustion and glaucoma.
   The government had said earlier that Robinson was shot in both
feet. There was no explanation for the discrepancy.
   Smart would not discuss the conditions under which Robinson was
freed, or say whether his health was a factor. Bakr said in today's
interview that Robinson was freed as a ``humanitarian gesture.''
   Gargano, interviewed before Robinson's release, said the
government remained united and in control. He said Robinson's
deputy, Winston Dookeran, and eight other ministers who escaped
rebel capture were running Trinidad.
   Smart said the government continued to enjoy the ``complete
loyalty'' of the 1,500-member military and 5,000-member police
force.
   In a joint telephone call Monday night from inside Parliament,
Robinson, Bakr's chief negotiator, Bilal Abdullah, and Minister of
Justice and National Security Selwyn Richardson all said a
settlement had been reached.
   Richardson said the agreement called for Robinson to resign and
for elections to be held within 90 days. But government spokesman
Gregory Shaw said there was no agreement: ``These are statements of
people being held at gunpoint. People are made to make statements.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
