ID: 168	RANK: 5	SCORE: 22.591726
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900804-0064 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-08-04-90 1110EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-Trinidad-Uprising Bjt   08-04 0816</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Trinidad-Uprising, Bjt,0844</SECOND>
<HEAD>Coup Attempt Further Damages Island's Economy</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By DAN SEWELL</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   PORT-OF-SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) _ A Moslem zealot's attempt to
overthrow the government, and the burning and looting that
accompanied it, have staggered Trinidad after three decades of
stable democracy.
   The rebels surrendered Wednesday and the six-day coup attempt
ended with the safe release of the hostages, but the casualty toll
in the assault and subsequent violence was at least 38 dead and 150
wounded.
   Now Trinidadians face food and gasoline shortages, economic
disruption from a week of paralyzing curfews and the devastation
left by looters and arsonists.
   This racially and ethnically diverse nation known for sun and
calypso also must deal with tensions created by the violent effort
to destroy a democracy that has endured since independence from
Britain in 1962.
   ``As a sociologist, I know that conflict and crisis can either
splinter groups or unify them; it's never in-between,'' said
Anthony Maingot, who was born in Trinidad and is a Caribbean expert
at Florida International University in Miami.
   The coup attempt by Abu Bakr, leader of a commune of 250 to 350
Moslems, began July 27.
   Bakr and his followers, most of whom are poor and black,
attacked police headquarters with explosives and seized Prime
Minister N.R. Robinson and other government officials in Parliament
House.
   Other members of Jamaat-al-Muslimeen simultaneously invaded the
state television complex a mile away and took employees hostage.
   Bakr's immediate demands were the prime minister's resignation
and elections within 90 days.
   ``I don't know that they planned beyond taking Red House,'' the
parliament building, said Col. Joe Theodore, who led the Trinidad
and Tobago Defense Force in the crisis. ``He went in with a
half-baked plan.''
   The sports and culture minister, Jennifer Johnson, one of the
hostages, said the rebels were convinced they could improve
Trinidad by establishing a fundamentalist Moslem state. Bakr, whose
newspaper had attacked ``satanic'' U.S. and International Monetary
Fund economic treatment of Trinidad, promised to help the poor.
   There were no signs of popular support for Bakr's attempt to
overthrow th prime minister.
   Robinson trails in public opinion polls and elections are due
next year.
   Trinidad has had a boom-to-bust economy over the last 20 years
tied to the world price of oil, its main source of wealth.
   The 1970s oil boom brought prosperity and gave Trinidadians the
highest standard of living in the Caribbean. The bottom fell out of
the oil market in the 1980s and Trinidad's gross national product,
the value of all goods and services, has dropped 41 percent in
eight years.
   Robinson led the new National Alliance for Reconstruction to a
landslide in 1986 with promises of recovery, ousting the People's
National Movement, which had been in power since colonial days.
   He has tried to diversify the economy, partly by expanding
tourism, to which the island was largely indifferent during the oil
boom. Unpopular austerity measures demanded by the IMF in return
for loans included wage freezes, new taxes, public employee layoffs
and devaluations that cut the Trinidad dollar's value from about 42
cents to 24.
   Officials say the economy has shown signs of recovery, but that
Robinson's reserved personal style and an unraveling of his
coalition weakened the government.
   ``There is discontent in the country,'' government spokesman
Gregory Shaw said. ``Apparently, he (Abu Bakr) took this as a sign
that the people were ready to revolt, but that is not the way
Trinidadians change government.''
   Much of downtown Port-of-Spain was looted, prompting
international assistance that began with food shipments last week
from Venezuela.
   Tourism and foreign investment are expected to suffer.
   ``We will have to make an effort to win people's confidence,''
Shaw said.
   There were signs of strained ethnic relations during the
violence. Looters shouted epihets at Arab store owners and Moslems
were the targets of anger.
   Most of Trinidad's 1.3 million people are Hindu or Christian,
each representing more than 40 percent. Moslems make up about 6
percent and, among them, East Indians outnumber the blacks 20 to 1.
   Many East Indians scorn black Moslems as a sect outside the
mainstream Islamic community, an attitude resented by the Bakr and
his followers.
   Confidence in Robinson's government could be undermined by the
fact that such a small group was able to cripple the nation.
   Abu Bakr's sect had been involved in court cases and with
police. It was under surveillance and police spokesman Winston
Cooper said ``the Libyan connection was established.''
   Authorities say sect members received money and training from
Libya, although there is no evidence Moammar Gadhafi, Libya's
leader, was linked to the coup attempt.
   Raffique Shah, managing editor of The Mirror, said he hoped
other would-be rescuers of Trinidad would learn from Bakr's attempt
and ``see the futility of such action.''
   As the week ended, turmoil in another land offered some hope to
Trinidad. The Iraqi invasion of Kuwait pushed oil prices up.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
