ID: 168	RANK: 7	SCORE: 21.546236
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900731-0011 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-31-90 0033EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-Trinidad 5thLd-Writethru a0746 07-31 0918</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Trinidad, 5th Ld-Writethru, a0746,0947</SECOND>
<HEAD>Hostage Prime Minister Reports Trinidad Accord Reached</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: LEADS with 7 grafs to UPDATE with further elaboration of how
announcement made. Picks up 6th pvs, `The announcement ...'
^LaserPhotos POS4,5</NOTE>
<BYLINE>By DAN SEWELL</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   PORT-OF-SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) _ Prime Minister Arthur N.R.
Robinson and the chief negotiator for his Moslem extremist captors
said Monday that they had reached agreement to end a 4-day-old
hostage siege.
   Robinson, other Cabinet ministers and lawmakers were among 41
hostages reported held by the black Moslems, who stormed the
Parliament building and the government television station on Friday
in a coup attempt. Robinson suffered gunshot wounds in both feet.
   Word of the accord came in telephone call to Trinidad journalist
Tony Fraser from inside Parliament and was not immediately
announced to the nation.
   Selwyn Richardson, the justice and national security minister,
said in the call that the agreement called for Robinson's immediate
resignation, with elections to be held within 90 days.
   Richardson said the government granted amnesty to rebel leader
Abu Bakr and his followers in the revolt, which has left at least
nine people dead and led to looting on this island-nation of 1.3
million residents.
   The official said, however, that the agreement was contingent
``upon the safe return of all members of Parliament'' now held
hostage.
   It was unclear when the hostage release might occur.
   The announcement came hours after government and military
spokesmen said negotiations with the radical Moslem group had
collapsed.
   Earlier Monday, security forces exchanged gunfire with the
rebels at both the parliament building and the state-run television
station, the two buildings were hostages were being held.
   Speaking from inside Parliament late Monday, Robinson said the
agreement was reached after ``very difficult bargaining.''
   The prime minister said he instructed Col. Joe Theodore, head of
the Trinidad and Tobago Defense Force, to ``make necessary
arrangements for the evacuation (of hostages and rebels) as soon as
possible.''
   Chief rebel negotiator Bilal Abdullah, speaking next on the
telephone, said: ``I wish to totally corroborate what Prime
Minister Robinson has just said.''
   The rebels claim Robinson's government is corrupt and
responsible for widespread poverty in this once oil-rich country.
They claimed on Saturday to have wired Robinson with explosives and
threatened to blow him up if a rescue attempt was made.
   Government spokesman Gregory Shaw said Robinson was shot in both
feet and Richardson was shot in one leg when rebels stormed
Parliament.
   Army spokesman Maj. Dave Williams reported that the Moslems were
armed with AK-47 assault rifles, pistols and grenades.
   In the first official casualty count, Williams said at least
nine people had died in the fighting since Friday. He said Anglican
negotiator Knolly Clarke told him additional bodies were inside the
parliament building, but it was not known how many.
   The two sides nearly reached agreement earlier Monday but a
government official said negotiations stalled over conditions for
releasing the hostages, who include eight Cabinet ministers.
   Shaw said 41 hostages were being held and about 100 rebels were
involved in the siege.
   He said 16 hostages, including the government ministers, were
being held in the parliament building. The remaining 25 hostages
are all employees of the government TV station, he said.
   Among the dead were six rebels, two police officers and one
civilian, Williams said. Six rebels were known to be wounded.
Williams said three soldiers were wounded, none seriously.
   The State Department said Monday in Washington there are no
plans for U.S. military intervention in Trinidad. Deputy spokesman
Richard Boucher refused comment on reports of U.S. military
maneuvers in the area, but suggested a military solution was ruled
out.
   Boucher said none of the estimated 6,000 Americans living in
Trinidad and neighboring Tobago were reported hurt.
   He criticized Libya's involvement, saying the radical North
African Arab nation trained Trinidadian insurgents. But he said no
apparent direct link existed between Libya and the hostage-taking
in Trinidad.
   Shaw and Williams called a news conference hours after a gun
battle between security forces and rebels at the state-run Trinidad
and Tobago Television complex.
   Williams said rebels fired on troops in an apparent attempt to
escape the TV complex. ``We were fired upon; we fired back,'' he
said. ``We won the firefight. They withdrew.''
   Three buildings in the area were set ablaze, witnesses said.
   Sporadic gunfire also broke out at the parliament building,
about a mile away, where the ministers were held. The army said no
attempt was made to storm either building.
   Army chief Col. Ralph Brown said he did not think the hostages
suffered casualties.
   Jamaica said Monday it sent 120 soldiers to neighboring Barbados
to assist Trinidad if needed.
   Bakr, a former policeman who converted to Islam in 1980, founded
Jamaat al-Muslimeen, which means the Moslem Group in Arabic, in
1984. The group is believed to number 250 to 300.
   Shaw said a 6 p.m. to noon curfew would remain in effect
islandwide despite a ``significant diminishing'' in looting, which
caused an estimated $50 million damage to downtown stores.
   In a statement read on state radio, U.S. Embassy spokeswoman
Lucy Hall urged all American tourists in Trinidad to obey the
curfew.
   Caribbean leaders gathering in Kingston, Jamaica, for a
conference added regional security to their agenda because of
Trinidad and Tobago. Heads of state and other government leaders
from the 13 member nations will open the Caribbean Economic
Community conference on Tuesday.
   Robinson easily won the 1986 parliamentary elections. Under the
constitution, the next elections don't have to be held until 1991.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
