ID: 258	RANK: 34	SCORE: 10.207804
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911226-0064
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911226-0064.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   PERSONAL TECHNOLOGY
   ----
   By Walter S. Mossberg
</HL>
<DATE>
12/26/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   AAPL IBM
</CO>
<MS>
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)
</IN>
<NS>
CONSUMER ISSUES (CSU)
</NS>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Store These Guidelines
   On Computer Shopping
</LP>
<TEXT>
   In Your Memory Banks
                                                                                                       

   SHOPPING for a personal computer can be like strolling
into a foreign street market with a fistful of dollars and no
clue to either the local language or the quality of the
merchandise.
   You'll find yourself bombarded with claims and smothered
by techno-babble -- terms like "nanoseconds" and "RAM cache"
that might as well be Greek, even to many salespeople.
   But keep your eye on the ball. Two of the most important
factors in choosing a personal computer are how much memory
is included, and how much disk storage capacity it features.
They can play a greater role in your satisfaction with your
computer than the minor differences in processing speed that
computer vendors love to play up. Last week, I explained the
core concepts of memory and disks. This week, I'll talk about
using that knowledge.
   The basic rule about memory and storage is this: Buy as
much as you can afford at first, even if it means sacrificing
other bells and whistles.
   There's nothing more frustrating than laying out thousands
of dollars for a computer and then finding you can't run new
programs or even put them on your hard disk because you're
out of room. Some modern software will suck up most of a
megabyte (the equivalent of a million typed characters) of
your memory just to load, and even some games take up four
megabytes on a hard disk. In general, software will run
faster, and with fewer crashes, if you have plenty of memory
and hard-drive space. Cutting either to the bone invites
headaches.
                                                                                                       

   MOREOVER, extra memory and added hard disk space are
relatively inexpensive parts of a PC's overall price. Once
you're putting together a configuration, an added megabyte of
memory can often be had for $50 or $60, and a 50% increase in
hard disk capacity can cost less than $200.
   Given today's hardware and software, two megabytes of
memory and an 80-megabyte hard disk drive are a bare minimum
on either a Macintosh or an IBM-compatible PC. But I'd advise
aiming for four megabytes of memory and a 100-megabyte hard
drive, especially if you're planning to run Microsoft's
Windows 3.0 software system on an IBM-compatible, or Apple's
new System 7 software on a Macintosh.
   IBM-compatible buyers should also be sure to get two
floppy drives (to handle both 5-inch and 3-inch disks), and a
computer whose memory can be expanded using easily insertable
modules called SIMMs. These modules can be bought by mail for
under $50 per megabyte of capacity. Even with extra memory
installed, IBM-compatible owners may have to delve into
manuals to make sure their computers and software can use it
properly. Incredibly, the main operating system for these
popular machines, Microsoft's MS-DOS, is still based on an
old concept that limited usable memory to just 640 kilobytes.
The latest version, version 5, strives to overcome its roots
with a special program called a memory manager to fool the
system into using more memory. But it can be tricky to get
every program to share memory smoothly.
   One way around this is to rely on the Windows program and
those application programs specifically designed to work with
it. They automatically recognize and apportion added memory.
                                                                                                       

   ALL THIS is much simpler for Macintosh owners. The Mac
uses only plug-in memory modules, its operating system
automatically recognizes all the memory present, and all Mac
software can share it. But be aware that the two
lowest-priced models, the heavily promoted Classic and
Classic II, can accept less memory than the others and come
in a sealed case that complicates memory expansion. Armed
with your new knowledge about memory, you'll find some of the
computer ads you see a bit less beguiling. Take the Zeos
International ad in a current computer magazine. It offers
for "only $1,195" a computer with "ultra high speed" memory
chips. Unfortunately, there aren't enough of them to do much
useful work on modern software.
   Indeed, this bargain Zeos comes with a paltry
half-megabyte memory and a 42-megabyte hard drive, and lacks
a floppy disk drive for the new 3-inch disks. A call to the
company finds that it costs $1,662.75 for the same unit with
four megabytes of memory, an 85-megabyte hard drive and the
3-inch floppy disk drive. (Adding a color monitor, mouse
device and Windows software brings it to over $2,000.)
   The Zeos ad isn't unique, nor is it deceptive; all the
details are plainly spelled out. And the company, which has a
reputation for both good quality and low price, offers more
complete configurations on other pages of the same magazine.
But a novice buyer might never get past the alluring $1,195
price and could wind up with plenty of heartburn.
   If you're absolutely certain you're going to run only
text-based word processors or spreadsheets on an
IBM-compatible, or simple word processors and spreadsheets on
a Mac, you can settle for a basic box with one megabyte of
memory and a 40-megabyte hard drive. If not, go for as much
capacity as possible. You won't regret it.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
