ID: 258	RANK: 66	SCORE: 7.566186
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911017-0026
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911017-0026.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   PERSONAL TECHNOLOGY
   ----
   By Walter S. Mossberg
</HL>
<DATE>
10/17/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   ADBE
</CO>
<MS>
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
SOFTWARE (SOF)
</IN>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>

   And Get the Most
   From Your Computer
                                                                                                       

</LP>
<TEXT>
   The Wall Street Journal today introduces a weekly column
aimed at helping readers make better use of personal
computers and other "personal" technologies at work and at
home. This new column will supplement the paper's existing
technology coverage by reviewing issues and products of
practical importance to readers, from the user's viewpoint.
                                                                                                       

   Personal computers are just too hard to use, and it isn't
your fault.
   The computer industry boasts that its products can help
everyone become more productive. Maybe so. But many people
can't afford the time and money needed to get the most out of
PCs.
   Sure, there are exceptions. Everyone knows a PC addict who
gives advice all around. But these wizards often spend hours
on their hobby to hone their skills. And there are those who
use a specific program like the Lotus 1-2-3 spreadsheet all
day and can make it sing. But even these people tend to
conquer only one package.
   For most people, getting the fullest use out of computer
products means training classes, books and the like. This is
an unusual phenomenon in the history of consumer technology.
There are no user groups or seminars for owners of, say,
televisions or toaster ovens.
   You can speed the learning process, but it may require a
greater initial investment. If you buy an Apple Computer
Macintosh, you'll find that powerful software can be
relatively easy to master because even complex functions are
controlled by manipulating pictures on the screen, or through
"menus" listing commands that vary little from program to
program. But the powerful Macintosh models often are costlier
than heavily discounted International Business Machines
clones.
   Some of the Macintosh's simplicity and consistency can be
obtained on IBM-compatible computers by using Microsoft
Windows, special software that lets you control the computer
using Macintosh-type screens and commands. But despite the
hype in many computer magazines, Windows runs poorly on
millions of older PCs. And it requires lots of memory and
large hard-disk drives to operate at its best, even on newer
computers.
   What about those who would like to get more out of their
computers without breaking the bank? Here's a sampling of
relatively inexpensive products that can increase
productivity by demystifying common tasks, organizing your
work or juicing up your hardware. Each is readily available
for around $100 or less at popular mail-order houses or
discount stores.
   To be sure, each of these items has good and useful
competitors. But I've found these six to be reliable and easy
to master.
                                                                                                       

   Menu Works: This versatile program for IBM-compatible
machines displays a menu whenever you turn on your computer.
The menu lists all of the programs on your hard-disk drive
and lets you run them with a single keystroke, without
forcing you to remember file names and locations. When you're
done with a program, you bounce back to the Menu Works menu,
ready to launch another or perform such tasks as locating or
copying files. Menu Works is easy to install, and it will
even scan your disk and build a menu for you. The manual is
brief and clear on how to alter menus. (PC Dynamics, $14.95.)
                                                                                                       

   XTreeGold: This program presents the entire contents of
your IBM-compatible machine's hard disk and floppy disks in
clear diagrams and lists, and then makes it easy to copy,
delete, move, rename or launch programs. The program is easy
to install and customize. It allows you to view documents,
including pictures, created by other programs. It presents
commands clearly on the screen. (XTree, $92.)
                                                                                                       

   Stacker: A software program that compresses all the files
on your IBM-compatible PC's hard disk. The result is to
effectively expand the size of your hard disk by as much as
100%. The process is complex, but you don't have to
understand it. The installation program guides you step by
step. (Stac Electronics, $99.)
                                                                                                       

   Adobe Type Manager: A small program that permits a
Macintosh or IBM-compatible PC running Windows to produce
handsome fonts made for costly, industry-standard Postscript
printers even on less expensive printers that lack Adobe's
proprietary Postscript circuitry. It operates "in the
background," meaning you don't have to enter repeated
instructions to get it to work. (Adobe Systems, $59.)
                                                                                                       

   Access PC: Another program that works in the background on
a Macintosh. This one automatically permits the current line
of Macs to read and write files directly from and to 3
1/2-inch disks formatted on IBM-compatible PCs, greatly
simplifying the exchange of data between the two kinds of
machines. All you do is put the Access PC file into a special
directory, or folder, on your hard disk, and you
automatically gain the ability to use -- and even to format
-- IBM-compatible disks. (Insignia Solutions, $62.)
                                                                                                       

   Super Boomerang: This one lets Mac users leap quickly to
their most-used folders, or directories, and summon their
most-used files from any program's standard "open" or "save"
command. The program remembers your frequently used files and
folders. It's bundled as part of a package called Now
Utilities. (Now Software, $89.)
</TEXT>
</DOC>
