ID: 258	RANK: 80	SCORE: 7.087615
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911021-0123
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911021-0123.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Technology (A Special Report)
   ---
   Notes for the Novice:
   A Guide to Buying
   Your First Computer
   ----
   By Timothy Lemmer
</HL>
<DATE>
10/21/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE R10
</SO>
<MS>
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)
</IN>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   SO YOU WANT to buy your first home computer?
   You realize, of course, that whatever you get now will
look like a stone ax in three to five years. Processor power
will continue to double every two years or so. Memory use
will rise tenfold every five years. Software will become more
powerful and easier to use. Operating systems will change.
Multimedia software . . ..
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Enough. You get the idea. But you figure you have to jump
in sometime, and you are convinced this is the time. Some
advice may help you find your way through the thicket.
                                                                                                       

   IBM vs. Apple.
                                                                                                       

   In general, the mainstream personal-computer world is
divided into IBM-compatibles and Apple Macintoshes, so this
represents your first decision.
   To understand the implications, it helps to know what an
"operating system" is. Because an application-software
package (such as a spreadsheet or word-processing program)
doesn't speak the same language as computer hardware, an
operating system has to translate. So, when people refer to a
computer as IBM-compatible, they are saying that it can run
some version of the operating system -- known as MS-DOS --
that was originally designed for International Business
Machines Corp. computers.
   The big advantage of IBM-compatibles is their numbers:
There are probably 60 million IBM-compatible personal
computers in use, about 10 times the number of Macintoshes.
Hundreds of manufacturers make IBM-compatibles; only Apple
Computer Inc. makes Macs. Because of the enormous number of
IBM-compatible PCs, thousands of vendors will offer products
and support for them for years to come, even as new standards
evolve.
   Apple Macs, on the other hand, are easy to use and easy to
set up. Users rave about their "graphical interface," which
the IBM-compatible world is trying to match. The Macs'
graphic presentation lets users navigate through or between
applications by choosing from among little pictures, or
"icons," on the screen, instead of having to type memorized
commands. Once you learn to use one Mac program, the next one
will be a snap. Moreover, the new Macs have the ability to
read files created on IBM-compatible PCs.
                                                                                                       

   What's the PC for?
                                                                                                       

   What you want to do with a PC to some extent determines
the computer you buy. In general, IBM-compatibles dominate
word processing and number crunching, while Macintoshes excel
at graphics and desktop publishing. But there is a large and
growing overlap between the two worlds. Increasingly, if you
want to do the most common things -- write letters, talk to
electronic services such as Prodigy, keep an inventory of
your assets, play games, whatever -- almost any of the
hundreds of IBM-compatible PCs or Macintosh computers will
probably do.
   You also should consider what your future needs will be.
As people master their PCs, and as more powerful software
packages come along, they find they want a more powerful
machine than they initially thought they needed. You don't
want to spend a couple of thousand dollars for a PC that you
will quickly outgrow.
   Finally, if everyone you know uses a given kind of
computer, it may be worthwhile to go with the crowd. Don't
underestimate the value of being able to share problems and
compare notes with friends.
                                                                                                       

   Think twice about laptops.
                                                                                                       

   Laptops include so-called notebook computers that weigh
about seven pounds or less and can run on batteries, and
heavier, more powerful machines that can be transported
(although not always comfortably), and need to be plugged
into an electrical outlet.
   Generally, if you are buying only one computer, avoid
laptops unless you must have a transportable computer. A
desktop PC offers more value for your money, more room for
upgrades and good-quality color monitors. Laptops also become
obsolete more quickly.
                                                                                                       

   What you can expect to pay.
                                                                                                       

   The field is hotly competitive, and now is a good time to
buy. Figure you will pay at least $1,000 for a basic,
not-too-powerful PC. An adult-strength system, with all the
software you need included, will probably run about $1,500 to
$2,500. And for $3,000 to $3,500, you can get a PC for
higher-tech tastes. Of course, you can always spend more for
extra goodies that you may or may not need.
   Try to be sure any price you are quoted includes all the
elements you want. Some ads give a great price and say
"monitor optional." A PC without a monitor is like a car
without wheels.
                                                                                                       

   What's in a PC?
                                                                                                       

   Unless you know something about the features of the PC you
plan to buy, you will be lost. Don't worry: It mainly sounds
complicated. So hang on.
   Start with the CPU, or central processing unit. Think of
the CPU as the brains of the computer. It is a computer chip
in the PC's base unit, and it is usually referred to by a
number. In ascending order of power (and cost), those numbers
are:
   The 8088, used in the original IBM PC introduced in 1981,
as well as in the subsequent IBM XT. Buying one of those
today is like buying a rotary telephone in a touch-tone
world.
   The 80286 was introduced in IBM's AT personal computer in
1984. It is a 16-bit processor, the absolute minimum for you
to consider. A bit, or binary digit, is the smallest unit of
data that computers work with. Eight bits are in a byte,
which is the amount of memory needed to store a single number
or letter. If you just want to write letters, play games, and
do simple spreadsheets, an 80286 will get you started.
   The 32-bit 80386 or the slightly less powerful 386SX
chips, vastly more powerful than the 30286 machines, will
probably give the home user the most value over time. If you
want to run multiple programs simultaneously, get the most
out of Microsoft Windows, or run heavy graphics or database
applications, you will want at least a 386SX.
   The 486, the generation after the 386s, now is the most
powerful IBM-compatible CPU, though it is overkill for home
use.
                                                                                                       

   Why you should have a hard disk.
                                                                                                       

   A hard disk, usually permanently installed inside the
computer, allows you to quickly store and retrieve data. You
can get by without a hard disk for basic computing, just as
you can shovel snow with a tablespoon, but why would you want
to? Moreover, many large programs require a hard disk to run
at all.
   Disks are measured in terms of their storage capacity --
specifically in megabytes. One megabyte equals about a
million characters. A common mistake is to buy a PC with too
small a disk. Thirty megabytes are a minimal requirement, but
60 megabytes or more are preferable. (To give you an idea of
the amount of information we're talking about, the English
text of the Bible takes up about 4.5 megabytes of disk
space.)
   Hard disks are also measured by the speed required to find
information on the disk. A speed of 60 milliseconds is slow.
An acceptable speed is about 28 milliseconds; less than 20
milliseconds is considered very fast.
                                                                                                       

   How about floppy disks?
                                                                                                       

   Floppy disks allow users to store and move data from one
computer to another. You need at least one floppy-disk drive,
to load programs and data from a floppy disk to a computer's
hard-disk drive, and vice versa. You also need it to make
backup copies of your data.
   The two common sizes of floppy disks are 5.25-inch and
3.5-inch, neither of which can be used in the other size
drive. Each size is available in high-density and low-density
standards; high-density disks can read disks of lower
density, but low-density disks can't read the high-density
variety.
   The trend is to 3.5-inch, high-density disks, but if you
work with people who use 5.25-inch drives, consider getting
one drive of each size. Laptops use 3.5-inch drives. Expect
to pay up to $100 to have a second floppy drive installed.
                                                                                                       

   What is all the talk about RAMs?
                                                                                                       

   RAM -- or Random Access Memory -- is the computer's work
area, where programs and data are temporarily stored when in
use. If you don't have enough RAM memory, some programs won't
run at all. Others will run -- but slowly. That happens
because without enough RAM to work with, your computer may
have to repeatedly store and retrieve information on the
relatively slow hard disk.
   The amount of RAM you need depends on what you want to do.
The minimum for low-end PCs used to be 640,000 bytes, or
640K. But these days, one megabyte (one million bytes) is
considered a minimum, even though not all software is able to
take advantage of that much RAM.
   Programs are getting bigger, requiring more RAM. If you
want to run Microsoft Windows 3.0, for instance, you can get
by with two megabytes of RAM, but you might wish you had four
megabytes.
   RAM chips also vary in speed from the creaking 120
nanoseconds (120 billionths of a second) of a few years ago
to 60 nanoseconds or better today. The speed of the RAM chips
must be compatible with the speed of your system.
                                                                                                       

   Color monitors vs. monochrome.
                                                                                                       

   Systems with color monitors generally cost a few hundred
dollars more than those with monochrome monitors. But color
is more fun to look at, especially if you or your children
ever plan to play games on your PC. Color also can convey
information at a glance that your eyes would hunt for on a
monochrome screen.
   The quality of your monitor depends, among other things,
on the number of "pixels," or dots, that make up the image.
The more pixels, the sharper the image. For instance, a
so-called VGA monitor provides 640 pixels horizontally and
480 vertically. VGA is now the most common standard for
monitors, though 800x600 and 1,024x768 are available in
higher-end systems.
                                                                                                       

   Putting it on paper.
                                                                                                       

   You very likely will want to print information your
computer generates. At the low end, for about $300, you can
get a reasonable 24-pin dot-matrix printer. (These printers
use various numbers of pins to strike a ribbon; the more
pins, the higher the resolution. Twenty-four pins is at the
high end; nine is at the low end.)
   The next step up is an inkjet printer such as
Hewlett-Packard Co.'s Deskjet, which sells for about $500.
High-quality laser printers are available for as little as
$650, but most cost about $1,000. Be sure the toner cartridge
is included in the price, as the printer won't work without
it. You will also need a printer cable ($5-$30) to connect
the printer to the PC.
                                                                                                       

   Calling the outside world.
                                                                                                       

   You will need a modem and communications software if you
want to dial such telephone services as bulletin boards,
electronic-mail providers and information data bases, or if
you want to talk to other computers. Modems, which typically
come with adequate communications software, are rated
according to their speed in so-called baud, or the number of
bits per second they can transmit. A capacity of 2,400 baud
is reasonable for most home computing these days. Some PCs
come with modems, some of which can be used to send faxes.
You can use the phone line you already have for your PC.
                                                                                                       

   If you're into games . . .
                                                                                                       

   A joystick and a game port to plug it into are essential.
                                                                                                       

   Packages may make sense.
                                                                                                       

   If the mere thought of computers sends chills down your
spine, you might consider buying a ready-to-use computer
package. Any one of several IBM-compatibles can simply be
plugged in and turned on. Even the software is preloaded. If
you know which end of a screwdriver goes in the screw, you
can probably do this.
   The IBM PS/1, available in 386SX or 80286 processor
versions, comes with Microsoft Works, an integrated software
package with a word processor, spreadsheet, communications
software, data base, and tutorial. A PS/1 386SX C42 with a
VGA color monitor, modem and 40 megabyte hard disk costs
about $1,400; the B82 version costs about $1,900 and offers
an 80 megabyte hard disk and includes Microsoft Windows.
Computer pros insist that if a person can't get this up and
running in 30 minutes, they should sell their car and buy a
horse. (But then, these are guys who could build a car out of
a horse.)
   Tandy Corp.'s 1000 RLX, also with a 80286 processor, comes
with Tandy's general-purpose software, plus programs geared
to such household tasks as making shopping lists and storing
recipes. It has built-in game ports and gives special
attention to sound, but offers little room for expansion.
   Packard Bell Electronics Inc. also offers preloaded PCs,
but with a wider choice of processors and base units than the
PS/1 or 1000 RLX. The company's 386SX with a 40 megabyte hard
disk, one megabyte of RAM, two floppy disk drives, a
2400-baud modem, a reasonable color monitor and graphical
interface that includes several software packages is
available for as little as $1,400.
                                                                                                       

   What about the Macintosh world?
                                                                                                       

   The basic Mac Classic can be obtained for about $850 with
one megabyte of RAM and no hard disk. With two megabytes of
RAM and a 40 megabyte hard disk it costs about $1,200. This
is a monochrome-only unit with a small but very sharp screen.
   The Macintosh LC is the cheapest color Mac. For about
$1,650 you can get one with two megabytes of RAM and a 40
megabyte hard disk. The color monitor is an additional $350
or so. For $199 you can add a card that will let your LC run
the 10,000 applications written for the six million or so
Apple IIs still widely used in schools.
   A Macintosh IIci is for the power user. With eight
megabytes of RAM, a 105 megabyte hard disk, color monitor,
and deluxe keyboard, it is marketed for about $3,700.
                                                                                                       

   Where to buy a PC.
                                                                                                       

   Basic PCs have become a commodity. You can now buy them in
consumer-electronics and department stores, as well as from
traditional computer stores, mail-order firms and computer
warehouses.
   The trend for traditional computer stores is to offer
high-end systems to businesses, to become more like mass
marketers specializing in PCs, or to go out of business.
Service from traditional stores varies a great deal.
Preconfigured systems supported directly by the manufacturer
allow stores without a trained sales staff to sell fairly
powerful PCs. Manufacturers have responded by beefing up
their phone-support staffs and by providing integrated
systems that are easier for the novice to use.
                                                                                                       

   What about mail-order purchases?
                                                                                                       

   Nearly 20% of home PCs are bought through a mail-order
firm. Computer makers such as CompuAdd Corp., Dell Computer
Corp., Gateway 2000 Inc., Northgate Computer Systems Inc.,
Zeos International Ltd. and many others are prospering in a
fiercely competitive market because they offer good value and
after-sales support. Some mail-order firms are starting to
offer preloaded application-software packages. If the vendor
you are considering doesn't offer the software you want, they
may talk you through loading any software you buy on your
own.
                                                                                                       

   If you have a problem . . .
                                                                                                       

   The approach to user support -- whom you call if you have
a question or a problem -- is changing. The support often is
being provided directly by the manufacturer rather than the
vendor. You should expect a year's guarantee on parts and at
least 90 days for parts and labor. Many mail-order firms
offer unconditional 30-day moneyback guarantees. Phone
support should be free. Be sure you know whether you will
have to bring your malfunctioning PC to a store or mail it
somewhere, or if someone will come to your home to pick it up
or fix it. If you paid for your PC with a credit card, you
may have additional warranty coverage through the card.
                                                                                                       

   Some other tips.
                                                                                                       

   Don't put your new PC and printer on a card table. Put
them on something sturdy, preferably with a way to vary the
height of the keyboard for the comfort of different users.
   A line filter-surge suppressor to protect your equipment
from "spikes" in your electrical power supply is cheap
insurance. Laser printers draw as much power as photo
copiers; the Hewlett Packard III, for instance, can draw up
to eight amps. Your color monitor draws as much power as a
color TV. Be sure your wiring is up to this, and always use
grounded outlets for computer equipment. Register your
equipment and software with the manufacturer, and record the
model and serial numbers. And save your receipts for when
everything goes wrong.
   ---
   Mr. Lemmer is senior news systems analyst for The Wall
Street Journal in New York.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
