ID: 98	RANK: 16	SCORE: 14.242841

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-9398 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu080_y_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-080 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  6 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Montenegro </F>
<H3> <TI>   Prime Minister Djukanovic Meets With Bankers </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Prime Minister Djukanovic Meets With Bankers </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0254B Belgrade POLITIKA in Serbo-Croatian 6 Apr 94 p 9 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0254B </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade POLITIKA </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by D. Becirovic: "Private Operators Are Ruining the </F>
Dinar"] 
  [Text] Podgorica, 5 Apr -- Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo 
Djukanovic today invited bankers to Podgorica for a discussion 
of what is happening to the money supply, saying that disturbing 
problems have been arising in recent days after the favorable 
results in the first stage of stabilizing the monetary system. 
According to Djukanovic, these problems require urgent measures. 
He mentioned scalping, of which he said that the "participant 
banks" are not the only ones. Montenegrin Deputy Prime Minister 
Krunoslav Vukcevic asked the bankers to present their view of 
how the currency exchange business operates. He presented 
figures to the effect that by 4 April Montenegrin banks had 
purchased 13.2 million German marks [DM]. When the sale of 
foreign exchange is taken into account, there was a positive 
result of about DM12 million. In view of the fact that the 
result for the entire country is DM300 million, the share of 
Montenegrin banking is not really at an enviable level in that 
amount. He also pointed to the phenomenon of scalping. Petar 
Vujovic, director of the Montenegrin branch of the National 
Bank, mentioned other figures, saying that the purchases of 
foreign exchange in Montenegro amounted to about DM26 million, 
but that banks in Montenegro headquartered in Serbia are not 
turning over their entire purchases to the Montenegrin branch of 
the National Bank of Yugoslavia. 
  "When we asked the Beobanka office about the purchases of 
foreign exchange, they told us that headquarters gave out the 
figures. Later they told us that they were not prohibited from 
giving out figures, but they could not provide them," Vujovic 
said. 
  Radmila Kalezic, Jugobanka manager in Podgorica, stated 
categorically that her bank was not engaging in scalping. She 
said that the purchasing of foreign exchange had been good up 
until 10 days ago, but since that time things had changed, and 
her bank had a deficit of DM397,000 in sales and purchases of 
foreign exchange. 
  "The tellers noticed that the same people are coming to buy 
foreign exchange again and again in the course of the day. Those 
who earlier purchased it on the street have now moved to the 
banks. It seems that private operators are not promptly turning 
in their cash receipts for the day," Kalezic said, calling for 
the government to monitor strictly the cash flow of private 
firms. 
  Milorad Lakovic, director of Pljevaljska Bank, was also 
categorical about the private operators. He said that the 
dealers are working for the private operators and that the black 
market is already beginning to operate, and Cetkovic, the 
director of Jugobanka in Herceg-Novi, presented the figure that 
until a few days ago the ratio in the purchase and sale of 
foreign exchange was 4:1 to the advantage of the bank, but now 
that ratio is even. He said that the private sector is probably 
engaged in purchasing from farmers, so that the movement of the 
money is not being monitored, and certain new people are coming 
to bank windows and doing so several times a day. The bankers in 
Kotor say that a check should be run on how people with a 
monthly salary of no more than 100 dinars can come several times 
a day and present 100 dinars to buy marks. When bank personnel 
notice this and offer another currency instead of marks, these 
people call for the assistance of the financial police, and the 
officials must then pay them. 
  It is obvious that scalping and the dealers are slowly 
becoming reality once again. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
