ID: 98	RANK: 34	SCORE: 12.587195

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31367 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu111_y_94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-111 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Montenegro </F>
<H3> <TI>   Republic's Economy Reportedly Nearing Collapse </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Republic's Economy Reportedly Nearing Collapse </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0296A Belgrade NIN in Serbo-Croatian 13 May 94 p 26 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0296A </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade NIN </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Dragan Djuric: "False Hopes"] </F>
  [Text] They have already begun to beat the band about the 
success of the second phase of the Avramovic 
program--invigoration of production. The key argument used is 
the figure of no less than a 21.3-percent increase in Yugoslav 
output between February and March. 
  In Montenegro, however, the "first successful results" are 
proving to be a pure illusion. That is, whereas in Serbia the 
March level of output really was 22.6 percent higher than in 
February, the Montenegrin economy is continuing to record a drop 
of about 6.5 percent. 
  The program for the country's monetary reform and economic 
recovery, recalls Miodrag Causevic, vice president of the 
Montenegrin Chamber of Commerce, was commissioned as a project 
by the Serbian Government and the president of the Republic of 
Serbia, and only later, on grounds that it was the best of all 
the stabilization programs that have been requested, was it 
submitted to the federal government and almost thrust upon it. 
Even Prime Minister Kontic did not immediately accept it with 
open arms, while the Montenegrin Government, Causevic recalls, 
made a number of objections, suggestions, and warnings. On the 
so-called team of some 40 experts headed by Dr. Avramovic, there 
was only one man from Montenegro--Dr. Janko Radulovic, secretary 
of the republic Secretariat for Development. The objections of 
the Government of Montenegro pertained above all to the need to 
respect specific structural needs and interests of the 
Montenegrin economy, which had no place in the Avramovic 
program. In that connection, they particularly accentuated the 
problems of the maritime industry and tourism. 
  "The main reasons why the Montenegrin economy has not felt 
more essentially the favorable aspects of the functioning of the 
Avramovic program up to this point," Causevic says, "lie in its 
more pronounced dependence on exports and the dominant role of 
the heavy industrial sectors." 
  The best example of the impotence of any measures of an 
internal nature is offered by the situation in maritime 
shipping. In the best of times, this industry brought Montenegro 
about one-fifth of its total inflow of foreign exchange. Its 
importance to this republic can also be seen from the fact that 
if Montenegro were viewed as an independent state, it would be 
the strongest maritime power in the world if the size of its 
maritime fleet were compared to the size of the country! Today, 
its fleet of 38 vessels, with a total capacity of almost 1 
million metric tons, is tied up and captive, with immense daily 
costs, which are becoming more and more difficult to cover. 
  Radomir Mugosa, secretary of the general association of the 
maritime industry in the Montenegrin Chamber of Commerce, points 
out that two companies--Jugooceania of Kotor and Prekookeanska 
plovidba of Bar--although before adoption of Resolution No. 820 
they were registered under a foreign flag, were literally caught 
in the mousetrap of the sanctions. Not a single vessel is 
sailing, some have been anchored by the banks as a guarantee for 
collection of debts, others are tied up at the dock under the 
pressure of the sanctions, while almost half of the fleet "hid" 
in China, which it dares not leave. 
  Last year, these companies had to sell four vessels in order 
to cover current costs. At the same time, the empty docks in the 
port of Bar, with a capacity for handling almost five million 
tons of cargo a year, and the shipyards in Bijela, which can 
repair about 100 vessels a year, are gloomy. One part of the 
port has been taken over by the fleet of the Yugoslav Navy, and 
the launches with which the Italians are carrying on a smuggling 
operation (mainly tobacco) with Montenegro are repaired from 
time to time in the shipyard. And that is all. 
  There is no chance at all, Mugosa explains, for this branch 
of the economy, which has immense importance to Montenegro, to 
get on its feet unless the sanctions are removed. 
  The electric power industry, which has a share of 22 percent 
in total Montenegrin output, coal production, which accounts for 
15 percent of output, and ferrous and nonferrous metallurgy, 
that is, the Niksic Steel Mill and the Podgorica Aluminum 
Combine, whose share is greater than 20 percent, are also 
suffering great troubles. In the Montenegrin Chamber of 
Commerce, they point out that the Avramovic program helps these 
industries only indirectly and that some growth of production 
might be expected only if small alternative production programs 
are started, using unsuccessful capacity that already exists. 
  The Podgorica Aluminum Combine, for example, has managed to 
maintain production at about 40 percent of capacity, while at 
the heart of the combine, the electrolysis operation is 
operating at only one-fifth of capacity. The value of the 
aluminum produced and held in inventory is estimated at about 
$100 million. The need for alkalies, resins, and petroleum coke 
(all imported) is so great that it is almost impossible to 
obtain them through the usual smuggling channels. What is more, 
there is also some doubt about obtaining alumina from Zvornik 
the because of exceptional increase in shipping costs since 
adoption of the new dinar. If we include in this survey Obod of 
Cetinje, which is operating at about 15 percent of capacity and 
importing all of 70 percent of components for production, then 
we get a clearer idea of what it means to say "dependence of the 
economy on imports," and therefore the significance of isolation. 
  Increasingly frequent charges are also coming from the 
largest Montenegrin firm to the effect that instead of 
cooperation in carrying out programs for economic recovery, they 
are encountering disloyal competition on the part of firms in 
Serbia. For instance, at the Niksic Steel Mill they say that 
firms from Serbia are importing more and more steel on the basis 
of various compensation deals, although the Niksic collective 
has on inventory more than 13,000 tons of various types of 
quality steels. At the same time, scrap iron is being exported 
from Serbia more and more, although Niksic is shutting down more 
and more frequently and for longer and longer periods of time. 
  Anton Kastrati, director of the salt plant at Ulcinj, 
explicitly accuses Serbia of importing 50,000 tons of salt in 
violation of a contract and thus jeopardizing this year's salt 
production. And the warehouses are full. 
  At Jugopetrol in Kotor they also have objections. It is 
extremely difficult to obtain fuel abroad, and it is not 
uncommon for it to cost sixfold more than it would have 
otherwise. Customs duties are added to that, so that intolerably 
high fuel costs are being imposed on the economy. It is as 
though Yugoslav sources of petroleum do not exist for 
Montenegro. Recently, none other than Prime Minister Milo 
Djukanovic said that Montenegro was not getting even a drop from 
domestic production. 
  All in all, the Montenegrin economy is on its knees. For 
years now, its production has been dropping faster and faster 
and farther and farther. If the 1992 level of output is taken as 
the basis of comparison, then what was achieved in the 
relatively peaceful year of prewar 1989 would stand at 76, and 
last year's results at minus 60. The level of output at the 
moment, compared to March of last year, which was disastrous, is 
down about 20 percent. To be sure, the statistics show that some 
industries with a total share of less than some 10 percent in 
output have nevertheless come to life. 
  In spite of Avramovic's optimism, the Montenegrins are 
worried about how to keep production from dying altogether. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
