ID: 98	RANK: 36	SCORE: 11.925390

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-9295 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu079_y_94011" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-079 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  18 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Montenegro </F>
<H3> <TI>   Idea of Montenegro-Herzegovina Union Attacked </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Idea of Montenegro-Herzegovina Union Attacked </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0233A Podgorica MONITOR in Serbo-Croatian 18 Mar 94 p 8 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0233A </F>
<F P=104>  Podgorica MONITOR </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Slavko Perovic, president of the Liberal </F>
Alliance of Montenegro, by Marko Vukovic; place and date not 
given: "Anschluss of Montenegro to Herzegovina"] 
  [Text] Momir Bulatovic, president of the republic, 
furnished the topic for the interview of the president of the 
Liberal Alliance [LSCG] when he hinted at a union of Montenegro 
with Herzegovina. The increasingly frequent demands to ban the 
LSCG and SDP [Social Democratic Party] [as published] made by 
certain members of assemblies of northern Montenegrin opstinas 
were of equal interest. 
  [Vukovic] What would union with Herzegovina mean for 
Montenegro in the sense of its status as a state and to 
Montenegrins from the nationality standpoint? 
  [Perovic] It is not a question of any union with 
Herzegovina. 
It is a question of annexation or, if you like, Anschluss, of 
Montenegro to Herzegovina, so that Montenegro would forever, 
according to the conception of the Serbian expansionists, be 
part and parcel of the future maxi, midi, or mini Serbia. So, 
Montenegro must at any price be included in Serbia. Because of 
its coast from the geostrategic standpoint, because of its 
history, which, using the formula of the Montenegrins as the 
purest Serbs, as a people of Serbian origin, and so on, rounds 
out, according to the Serbs, the overwhelming truth not only of 
the five centuries of enslavement, but also, as far as the 
church is concerned, of collaboration with the Turks. When 
things are taken to their ultimate consequences, we learn that 
Montenegro is the backbone, but also the Achilles heel, of the 
Serbian expansionist project. Nikolaj Velimirovic put it this 
way: "Serbism without Montenegro is like a body without bones." 
So, following a de facto annexation, the Montenegrins would very 
quickly be presented a demand to become Serbs, since, as 
President Bulatovic threatened with the authority of his 
authoritarian state, the Montenegrins are of Serb origin, so 
that it is truly illogical, when they are of Serb origin, for 
them not to be Serbs today, but Montenegrins, a Comintern 
nationality invented somewhere else. In any case, when it 
becomes part of Herzegovina, a major change occurs in the ethnic 
structure to the advantage of Serbs, who will then vote for 
regionalization of the future unitary Serbian state, in which 
nothing would be left of Montenegro but the folklore. So, this 
is a betrayal of the national interests of Montenegro.... 
  [Vukovic] One gets the impression that the development of 
events in Bosnia, I am referring above all to the U.S. 
initiative to create a Muslim-Croat federation, which would then 
enter into a confederation with the Republic of Croatia, could 
favor the suggested integration. 
  [Perovic] It is my impression that the Americans and 
Russians 
have taken over Bosnian territory. The Russian side, make no 
mistake about it, is cooperating with the Americans. It is 
merely helping Milosevic and Karadzic to celebrate every defeat 
they experience, in keeping with Serbian tradition. The entire 
world saw Karadzic's celebration after withdrawal under the NATO 
threat. And it is clear on this occasion that if Yeltsin had not 
made the request, Karadzic and Mladic would have given NATO a 
kick in the rear. It is my belief that Bosnia will be buttoned 
up, that the confederation will turn out to have been only a 
lure to join the negotiations. I am convinced that Bulatovic 
"fired off" Herzegovina only in order to throw out a new bone 
for this unhappy people to gnaw on, a trick to make it forget 
the fact that it is imprisoned and that this was done to it by 
the Montenegrin-Herzegovinian-Serbian separatists, who have made 
of it their own reservation on which, so they hope, they will be 
the chiefs for a long time yet.... 
  [Vukovic] Many refer to Mr. Bulatovic's statement as an open 
claim to territory of neighboring Bosnia and Herzegovina, which 
has been internationally recognized. How do you assess the 
effect of that act on the attitude of the international 
community towards Montenegro? 
  [Perovic] The idea of union with Herzegovina has the 
additional goal of destroying any thought of any Montenegrin 
position in foreign policy. Bulatovic's move subjects Montenegro 
to a defeat and mockery in the international arena and will 
contribute to its being globally satanized once again. This is 
all being done intentionally in order to destroy Montenegro. The 
result is the same as achieved at one time by Prevlaka, then 
Dubrovnik, then Zhirinovsky.... This question should be put to 
Montenegro's foreign minister, since the ministry still has not 
spoken out, which might be interpreted as support for the views 
of Bulatovic and Djukanovic; otherwise, the moral thing to do is 
resign. 
  [Vukovic] Do you believe the idea of creating the Republic 
of 
Montenegro and Herzegovina, as they say it would be called, was 
conceived in the head of President Bulatovic? 
  [Perovic] Bulatovic and Vucurovic are excellent friends, and 
they are both entirely devoted to Slobodan. It is clear than an 
idea like this could not have been conceived in the heads of 
those two, since they are not here to create, but to execute. 
The idea is Belgrade's, the execution is Podgorica's, just as 
January 1989 established. If things take that course, the idea 
is strategic in the sense that Montenegro is killed off for good 
within the framework of some alliance of Serbian states, 
countries, cantons, or whatever they might be. 
  [Vukovic] How would the LSCG react if a referendum were 
called for unification of Montenegro with Herzegovina? 
  [Perovic] That referendum, if it should come about, will be 
carried out under the same conditions as the recent referendum 
on annexation of Montenegro to Serbia. We boycotted that 
referendum, we would boycott this one as well. 
  [Vukovic] What impact would that event have on interethnic 
relations in the republic? 
  [Perovic] It would heat them to the glowing point. There 
would be no place in this state for Montenegrins, Muslims, 
Albanians, and the few Croats who have remained in Montenegro. 
At the same time, I think that the Montenegrins would be in the 
worst position, since the other groupings would be protected by 
the international community, but it will not protect us, since, 
as Bulatovic says, we are of Serb origin, that is, Serbs. In 
that scenario even the Serbs in the People's Party will be 
undesirable, since the entire project was conceived as an act of 
destroying Montenegro's statehood, so that the question of the 
sea would be solved for the Serbian side once and for all. The 
existence of a state bothers them, since that is the means by 
which the sea is kept out of their complete control, regardless 
of whether it is a Serbian or Montenegrin state. And that is the 
only reason why Seselj and his office were set up in Montenegro 
and that is why even Kilibarda is a traitor from their 
standpoint. 
  [Vukovic] Now that we have touched upon the topic of 
interethnic relations, which it seems have been additionally 
strained by the arrests of the leaders of the SDA [Democratic 
Action Party], we should note that there have been more frequent 
demands to ban the LSCG and the SDA! 
  [Perovic] We are precise in our views, and they expose the 
Serbian expansionist project, which ultimately, or even above 
all, is disastrous for the Serbian people itself. We get in the 
way, since we are a party of the authentic liberal democratic 
option, that is, of the civil option; we further our objectives 
exclusively by democratic means, which even the world at large 
has recognized through my foreign political contacts, and has 
supported us in this. That is why we are an embarrassing 
opponent, that is why they need to ban us, not only because of 
our objective, an independent Montenegro, but because of the 
truth that we convey and communicate unashamedly. All the 
groupings in Montenegro have been armed by the government -- 
either directly or under its tranquil eye. Those who were naive 
took the weapons, not realizing that weapons could not solve 
anything, since this is not 1784, but 1994. Those weapons have 
turned into a trap for those who accepted them, and the 
government will take advantage of this regardless of the 
religious, ethnic or other allegiance of those who possess them, 
since political accounts are settled with arrests like the 
arrest of the SDA, using the form of protecting the public 
order. Someone decided the Muslims need to be intimidated once 
again, perhaps pushed once again in the direction of Bulatovic, 
who mentioned them in such mellifluous terms at the recent 
congress of the DPS [Democratic Party of Socialists]. Perhaps an 
election is being prepared. Who knows what they are up to. I 
have information that something is being prepared for us and for 
me in particular. One would say that it is our turn. But, 
whatever happens, we are ready for him! 
  [Vukovic] Along with the "spontaneous" demands to ban the 
LSCG, an attempt is being made to cast your party in the image 
of a terrorist organization. To that end the Montenegrin 
ministry of internal affairs has been showing a surprising 
propensity toward graphomania. 
  [Perovic] The Montenegrin public is aware of all the 
government's efforts to satanize the LSCG. This has had a 
definite impact with a certain number of people. But we have 
managed to achieve the opposite result with an immense number of 
people. We were not taken in by the provocations, by the plants, 
by the offers of posts in the government, by the threats, nor 
will we be. We are aware that we are being infiltrated by 
"spies," by agents provocateurs, that at some point an agent 
provocateur will be activated to portray us in the light they 
want. We know that, we see them, it is all right. That is their 
technology for holding onto power, but nothing will stop us, 
nothing.... 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
