ID: 98	RANK: 49	SCORE: 10.936223

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-9297 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu079_y_94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-079 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> YUGOSLAVIA </F>
<F P=101> Montenegro </F>
<H3> <TI>   Government, Police Said Tapping Telephones </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Government, Police Said Tapping Telephones </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0233C Podgorica MONITOR in Serbo-Croatian 11 Mar 94 p 8 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0233C </F>
<F P=104>  Podgorica MONITOR </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Seki Radoncic: "Into the Minister's Ear"] </F>
  [Text] The fear citizens of Montenegro have of having their 
phones tapped is a legacy of the communist times, but also a 
consequence of this government's loose use of the word "traitor" 
for those who do not share its political opinions. Finally, an 
important reason for suspicion arises from the fact that only 
the Montenegrin police in all of Europe are not subject to the 
oversight of a multiparty parliament. 
  It is the public's general belief that eavesdropping is done 
on a large scale, says Slobodan Franovic, justice secretary of 
the executive board of the LSCG [Liberal Alliance of 
Montenegro]. "It is not our view that certain agencies that 
exist in all states should not take advantage of certain methods 
which represent some departure from certain principles of human 
rights, such as the principles of secrecy of the mail or 
inviolability of other means of communication between 
individuals. However, this must conform to the standards that 
prevail in the world." 
  The Liberal Alliance has announced "that it will take the 
initiative for evaluation of the constitutionality of the Law on 
Internal Affairs, that is, of Article 23, under which the 
minister of police can order the SDB [state security service] to 
take steps that depart from the inviolability of the mail and 
allow eavesdropping." 
  The Constitution of Montenegro, Franovic says, provides that 
this can be done only on the basis of a court order. However, 
the present Law on Internal Affairs allows this on the basis of 
a decision of the minister of internal affairs. So, we want the 
court to evaluate this and issue a decision, that is, to 
establish civilian control over the work of the police. We will 
soon file a petition with the Constitutional Court as to whether 
one provision of the Law on Internal Affairs conforms to the 
provision of the constitution. Specifically, concerning the 
procedure whereby the constitution allows departure from the 
principle of inviolability of the mail and other communications. 
"I personally believe," Franovic says, "since this is more than 
obvious, that the Constitutional Court will find that this 
provision of the Law on Internal Affairs does not conform to the 
constitution." 
<H5>  Eavesdropping on Telephone Conversations </H5>
  The PTT does not resist when the police monitor telephone 
conversations. In all the post offices in Montenegro, that is, 
there are separate rooms through which subscriber cables pass, 
where eavesdropping devices and telephone recording devices have 
been installed; post office employees are not allowed to enter 
except in special cases. 
  Aware of this kind of collaboration between the police and 
the post office, the former Democratic Party [DS] filed a 
criminal charge back in 1990 against several persons because of 
warranted suspicion they committed the crime of unauthorized 
eavesdropping and recording. 
  The basic public prosecutor's office responded to the 
complaint of the Democratic Party in mid-1991 by confirming that 
"in 26 PTT offices in Montenegro there are in fact rooms with 
what are called `cable taps' in which is possible to monitor and 
record other people's telephone conversations." However, it also 
informed the plaintiff that it found no legal basis for 
undertaking criminal prosecution of the "suspects." 
  It is of interest that the basic public prosecutor's office 
said at the time "that the powers of the republic secretary (now 
minister) of police under Article 24 of the Law on Internal 
Affairs are too vague...." 
  The prosecutor's office also observed the following: The 
summary definition of this authority, as represented in the law, 
affords an opportunity for arbitrariness and willfulness on the 
part of the agency of the state and an erroneous assessment of 
the existence of grounds for invoking the authority. In the 
judgment of the basic public prosecutor's office, this is 
incompatible with basic civil rights.... 
  The basic public prosecutor's office promised at that time 
that it would initiate amendment of the legislation in effect in 
the Montenegrin Assembly. However, that never went beyond an 
empty promise. 
<H5>  Bugging Facilities </H5>
  In the meantime the police have made technical advances, and 
now conversations in Kolasin, Cetinje, and Danilovgrad can be 
monitored from Podgorica, conversations in Kotor and Tivat from 
Herceg-Novi, and conversations in Zabljak from Pljevlja. 
  In addition to eavesdropping on telephone conversations, the 
police frequently eavesdrop on conversations in facilities they 
have bugged. The bugging of facilities (offices, apartments, 
houses...) is done by installing highly sensitive microphones in 
the walls (especially under wallpaper), light fixtures, pieces 
of furniture, or anywhere the police imagination can think of. 
The bugging of a facility may be temporary or permanent, again 
depending on the police assessment. This method has one 
technical deficiency. That is, the place where the conversations 
are taped and recorded must not be very far from the place that 
is bugged. For example, if a person "subject to operational 
scrutiny" goes to a hotel, then through collaboration between 
the police and the desk clerk, he is sent to a room that is 
permanently bugged. Usually between eight and 10 rooms are 
bugged in the larger hotels. One of the hotel rooms is always 
"at the service" of the police, and that is the location of the 
"operative" who listens in and tapes conversations of the person 
or persons in whom the police are interested. 
  Policemen, depending on the need, also know how to install a 
hidden camera. They may use three methods at the same time: 
monitoring the telephone conversations, bugging the rooms, and 
tailing. The bugging of a room is defeated most easily by 
turning on the radio or TV, and turning on a water faucet has 
also proved an effective means of defense. 
  In any case, all the observations of the police, reports, 
taped conversations, and so on are coded separately and put in 
the same file. The first and last name of the "suspect" are 
never used as the code. So, the person, the facility, and the 
measure (eavesdropping or tailing), the action, and the file 
itself are given separate codes. 
  The Montenegrin SDB also monitors and records telephone 
conversations on behalf of the KOS [counterintelligence 
service]. Although by law the KOS, our sources say, is required 
to file a request, order and decision of the Montenegrin MUP 
[Ministry of Internal Affairs] for such "services," 
eavesdropping is done on no more basis than a verbal agreement 
between the heads of these two agencies. 
  The equipment which the Montenegrin MUP has for monitoring 
telephone conversations is nevertheless not quite as good as 
what the Serbian MUP has. That is, the Serbian SDB has the 
"5001" system, which is the most up-to-date and was purchased 
from the French, Germans, and English. This system allows 50 
telephones to be monitored from a single point. The system also 
allows computer monitoring of a particular subscriber in that it 
prints out data on all the numbers called. This system can also 
block a large number of telephone lines at the same time, 
normally if the "security people" judge that certain people 
should be prevented from contacting one another by telephone. A 
journalist of POLITIKA has expressed the opinion that "whoever 
has this equipment in his hands has control of the country." 
<H5>  Who Is Monitored? </H5>
  The Montenegrin police regularly follow all the major fairs 
of police equipment in the world. MONITOR has learned that Bosko 
Bojovic, who heads the Montenegrin SDB, attended the world's 
fair of police equipment, technology, and weapons two months ago 
in Paris. He was accompanied by a well-known Podgorica 
businessman, which could suggest that soon even "our" MUP will 
be technically upgraded. As is natural, the price of this police 
equipment will be paid for by the citizens of Montenegro, and 
many will thus be financing eavesdropping on their own 
conversations. 
  For someone to be monitored, there must be warranted 
suspicion of his extremist activity, an activity aimed at 
bringing down the order established by the Constitution. 
Although they cannot be put in that group, Nikola Samardzic, 
former foreign minister, and then Blagoje Lucic, current federal 
minister, as well as Branko Abramovic, former agriculture 
minister in the Montenegrin Government, have been monitored, our 
sources say. 
  If it is true that current ministers have been unlawfully 
monitored, then this greatly strengthens the suspicion that 
certain opposition leaders are monitored in Montenegro. For that 
matter, it has already been leaked to the public that Slavko 
Perovic, leader of the LSCG, has been bugged and that this 
operation was allegedly done by the police under the code 
"Godfather." It is no secret at all that the eavesdropping on 
certain opposition politicians is spoken about openly in the 
other opposition parties. But what is the eavesdropping on 
opposition leaders compared to the bugging of Dobrica Cosic, 
whom the Serbian SDB "bugged," according to the press, while he 
was president of the FRY [Federal Republic of Yugoslavia]? 
  For the present there is no hard evidence that the police 
are 
monitoring the telephone conversations of party leaders in 
Montenegro. Provided, of course, the arrested leaders of the SDA 
[Democratic Action Party] are excluded. However, MUP personnel 
who work in the "ear department," we have learned, have their 
hands full of work and every morning put envelopes containing 
recorded conversations on the desk of Bosko Bojevic. He then 
informs Nikola Pejakovic, minister of internal affairs, about 
the content of the conversations and other knowledge generated 
by the operations. 
  The minister of police, our sources say, reports all the 
more 
sensitive and major operations of the MUP (which include the 
monitoring of important persons) to Momir Bulatovic, president 
of Montenegro, Mile Djukanovic, prime minister, and of course 
Zoran Zizic, the inevitable deputy prime minister responsible 
for monitoring the operation of the police. Since Montenegro is 
the only state in Europe that does not have a parliamentary body 
to oversee the work of the police, it is a closed circle. 
  The police were supposedly depoliticized back in 1989. We 
have had a chance to see what this looks like in practice by 
watching the TV screen when the camera showed the 
"depoliticized" chief of the Montenegrin SDB, Bosko Bojevic, 
attending a closed party congress of the incumbent party. 
Strange that he should not have attended the open congresses of 
the People's Party or the Liberals. Or perhaps he knew in 
advance what they would be saying and adopting there, and he did 
not want to waste his time? 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
