ID: 98	RANK: 51	SCORE: 10.894826

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-32039 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu118_k_94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-118 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> CROATIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Montenegro Returns Some `Looted' Goods </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Montenegro Returns Some `Looted' Goods </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94BA0318D Zagreb VJESNIK in Serbo-Croatian 3 Jun 94 p 11 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0318D </F>
<F P=104>  Zagreb VJESNIK </F>
<F P=105>  Serbo-Croatian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Branko Vojicic: "Montenegro and `War Booty': </F>
Plunder of Looted Croatian Riches"] 
  [Text] Podgorica--The Montenegrin public has still not been 
told that Montenegro has returned part of its plundered "war 
booty"--paintings and drawings that the former JNA [Yugoslav 
People's Army], in its famous "liberation" raid on Dubrovnik, 
"captured" at the summer house of renowned painter Milovan 
Stanic in Mali Zaton. Specifically, since there was not a single 
representative of the Montenegrin "fourth estate" present at the 
transfer of the paintings and drawings, the local media have 
remained mute and the public has been short-changed for the 
umpteenth time concerning the details of this significant step 
in normalizing relations between the Republic of Croatia and 
Montenegro. 
<H5>  What MONITOR Reveals </H5>
  In light of this fact, the article "Paths of War Booty" 
published by the independent Podgorica weekly MONITOR is of 
interest. The article talks about how students from Niksic--in 
military uniform and with passes--were transported to the 
Dubrovnik front in organized fashion to "gather war booty." 
Specifically, the weekly reveals that in early March 1992, while 
the war was raging around Dubrovnik, 15 students, residents of 
the "Vucinic Brothers" dormitory in Niksic, led by Radoman 
Kovacevic, director of that institution, loaded six truck 
tractors and two trailer trucks with goods from the "Mlini" and 
"Kupari" hotel complexes and transported them to Niksic amid air 
support and the protection of the military police. The operation 
was organized by the successor to the army that shot its own 
soldiers for stealing apples--the former JNA and current Armed 
Forces of Yugoslavia [VJ]. MONITOR published a photocopy of 
Radoman Kovacevic's permit "to take from the Mlini (hotel) 
furniture, radiators, dishes, and kitchen supplies for the needs 
of the Niksic dormitory," as well as a pass "authorizing 
movement to and from Sutorina and Trebinje." This permit was 
signed, "under the authority of the commander," by head of the 
civilian administration agency, Colonel Drago Pipovic. The 
stolen goods were transported by "Autoprevozno" of Niksic, which 
properly billed the dormitory for its services in transporting 
160 metric tons of "equipment, furniture, and miscellany" along 
the Niksic-Kupari-Niksic route. 
  Scarcely four months had passed since the successful looting 
expedition when a dispute broke out among employees of the 
Niksic dormitory. The director was accused of having seized 
everything, and it was alleged that the "war booty" was 
extensive: expensive paintings (for some time they adorned 
Kovacevic's office, but then they disappeared), large safes of 
gold and foreign exchange, plus television sets, expensive 
furniture, telephone exchanges worth hundreds of thousands of 
German marks.... 
<H5>  Mercedes for a Fistful of Marks </H5>
  "We do not know where such things are," it was said at a 
special session (closed to the public) of that institution's 
board, when several dormitory employees suggested that 
"officially not a single specification arrived" and that the 
dormitory has not benefited from it in the least. 
  On the contrary, the director rewarded the students who went 
with him on the adventure--with free dormitory services until 
the end of the school year. However, the director refuted the 
charges by saying, "Although I have a moral right to enter 
ustasha houses, there are no items in my possession!" 
  "The legal person did not provide evidence of the property 
at 
his disposal," because of which it was not possible "to exercise 
control over the financial-material business dealing," concluded 
the financial police, which has been involved in the entire case 
ever since charges were brought by the minister of education 
against Director Kovacevic, but not because of the plunder, but 
rather because of the illegal rehiring of a former dormitory 
secretary. Kovacevic was called before the examining magistrate 
only six months later, but after that the whole matter sank into 
oblivion. 
  It appears that the further investigation into Kovacevic was 
halted by the former chief of the VJ General Staff, Zivota 
Panic, with the cooperation of General Pavle Strugar and General 
Radomir Damljanovic, insiders allege. Apparently they did not 
want to raise questions concerning the thefts because all 
indications are that they too had "lined their pockets." For 
example, Strugar "bought" a Mercedes 190 brought in from the 
Dubrovnik front for several hundred German marks, while 
Damljanovic got a luxury Peugeot for a few marks more. 
  Recently, however, the "Kovacevic case" has been 
"activated." 
The court has authorized experts to gather evidence of the 
director's "abuses in connection with procuring food for the 
dormitory, trading a freezer for one automobile tire, giving 
free housing to some students," and several other minor 
irregularities. No one mentions the theft of "war booty." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
