ID: 98	RANK: 61	SCORE: 10.340421

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20672 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpeer007__s94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EER-94-007-S </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:East Europe 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  SUPPLEMENT </ABS>
<DATE1>   2 March 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> INTER-EUROPEAN AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Oil Smuggling Across Albanian-Montenegrin Border </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94BA0176A Belgrade NIN in Serbo-Croatian 28 Jan 94 pp 26-27 </F>
<F P=103> 94BA0176A </F>
<F P=104>  Belgrade NIN </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Dragan Djuric: "The Scutari Oil Pipeline"] </F>
  [Text] "God grant the sanctions continue," is the phrase 
used most frequently by those with whom we talked about the 
smuggling of petroleum products across Lake Scutari. The story 
about the wealth which people have amassed overnight explains 
the background of this strange prayer. 
  "Every day about 200 boats cross the (imaginary) border 
between Montenegro and Albania illegally on Lake Scutari," says 
someone very familiar with the flows of smuggled goods between 
Zeta, the rich farming region on the Montenegrin shore of the 
lake, and Vraka, the Albanian part of the Scutari region, which 
is mainly settled by Serbs and Montenegrins. 
  So, the southern Yugoslav republic has been managing to 
avoid 
isolation a full year longer than Serbia and has been regularly 
supplying the public with fuel. Since adoption of Resolution 
820, foreign tankers, mainly Greek, have had a harder and harder 
time running the NATO blockade in front of the port of Bar. Just 
before New Year's, the government announced that reserves had 
fallen so low that it was forced to "discontinue gasoline 
coupons for individuals." 
  Numerous private and government-owned firms became involved 
in the smuggling of petroleum products immediately after the 
sanctions were introduced toward the FRY; not long afterward, 
they were joined by resourceful individuals on both sides of the 
Montenegrin border. 
<H5>  The Oil Well </H5>
  The merchants in Scutari were the quickest to react. They 
installed double gas tanks in their cars and used them to carry 
gasoline across the border checkpoint at Bozaj for sale in Tuzi 
or Podgorica, which is only some 20 km or so from the border. 
Thus, the ancient meaning of the name of Tuzi, a small town 
midway between Podgorica and the Albanian border, has been 
restored. (The town, mostly settled by Albanians and Muslims, 
takes its name from the time when caravans carrying salt passed 
through, and the town came to be called Tuzi--"salt station.") 
  Almost every house in the town has become a small gasoline 
station. Car owners from Podgorica who need more than the 
limited amounts of gasoline (30 liters a month at the beginning 
and then 15 liters) go to Tuzi as though it were the nearest gas 
station. The reason, of course, lays in the price. The price of 
fuel in Tuzi has steadily been 20 to 30 percent lower than at 
the open-air markets in Podgorica. 
  People living in Zeta have been involved since this past 
autumn. They have begun to run the blockade in boats. They do 
not even need visas, which, because of the restrictions of the 
Albanian Embassy in Belgrade, are the greatest obstacle to 
crossing at Bozaj, the only border crossing between Montenegro 
and Albania. It is simple: You cross Lake Scutari in a rowboat 
to the town of Kamenica on the Albanian shore, without any kind 
of border or customs inspection; you are met there by your 
"trading partners" from what until recently was the most 
isolated country in the world, and they have drums full of 
petroleum products. The boats are used in this way to smuggle 
everything--from cigarettes to satellite dishes--but petroleum 
products and gasoline are the most common. Here are figures on 
how lucrative this entire operation is. The Albanians are paid 
between 160 German marks [DM] and DM190 for a 210-liter drum of 
petroleum products, depending on the quality, while in Zeta that 
same drum "sells at wholesale from DM210 to DM240 or even DM300." 
<H5>  The Fleet </H5>
  The heady rate at which money is earned is attractive for a 
great many people. In recent months, new boats are being built 
in large numbers or old ones repaired. One reason is that the 
traditional rowboats that the people of Zeta have used to fish 
Lake Scutari can take only five drums of petroleum products, and 
that exceeds the allowed load and presents a risk of capsizing 
and sinking in any kind of sea. So now the Zeta rowboats have 
sides which are four or five or more planks high, instead of the 
previous three, so that they can take a much larger load. Demand 
has also increased suddenly for drums, and there is a frantic 
demand for the metal plugs used with the drums. They carry a 
price of DM10, and the Aluminum Combine in Podgorica is faring 
the worst, because its employees are stealing large numbers of 
them. 
  The wind and waves are the greatest danger to the people in 
the boats. The boat ride from the Montenegrin to the Albanian 
shore in small boats takes an hour to an hour and a half, but 
coming back, because they are loaded, it takes about two and a 
half hours. Moreover, part of this is away from the shore of the 
lake (only 15 minutes or so of the trip), but this is where the 
seas are highest and there is a constant danger of sudden winds. 
In Albania, the drums containing petroleum products are loaded 
by hand, so that often the associates simply exchange full boats 
for empty ones. 
  On the Montenegrin shore, the transshipment technology is on 
a higher level. Tractor attachments are used to lift the drums 
from the rowboats, much in the way of a crane, and they are 
loaded onto trailers or trucks, and from there they are stored 
in farmyards. 
  Tank trucks carry the petroleum products from Zeta to other 
regions of Montenegro, Serbia, and the Serbian krajinas. The 
petroleum products are drained from the drums very quickly with 
a compressor or ordinary water pump. This job, our informants 
explained, even involves the Montenegrin government, which 
issues special certificates to individuals, according them the 
right to purchase and carry the smuggled petroleum products. 
<H5>  Chain </H5>
  The sudden wealth and the spirit of adventure which go with 
smuggling petroleum products across the largest lake in the 
Balkans have been generating many "hunting" stories about the 
exploits of the newly created "businessmen." It is thus said 
that there is no house in Zeta which has not earned at least 
DM10,000 or so from petroleum products. The earnings of a 
journalist from Montenegrin Television, who was among the first 
to become involved as a buyer and carrier, is estimated at DM2 
million. Albanian soldiers, who are said to intercept the 
smugglers, occasionally even quite amicably, are collecting 
bribes of DM10 per person. In order to dispel our disbelief, one 
of our informants pointed with pride to a new Mercedes tank 
truck, which he had just bought for DM130,000. "That came from 
petroleum products," he said. 
  The associates in Albania, we were told, are quite 
straightforward in their dealings. The Montenegrin and Albanian 
smugglers help one another, and it is not uncommon at all for 
them to visit one another for even several days (illegally, of 
course). 
  In Albania, it is prohibited to pump petroleum products into 
drums at filling stations, so that it is actually sold by the 
truckers, whose job comes down to cruising constantly around the 
gasoline stations. The petroleum products are usually of very 
poor quality. A great deal of kerosene (30 to 50 percent) is 
dumped into it, because in Albania it is cheaper--10 pfennigs 
per liter. So that engines can operate on this mixture, any kind 
of motor oil (usually used) is added to it. 
  The petroleum products go through five hands before they 
reach the ultimate consumer. The job also runs the risk that the 
police patrols, who are said to be increasingly numerous, will 
seize the petroleum products as they are being carried from Zeta 
in canisters. It is a long chain, and the links in it include 
both big operators, who order tank trucks by phone, and also 
erstwhile high school students waiting for customers in the 
open-air markets with plastic containers. Many firms whose 
trucks and buses have long been paying visits to farmyards in 
Zeta instead of the official Jugopetrol stations also rely on 
the newly opened "oil pipeline." 
  There is the smell of petroleum products at every step in 
Zeta. As you enter Zeta, our informants joke, there should be a 
"NO SMOKING" sign, just as there is at filling stations. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
