ID: 155	RANK: 18	SCORE: 9.234662
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP901015-0172 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NY-10-15-90 1944EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i AM-Britain-Fashion 1stLd-Writethru a0710 10-15 0657</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Britain-Fashion, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0710,0788</SECOND>
<HEAD>British Designers in Overtime with New '90s Swing</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: ADDS five grafs of new material.</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By EDITH M. LEDERER</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>LONDON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   British designers have reinvented the Sixties with
a sexy, snappy '90s swing for next spring and summer.
   Nostalgia for the '60s isn't surprising for the country that
invented the miniskirt. But the designers didn't wallow in it. They
pushed it forward into the very modern Nineties with some of the
best collections seen here in years.
   The British look for 1991 is short, simple and sexy.
   The sportswear influence is strong, with cropped jackets and
shorts the hot favorites. But the big news is that dresses are
back, especially skimpy shifts ala Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis and
Audrey Hepburn.
   It's definitely going to be a white summer in Britain, though
the color palette runs from black and navy to summer pastels,
occasionally vivid tropical hues, and a smattering of the bright
and bold prints featured in Milan.
   ``It's a '90s version of simplicity dressing,'' said designer
Benny Ong. ``I think the '60s heralded the innocence of it, and the
'90s makes a full circle and says now we have arrived. I think the
difference is, it's a realized woman who is dressing now - and
there is a choice.''
   Designers who lived through the '60s - Caroline Charles, Edina
Ronay and Jean Muir - and those too young to remember - Arabella
Pollen, Jasper Conran and Bruce Oldfield - showed very individual,
wearable collections with an accent on youth at shows over the
weekend and on Monday.
   Caroline Charles did trapeze-line coats and short little shifts,
some in black and white prints, set off by Jackie Kennedy-style
pillbox hats and big sunglasses.
   Arabella Pollen did her sexiest collection yet, featuring
houndstooth check jackets worn with hot pants or hipster miniskirts
and minishifts for evening decorated with pieces of cut mirror. ``A
sort of neon Hong Kong,'' the designer said.
   Bruce Oldfield featured a pared-down look with fluid nautical
print silk shifts, trapeze dresses over slinky jersey bodysuits,
and glamorous asymmetrical sand-colored chiffons with gilt chains
setting off the bust or derriere.
   Paul Costello did his classic linen separates in sherbet colors
and a lovely white linen shift but his back-to-front jacket dresses
in shiny brocades were less successful.
   Betty Jackson mixed figure-hugging pants with loose jackets and,
with an eye to the not-so-young, did some knee-length shifts. Edina
Ronay featured mint and pink pastel sequins for evening with
chiffon and raw silk in the same colors. Jasper Conran's lean and
fluid classically tailored jackets, shorts and short knife-pleated
skirts were back on the catwalk.
   Rifat Ozbek, who has the biggest international clout, opted for
a video presentation instead of a catwalk show. Titled
``Afrodizzia,'' it featured hot African colors, sequins and prints
as well as Rasta ragamuffins in African print leggings and rough
linen tops embroidered with compact discs.
   London also kept its reputation for the wild and wacky.
   Vivienne Westwood, who originated punk fashion and won this
year's Designer of the Year, marched to her own tune in her ``Cut,
Slash and Pull'' collection. It featured very demure '40s-style
tailored suits with midi-skirts alongside slashed and ripped denim
shorts and dresses and shocking bikinis and shorts embellished with
bow-tied phallic symbols.
   Westwood, honored Monday night at an award ceremony at Royal
Albert Hall, developed the punk look and incorporated anarchy into
fashion. One of Britain's most unorthodox and influential
designers, she has designed for the Sex Pistols, Boy George and
Bananarama.
   Pam Hogg's very sexy cotton bustiers, peek-a-boo catsuits, and
short-shorts in dark red, smoked green and mauve, were worn by
models with shaved heads and a wide grey stripe across their eyes.
   Workers For Freedom, the design duo of Graham Fraser and Richard
Nott who won the 1989 Designer of the Year award, picked ``Delicate
Bondage'' for their theme. Some models were strapped into soft
knee-length dresses with leather harnesses. Others wore brightly
printed kimono styles and shirts with evil eyes.
   Body Map's body-hugging ``Square'' collection showed the
influence of Mondrian prints. Ghosts featured clinging minis in
lime and tangerine.
   Red or Dead showed a short red playsuit in synthetic rubber
diving suit material, shorts with red shield stamps that peel off,
and baby dolls embroidered with ``Kiss Me Quick'' and other
sayings.
   Several designers noted there were very few American buyers and
said it was due to the weak dollar and strong British pound. But
Red or Dead spokeswoman Catherine Morris said it had brought down
its prices on clothes and was ``doing outrageously well in
America.''
</TEXT>
</DOC>
