ID: 155	RANK: 59	SCORE: 6.447434
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920320-0011
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920320-0011.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   If That Orangutan
   Is Familiar, Maybe
   He's Been Recycled
   ---
   Rude Ape Is a Top Banana
   In the Booming Market
   For Used Television Ads
   ----
   By Ken Wells
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
03/20/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<IN>
ADVERTISING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)
</IN>
<RE>
AUSTRIA (AU)
IRELAND (EI)
EUROPE (EU)
GERMANY (GE)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)
</RE>
<LP>
   As an orangutan makes faces and rude noises, an unseen
announcer for a Columbia, S.C., savings and loan asks
questions designed to skewer the services of rival S&amp;Ls.
   A continent away, Germany's Christian Democratic Party
broadcasts a television ad ridiculing the policies of its
opponent in a national election. The star? An orangutan
making faces and rude noises.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   If the similarities are startling, they should be: It's
the same ad -- its message rewritten and dubbed in German.
   "It's such a best-seller that we sometimes say we're in
the monkey business," says Rolf Stacker, the German
representative of AdExchange of San Francisco.
   Actually, Mr. Stacker is in the recycling business -- not
paper, plastics or aluminum, but TV commercials. As a used-ad
salesman, he is among a growing number of world-wide players,
including advertisers and some advertising agencies, who have
begun to mine gold from stacks of old commercials gathering
dust on shelves.
   The orangutan spot, commissioned by South Carolina Federal
Savings, is one of perhaps 1,500 TV commercials now available
on used-commercial lots world-wide. And the number is growing
rapidly, as is the penchant for commercials to cross product
boundaries.
   A commercial featuring a new baby that worked for a
Colorado hospital promoting maternity-care facilities has
been reused by a New Jersey bank pushing long-term
investments. And a year ago, Austria's right-wing Folk Party
broadcast an ad showing a lone red Slinky toy climbing steps
against a tide of descending green Slinkys. The spot was
originally commissioned by a New Orleans S&amp;L to distinguish
it from the competition.
   Like all recycling movements, the used commercial business
operates on a green philosophy -- though the green in this
case is cash. "It's champagne commercials for beer money,"
explains John Marchant, founder of TV-Link, a London company
that acquires resale rights to what he considers "classic"
British commercials. Indeed, with high-quality new
commercials costing $200,000 and upwards to make -- and used
ones starting at a mere $5,000 -- buyers can save a fortune
on production costs if they don't mind a spot with a few air
miles on it. For small advertisers, used commercials can give
them television exposure they normally couldn't afford.
   For sellers, who in most cases own exclusive rights to ads
they've commissioned, the lure is a windfall that often lets
them cover some or all of the production costs of a new
campaign. "It's money for nothing," says Philip Perkins, vice
president of marketing for Snyder Drug Stores, a Minnetonka,
Minn., concern that resold part of a recent ad campaign to
Giant Food Corp. of Landover, Md.
   For South Carolina Federal, its five-year-old orangutan
spot -- resold 20 times and fetching an unusually pricey
$50,000 to $90,000 a campaign -- has given the thrift's
marketing department star status. "How many times have you
heard of a marketing department becoming a profit center for
a bank?" says an incredulous Sara Fisher, the company's
marketing director.
   Credit for the phenomenon goes to Henry Whitfield, founder
of AdExchange. In the early 1980s, Mr. Whitfield was managing
Apple Computer Co.'s Macintosh ad campaign and saw firsthand
the enormous sums spent on ads that got shelved after a few
months. He also noticed that Apple's independent network of
dealers had increasingly begun to swap promotional materials
and advertising ideas.
   From both observations emerged one notion, says Mr.
Whitfield: "We could give value to something -- a used
commercial -- that is otherwise worthless." Three years ago,
he sold an ad created for a Gainesville, Fla., hospital to a
hospital in Richmond, Va., and AdExchange was born. True, the
recycled-commercial business has produced bizarre
juxtapositions, turning a thrift-peddling ape into a
political animal, for instance. But recycling works largely
because much TV advertising, especially in ad-dependent
industries such as banking and health care, is generic enough
to be easily reused.
   While Mr. Whitfield has been busy expanding into Europe
and Asia, Mr. Marchant has set up a rival shop in Britain.
Both concerns essentially serve as brokers, passing on 20% to
40% of the net proceeds to sellers while pocketing the rest.
Typically, what they sell is the right to reuse a commercial
in one geographically defined television market for one year.
Since there are hundreds of such markets worldwide -- 250 in
the U.S. and Canada alone -- the potential is enormous.
Sellers typically exclude their home market.
   A number of sellers, especially banks and hospitals,
handle their own resales. South Carolina Federal, for
example, brokers its own spots in the U.S. but uses
AdExchange to market its commercials abroad. And
increasingly, advertising agencies are getting into the act,
drawn in some cases by a share of resale commissions and by
the notion that, in helping clients resell ads, they raise
money for future original campaigns. As a "subsidy on
production costs, it's an amazing concept," says David
McGrath, a creative director at the London offices of BSB
Dorland.
   Some agencies, however, greet the phenomenon with the same
glee as, say, a global ad recession. "This is the antithesis
of what we do and believe in," says Allen Thomas, chairman of
J. Walter Thompson/Europe, a unit of WPP Group. In his view,
quality advertising is created and tailored to the client,
and therefore the notion of buying used ads is like sawing
off bodies to fit the coffins.
   Nevertheless, the used-ad business is thriving in part
because of the speed and ease of getting a commercial on the
air. Both Mr. Whitfield and Mr. Marchant, for example, offer
video catalogs that allow buyers to browse through selections
at their leisure. Once they choose a spot and agree on a
price ($5,000 to $15,000 is average), buyers can then have it
customized at the brokerage, or have the work done by their
own advertising agencies.
   Most U.S. commercials can be turned around in as few as
three days. The process is a little more cumbersome in
Europe, where permission to reuse an ad is sometimes delayed
because advertisers share rights to their commercials with
theatrical unions or advertising agencies.
   "It can get very complicated here," says Mr. Stacker, who
runs AdExchange European operations from Frankfurt. "If the
cleaning lady was in during the production, she probably has
rights, too." Still, turnaround time, even in Europe, is
generally quicker than the two to three months it typically
takes to make a commercial from scratch.
   A critical question, however: Do used commercials work?
   Austria's Folk Party lost its election, recycled Slinky ad
notwithstanding. And two years ago, South Carolina Fed's
orangutan couldn't save Germany's Christian Democrats from
defeat, either.
   On the other hand, Ireland has gone ape over the South
Carolina Fed campaign since it was first recycled a year ago
by First National Building Society, the country's second
largest thrift. "We've made our own commercials costing
$150,000 . . . but we've never had a response like this,"
says Gerry Murphy, the Dublin concern's assistant general
manager. "It's been phenomenal."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
