ID: 155	RANK: 8	SCORE: 12.439412
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891018-0212 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-10-18-89 2043EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r i BC-France-Fashion     10-18 0776</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-France-Fashion,0799</SECOND>
<HEAD>Shows Open on Optimistic, Feminine Notes for Summer</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By SUZY PATTERSON</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP Fashion Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>PARIS (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Lots of youthful, feminine clothes were shown in
early openings Wednesday as ready-to-wear shows for summer 1990 got
underway.
   Great fabrics, curvy silhouettes and soft color palettes were
about the only things designers had in common as everybody did his
or her own thing.
   Also on the opening day, Lanvin announced at a press conference
that Claude Montana _ known as one of the most creative
ready-to-wear talents in Paris _ would be the new creator of
Lanvin's couture. Montana is a maverick, whose strong fashions and
silhouettes have often rocked the fashion world.
   Montana's first couture collection will be shown in January, for
next summer.
   In her tent show in a courtyard of the Louvre, Lolita Lempicka
showed clothes with just enough chic to keep the sweet fashions
from cloying. Her bicolored fitted linen suits, either short to the
knee or maxi-length, often had fitted jackets with scalloped
necklines.
   One of her main silhouettes was formed by gold-buttoned long
redingotes giving a funnel shape to the linens or textured
``beehive'' ivory silks.
   Other flowingly feminine shapes came out under billowy-topped
dusters with long wrapped skirts.
   Lempicka's garden-party clothes had fresh allure with appliqued
daisies or fitted jackets in daisy prints. Dressy looks for wedding
parties are Lempicka's forte, but she also brought out some fun
fringed, clinging outfits in raffia _ a big new ``fabric'' for next
summer.
   Doby Broda's idea of the 1990s harks to the 1930s, with lots of
flowing pyjamas and long skirts. Some in the audience liked her
flower-sprigged ``farmer's daughter'' dresses in soft or murky
colors.
   More fun were her easy pants or skirts outfits based on
``dishcloth'' linens _ the little loose dishcloth-plaid boleros
paired with solid blue full pants, skirts or occasionally shorts.
   For evening, her gold lame bias-cut dresses and flared pants
looked slinky enough to steal applause at parties, though perhaps
not quite luxurious enough for Marlene Dietrich.
   Emmanuelle Khanh brought out a lot of long and slinky suits for
cruise wear, as well as some modest one-piece maillot bathing suits
with little flounces at the hip.
   Her sailor looks ranged from pants to shorts to skirts _ in
crisp navy and white or more original rusty brown cottons and
linens. For late-day, her best lines were easily fitted outfits
with strong black and white arabesque embroideries around collars
and shoulders.
   The Japanese are out in force as usual. Hanae Mori will show
later in the week, but Tuesday night was awarded the Legion of
Honor for her contribution to Paris fashion in the couture and
ready-to-wear shows she has shown and sold here for over 20 years.
   Junko Shimada's bouncy young styles were always figure-hugging,
featuring bright turquoise beach mini-dresses with pointed hems,
printed in seashell patterns, topped with fishnet stoles.
   There was lots of creativity here _ from scalloped pique fitted
suits with very short skirts to a whole range of clinging broadly
striped sailor suits teaming pullovers with bell-bottomed jerseys
or tight bermudas like turn-of-the-century bathing costumes.
   The neat linen suits with decollete, small-waisted jackets in
shades of sand, turquoise, pale pink and chocolate had details like
big bucket pockets, tab pockets or perky pointed peplums.
   And Shimada's combinations of dark plaids and insets, sleeves
and double collars or tobacco-brown organza looked original, if not
for everyone.
   Party girls with good figures will probably love the khaki green
clinging jersey and gold lame outfits with their gold lattice-work
hemlines and mousseline stoles.
   Hiroko Koshino's collection was based on a cruise down the Nile,
from safari suits to outfits with asymmetrical details, folding and
pleating that could have come right from an Egyptian fresco or the
wardrobe of Cleopatra herself.
   In patterned silks and textured linens, the inspiration may have
been ancient, but the lines were modern _ with lots of high-waisted
pants, some bare midriffs, original jackets with one side covered
in a pleated scarf effect over wraparound skirts.
   There were lots of long jackets over pleated skirts or vests
sewn onto the skirt in a dress. And whether worn with shorts,
pleated or draped long skirts, the effect of these combinations was
never heavy.
   The colors _ sandy beige or grey, Nile green, deep fresco blue,
terra-cotta and mustard or gold _ gave the silk and linen outfits
an original cachet for next summer.
   Transparency was rife in the shows, but nowhere was it more
obvious than at Kimijima. He concentrated on mousselines and
fishnets topped with enough sparkly sequins to cause a few
shipwrecks with sailors spotting his revealing mermaid minis.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
