ID: 155	RANK: 87	SCORE: 5.756154
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920316-0169
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920316-0169.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   International:
   China's Cadres Bank On Consumerism
   ---
   To Save the Party, Materialism
   Is Added to List of Ideals
   ----
   By James McGregor
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
03/16/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10
</SO>
<IN>
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)
</IN>
<NS>
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)
</NS>
<RE>
CHINA (CH)
FAR EAST (FE)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
</RE>
<LP>
   BEIJING -- Just down the street from Tiananmen Square,
where Chinese troops first opened fire on pro-democracy
demonstrators in June 1989, more than 200,000 people now
gather every day to gawk at the government's latest strategy
for staying in power.
   They come to a massive chrome and glass building with
escalators that whisk them from floor to floor and where
young Communist Youth League women in cheerful blue dresses
hand out free refreshments. The cavernous halls are crammed
with everything from microwave ovens and remote-control toy
cars to slinky silk gowns and BMX tricycles.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The only thing missing is a red banner in Mao Tse-tung's
handwriting, proclaiming the Communist Party's latest line:
"Shop 'til you drop."
   Although the party isn't ready to be so explicit, that
slogan is clearly the current message to the masses. It's all
part of a campaign in which the party is trying to help save
communism through consumerism. This shopping center, the
Beijing Urban-Rural Trade Central Store, is one of hundreds
of upscale retail stores and boutiques springing up across
China.
   After lurching sharply to the left in the aftermath of the
Tiananmen massacre, China's Communist rulers have spent
nearly three years inching back toward a practical path for
survival. The collapse of the Soviet Communist Party -- big
brother to such Moscow-trained cadres as Premier Li Peng and
party chief Jiang Zemin -- has shocked China's leaders into
the realization that offering people a better life is their
best hope. Just last week, the Chinese politburo endorsed
leader Deng Xiaoping's call to keep hard-liners out of the
way of economic reform.
   A two-pronged strategy is apparent. One is an absolute
iron fist against political dissent or independent
organizations that could threaten the Communist Party's
monopoly on power. The other is a market-oriented economy
that provides good jobs and high-quality goods at reasonable
prices to China's 1.15 billion people.
   "Premier Li and President Yang (Shangkun) know they made a
mistake in 1989 when they ordered soldiers to shoot
demonstrators," says an official involved in economic
development. "They are now trying to make up for it with
policies that make life better for the people."
   The latest wrinkle is a propaganda campaign, "China's Long
March to Quality," launched in February by state media
outlets. Newspapers and television now attack defective
products with the same gusto they traditionally used to
assault citizens deemed politically incorrect.
   A factory in Qingdao that sold whiskey containing insects
and pieces of rubber has been elevated to the status of
public enemy. Nationwide television lets viewers call special
hotlines to expose substandard products during prime-time
programs.
   There are even efforts to improve the attitude of clerks
in state department stores, where the hallmark has long been
service with a snarl.
   "No matter how splendid the shop looks, no matter how much
you spend on dressing up, if salespersons present to
customers faces as cold as winter frost, and complaints
receive no reasonable answers, how can customers be expected
to visit the store again?" the English-language China Daily
recently asked.
   The spending power of Chinese consumers and the retail
market's pace of growth are difficult to determine from
official statistics, which are often contradictory and
incomplete. The State Statistical Bureau says retail sales in
1991 totaled about $173 billion, a 13.2% increase from 1990.
The bureau also says the average urban dweller in 1991
received an official salary of $434 for the entire year.
   But these numbers have little relation to what can be
observed in the stores and on the streets, where many
shoppers belie official statistics. In conservative Beijing,
for example, dozens of shops sell quality suits and dresses
for $300 or more. The city's new Urban-Rural shopping center
sold out of $178 microwaves in its first month of operation.
And in wealthy Guangzhou and Shenzhen, $1,200 portable phones
and $650 palm-sized electronic databanks are the rage.
   Even in such remote corners of China as Yinchuan, the
capital of impoverished Ningxia province, many women
bicycling to work wear fashionable silk dresses, and stores
are stocked with much the same fare as that in wealthy
coastal cities.
   Yet, much of this economic activity isn't reflected in
official statistics because it occurs off the books to avoid
taxes. Personal spending power is also bolstered by companies
and government units that pay for employees' clothing and
other personal items in lieu of extravagant salaries.
   For example, on a recent afternoon at a high-priced
clothing store near the Zhongnanhai compound in Beijing,
where many of China's top leaders live, the cashier's sales
slips showed that the last three items of clothing, each
representing about a $100 purchase, were paid for by,
respectively, a local office of International Business
Machines Corp., a nearby army unit and People's University.
   Political survival isn't the only reason the government
wants the retail market to flourish. The government also
wants to get a piece of the country's savings glut into
circulation. Chinese people currently save about 35 cents of
each $1 earned. At the end of 1991, savings deposits and cash
held by individuals were estimated to total more than $205
billion, or more than the total annual wages of every person
of working age in China.
   "In absolute terms, disposable income in China isn't very
high," says the manager of an American joint-venture factory
that makes consumer products. "But there are many people here
with money to spend, and everybody wants to improve their
quality of life in terms of what they eat, how they dress and
how they fix up their homes."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
