ID: 132	RANK: 25	SCORE: 11.207238
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910614-0004
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910614-0004.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Marketing &amp; Media -- Advertising:
   J.C. Penney Switches Big Account
   To Bozell from Ayer in Dallas
   ----
   By Joanne Lipman
</HL>
<DATE>
06/14/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B5
</SO>
<CO>
   IPG JCP WNEWS
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)
BROADLINE RETAILERS, DEPARTMENT STORES (RTB)
</IN>
<NS>
PERSONNEL ANNOUNCEMENTS, PROMOTIONS, APPOINTMENTS (PER)
</NS>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
TEXAS (TX)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   J.C. Penney Co. abruptly pulled its huge ad account from
Ayer's Dallas office, handing it to Bozell without so much as
the courtesy of a review.
   The Penney account, one of Ayer's largest and certainly
among its most visible, is a jolting loss that probably will
force the agency to close its Dallas office, which was
established in 1988 solely to serve Penney. Estimates of the
account's size differ, as they so often do, depending on
whether one asks the winner or the loser.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   According to Ayer, the account will bill $45.6 million
this year, down from $53 million a year ago. But Bozell
insiders insist the account bills closer to $75 million
annually. The actual number, say seasoned observers
accustomed to ad-biz hyperbole, probably falls in between.
   Penney said it yanked the account simply because Bozell's
Dallas office, with 450 people vs. Ayer's 45, is larger and
closer to Penney headquarters. The retailer moved to Dallas
from New York in 1988, and "we have slowly shifted suppliers.
. . . to Dallas groups" since then, a spokesman said.
   But executives close to the retailer suggest Penney was
miffed by what it believed was Ayer's lack of attention. They
took the retailer for granted too much, said one executive
who requested anonymity. This executive said Ayer's top
managers didn't go to Dallas and were less responsive.
Bozell, like Ayer, is based in New York, but its chairman,
Liener Temerlin, lives and works in Dallas and will oversee
the Penney account.
   Penney's switch also may reflect business problems totally
unrelated to advertising. Like other retailers, it has been
hard hit by the recession. First-quarter net income plummeted
48%, to $80 million, on a 2.7% sales decline. Penney has said
its results will continue to decline until the economy
strengthens.
   At the same time, the big mid-priced chain is struggling
with a major image problem. In its transition from
mass-merchant to fashionable department store, it has lost
hordes of traditional customers. But it hasn't replaced them
with wealthier consumers, who still look down their noses at
a company they view as decidedly declasse. Upscale brands,
including Liz Claiborne, refuse to sell to Penney, a huge
disability for Bozell as it attempts to polish the store's
image.
   The ad agency switch comes after years of wooing by
Bozell, which has been trying to get its foot in the door
ever since Penney arrived in Dallas. Speculation intensified
that Penney finally would switch to Bozell in March, when
Bozell resigned the $25 million Zale Corp. jewelry store
chain account just two weeks after winning it. The agency at
the time cited a conflict with a tiny piece of Penney
business, for a shopping network that Penney has since
discontinued. Now, the Penney account becomes the
second-largest in Bozell's Dallas office, after American
Airlines.
   "It's no secret that Bozell has been courting Penney ever
since they moved to Dallas in 1988," said Jerry Siano, Ayer's
chairman and chief executive officer. Yet while he heard
rumors about a possible switch for months, he said, the call
actually firing Ayer last night came as a surprise. Ayer had
heard "nothing but praise," from Penney executives, he said,
adding: "There was obviously no indication. It's
discouraging. It just isn't understandable. What else can I
say?"
   The loss is all the more discouraging because it came the
same day as news that another client, the sports daily The
National, was closing its doors. Ayer hasn't had many major
wins in recent years, and has lost several of its biggest
clients, including the Army in 1987 and Burger King in 1989.
   Mr. Siano said it was too early to decide on layoffs or
even the fate of the Dallas office. But the office has
attracted only a few other tiny clients, such as the Dallas
Chamber of Commerce, and "we wouldn't stay there to have a $2
million office," Mr. Siano said. He added that he hoped to
find a place for many of the 45 staffers, singling out the
two top executives there, Thomas M. Hooke and James Hradecky.
Ayer also has high hopes for several accounts it is competing
for now, including Sterling Drug's $20 million to $25 million
Bayer account.
   Penney is the latest in a string of major advertisers,
from Miller Lite to Benson &amp; Hedges, to switch agencies
without bothering with expensive, time-consuming agency
reviews. The Penney spokesman said the retailer decided
against a review because "we knew what we wanted." No doubt
switching without a pitch is far cheaper, too.
   For Bozell, the big new chunk of business helps propel its
Dallas office to $380 million billings from $280 million a
year ago, the office's Mr. Temerlin said. He was mum,
however, on how Bozell plans to improve on the Ayer slogan
for Penney: "Fashion comes to life."
   ---
   Kevin Helliker in Dallas contributed to this column.
   ---
   Ad Notes. . . .
                                                                                                       

   WHO'S NEWS: The top two executives at Lower Direct, a
direct-marketing agency owned by Interpublic Group, were
named to new posts in a restructuring. J. Robert Lieber, who
had been managing director, was named to the new post of
chief executive officer, and Paul Randall Levett, who had
been creative director, was named president.
                                                                                                       

   MILLI VANILLI: A new ad for CareFree Sugarless Gum seizes
on the lip-syncing controversy over pop group Milli Vanilli,
which won a Grammy only to be stripped of it when it was
disclosed they hadn't sung the hit songs on their album. The
spot depicts Robert Pilatus and Fabrice Morvan, the
entertainers who comprised the now-shamed duo, pantomiming an
operatic opus. "How long will the flavor of CareFree
Sugarless Gum last?" a voiceover asks. "Till these guys sing
for themselves."
   ---
   Corrections &amp; Amplifications
                                                                                                       

   LOWE DIRECT named J. Robert Lieber chief executive officer
and Paul Randall Levett president. Friday's edition misstated
the agency's name.
   (WSJ June 17, 1991)
</TEXT>
</DOC>
