ID: 132	RANK: 39	SCORE: 10.682734
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900521-0064 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-05-21-90 0923EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r w PM-Thornburgh 1stLd-Writethru a0450 05-21 0616</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Thornburgh, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0450,580</SECOND>
<HEAD>Attorney General Denies He Protected Aide During Leak
Investigation</HEAD>
<NOTE>EDs: SUBS 3rd graf to remove redundant full reference to Ayer</NOTE>
<DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Attorney General Dick Thornburgh has denied
that he tried to cover up when a top aide showed deception on a lie
detector test while the Justice Department was investigating news
leaks.
   Thornburgh said Deputy Attorney General Donald B. Ayer, the
agency's departing No. 2 official, was ``sadly misinformed'' in
criticizing how the case was handled.
   Ayer, who has resigned effective Friday, has charged that
Thornburgh mishandled the Justice Department's investigation in an
attempt to protect Robert S. ``Robin'' Ross, a longtime Thornburgh
aide.
   ``The attorney general was participating in an effort to prevent
appropriate disclosure and evaluation through established
procedures of the activities that earlier this week resulted in
Robin Ross' abrupt removal from office,'' Ayer was quoted as saying
in Sunday's Los Angeles Times.
   Sources speaking on condition of anonymity have told The
Associated Press that Ross and another veteran Thornburgh aide,
David Runkel, showed deception on polygraph tests. The tests were
given as part of the department's attempt to find who leaked
information to reporters about an investigation into alleged
financial irregularities involving Rep. William Gray, D-Pa.
   Thornburgh, appearing Sunday on ABC-TV's ``This Week With David
Brinkley'' program, replied, ``Absolutely not'' when asked if he
tried to conceal Ross's performance on the lie detector test.
   ``We conducted an investigation into leaks. There was no
evidence that tied any person on my staff to the unauthorized
disclosure of that information,'' Thornburgh said.
   The attorney general also said that failing a polygraph test
``isn't evidence of wrongdoing _ not in our courts of law.''
   Thornburgh said he was saddened that Ayer ``feels that he has to
lash out against his former colleagues, but there is no basis in
fact for that kind of story.''
   The Justice Department has had a series of high-level personnel
changes since Ayer announced May 11 that he was leaving.
   Ross resigned three days later as Thornburgh's executive
assistant to head a new international division. He said he plans to
leave the department in two or three months. Runkel was reassigned
from serving as spokesman, taking on the new title of director of
communications.
   In the Los Angeles Times interview, Ayer criticized the way
Thornburgh dealt with the Gray case. Thornburgh had ordered the
investigation into the leaks _ which Democrats charged were
politically motivated _ last spring while Gray was running for the
House majority whip post.
   Ayer said Thornburgh tried to keep the results of the leak
investigation out of the hands of the department's internal
watchdog agency, the Office of Professional Responsibility.
Unsuccessful in that attempt, Thornburgh then refused to follow the
unit's recommendation for further investigation, Ayer told the
newspaper.
   Ayer did not return a telephone call Sunday seeking comment.
   Thornburgh reported to Congress in September that the criminal
investigation of the Gray leak failed to identify the source of the
story.
   The attorney general told Congress the head of OPR had concurred
with the conclusion to drop the investigation. But Ayer said the
internal watchdog agency had never seen the report.
   When Ayer and two other top officials suggested to Thornburgh on
Jan. 30 that he remove himself from the case and turn it over to
the watchdog agency, the attorney general ``rejected our advice out
of hand,'' Ayer said.
   Ultimately the case went to OPR, after prodding by Sen. Joseph
Biden, D-Del., chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee.
   After the OPR review was finished, Thornburgh turned the issue
over to Solicitor General Kenneth Starr, who concurred with the
attorney general's decision not to discipline any department
officials.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
