ID: 132	RANK: 43	SCORE: 10.629652
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP881114-0205 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-11-14-88 2153EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>a e BC-WKD--FilmReviews ADV00   11-14 0986</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-WKD--Film Reviews, ADV 00,1011</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv00</NOTE>
<NOTE>For Release Anytime</NOTE>
<HEAD>AP WEEKEND ENTERTAINMENT AND ARTS</HEAD>
<HEAD>At the Movies: ``A Cry in the Dark,'' ``U2 Rattle and Hum''</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   
   ``A Cry in the Dark''
   
   A deeply religious Australian family goes on a camping vacation
at the site of Ayers Rock, which rises like a monstrous carbuncle
from the flat, desolate land. One evening the wife returns to the
tent in time to see a dingo, a wild dog of the outback, escape into
the darkness. The nine-week-old baby Azaria is missing.
   Search of the surrounding territory fails to locate the baby. The
sorrowing couple returns home and discovers the disappearance has
become a national sensation. Television and the tabloid press raise
doubts about the mother's story, and she is arrested on a charge of
murder. Pregnant with her fourth child, she is convicted and
sentenced to life imprisonment at hard labor.
   A grim, harrowing story that happens to be true. The events are
told with apparent fidelity in the Warner Bros. release ``A Cry in
the Dark,'' starring Meryl Streep and Sam Neill and directed by Fred
Schepisi. The screenplay was written by Schepisi and Robert Caswell,
taken from John Bryson's book, ``Evil Angels.''
   Meryl Streep as Lindy Chamberlain adds another of her impeccable
portrayals of tormented women, this time affecting an Australian
accent. Curiously, it is her performance itself that prevents ``A
Cry in the Dark'' from becoming a completely absorbing film. Her
Lindy is so cool and sardonic that she repells sympathy rather than
attracts it (this reportedly was true with the real-life defendant).
   Sam Neill contributes a well-shaded portrait of a husband
perplexed and bewildered by the onrush of events. Schepisi's
direction matches the heaviness of the story. He seems obsessed by
the imagery of the huge rock, the significance of which is not
readily apparent. The venality of the news media, while perhaps
historically accurate, also seems overplayed.
   Despite its deficiencies, ``A Cry in the Dark'' is a valuable and
courageous document, showing how ignorance and hysteria can inflame
a ruinous miscarriage of justice. Only this September was Lindy
Chamberlain finally cleared of all charges. That is noted in a
postscript to the movie, added just before the release.
   Menahem Golan and Yoram Globus were executive producers, and
Verity Lambert produced, with Roy Stevens as line producer. The
rating is PG, with scary elements for the very young. Running time:
121 minutes.
   _ By Bob Thomas, Associated Press Writer.
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   
   ``U2 Rattle and Hum''
   
   In the age of MTV, the concert film has become superfluous
self-parody. U2, the sometimes insufferably self-righteous rock
conscience of the 1980s, also flirts dangerously with the line over
which lies unintentional comedy.
   It took a young, relatively inexperienced director, 26-year-old
Phil Joanou, to walk this tightrope, oblivious to the lack of a net.
   ``U2 Rattle and Hum'' is an unself-conscious, visually thrilling
concert film that honors the music, but also reveals the boys in the
band _ lead singer Bono, guitarist The Edge, bassist Adam Clayton
and drummer Larry Mullen Jr. _ as less self-important than
reassuringly self-deprecating.
   Most of the film, shot during U2's ``Joshua Tree'' tour last
year, is in beautiful black and white. Concert films can be
cloyingly arty in the filming, but Joanou lays down an unobtrusive
visual back-beat for his stars _ until it's time to take the lead,
and when the camera work is center stage, it's dazzling. Joanou also
did his own editing.
   Thankfully there are none of those
sitting-around-the-hotel-suite-rapping scenes. When Joanou does try
to interview the band, they giggle and stammer what they know to be
hopeless banalities, such as, ``It's a musical journey.''
   Other behind-the-scenes are quite touching. During a visit to
Graceland, Elvis Presley's home in Memphis, Mullen struggles
earnestly to explain why he liked the Elvis movies that hipper types
disdained. Bono, like an indulgent papa, sweet-talks the tour guide
into letting Mullen have his picture taken sitting aboard one of
Elvis' motorcycles.
   The Edge provides Buster Keaton-like comic relief _ though he is
quite articulate when asked to talk about the film or the music.
Backstage just before an encore, huffing and puffing Bono shouts at
him, ``Not on the first verse, not on the second verse, on the third
verse!'' When B.B. King joins the band onstage in Fort Worth, he and
Bono walk the stage in rehearsal. ``I'm no good at chords,'' King
says. ``You'll have to get somebody else to do chords.'' Bono
mutters, ``Edge can do it.''
   The title of the movie is from one of the songs that first seared
the band into U.S. consciousness, ``Bullet the Blue Sky.'' The
band's political message is more sophisticated than the usual
oh-wow-man-heavy rock dose. Ironically, when Bono is flinging
himself around the stage, it's hard to concentrate on the message
when thinking, ``Nice hair.''
   Bono does allow himself to be upstaged, though, as on a trip to a
Harlem church where the New Voices of Freedom sing ``I Still Haven't
Found What I'm Looking For'' as a gospel song, or B.B. King's duet
on ``When Love Comes to Town,'' a song Bono wrote for the blues
great when he came to Ireland.
   The true test of a concert film is, after all, its concert
footage, and the friendly preview crowd at a Times Square theater
thought it was _ they cheered after every number.
   _ By Kathryn Baker, AP Television Writer.
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
   G _ General audiences. All ages admitted.
   PG _ Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be
suitable for children.
   PG-13 _ Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children
under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
   R _ Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult
guardian.
   X _ No one under 17 admitted. Some states may have higher age
restrictions.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Release Anytime</NOTE>
</DOC>
