ID: 132	RANK: 61	SCORE: 9.881557
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910919-0049
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910919-0049.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Marketing &amp; Media -- Advertising:
   Hotels Promote Cheaper Rates,
   But the Strategy Has Some Risks
   ----
   By Jonathan Dahl
</HL>
<DATE>
09/19/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B11
</SO>
<CO>
   HLT MHS OMC WNEWS
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
</MS>
<IN>
ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)
BEVERAGES (BVG)
DISTILLERS AND BREWERS, MAKERS OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES (DST)
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS AND SERVICES (HOU)
LODGING, CAMPGROUNDS (LOD)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
TOBACCO PRODUCTS (TOB)
</IN>
<NS>
PERSONNEL ANNOUNCEMENTS, PROMOTIONS, APPOINTMENTS (PER)
ACQUISITIONS &amp; MERGERS, TAKEOVERS, BOARD BATTLES (TNM)
</NS>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
FAR EAST (FE)
ILLINOIS (IL)
JAPAN (JA)
MARYLAND (MD)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
OREGON (ORG)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   Most travelers sneer at the idea of cheap hotels, which
conjure up images of paper-thin walls, grungy carpets and
rust-brown water. But now the inexpensive hotel is turning
out to be a new concept in advertising.
   Increasingly, such hotels as Marriott, Hyatt and Hilton
are running ads touting prices that are only $10 or $20 more
than the rates of some roadside dives. It is an effort to
drum up business in a lackluster year, and the hotel hype has
been one rare bright spot in a severe advertising recession.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But even some hotel executives concede this is risky
ground for an industry so obsessed with image and luxury.
Moreover, the bogus bargains claimed in some top-name hotel
ads threaten to anger customers and do further damage to some
classy reputations.
   Hotels have spent millions on new lobbies, health clubs
and various marketing programs, all to differentiate
themselves from competitors. Now, frets Mike Ribero, a senior
vice president at Hilton Hotels Corp., "As an industry, we're
spending a lot of money telling people how cheap we are, not
how good our service is. That can be destructive."
   Advertising with such a heavy accent on discounts "only
tells the customer to pick hotels just on price," says Jack
Trout of Trout &amp; Ries, a marketing consultant in Greenwich,
Conn. "It destroys brand loyalty and turns hotels into a
commodity."
   The push to be inexpensive can backfire with business
travelers, in particular. They often are more keen on service
than price because their employers are paying the bill. To
some degree, chains recognize this and run more conservative
spots on the evening news and in other TV programs that
appeal to this group. "There's an excruciatingly delicate
balance to strike here," says Marc Yanofsky, senior vice
president of marketing at Hyatt Corp.
   Most hotels are pushing price out of desperation. The
industry has been in the dumps for five years, at first
because of glut of newly built properties and more recently
because of the nation's recession. In 1990, the industry had
losses totaling about $350 million, and its vacancy rate
today is 35% to 40%.
   Faced with these vacancies, even upscale chains shifted
from strictly service-oriented ads to price promotions. About
75% of Marriott Corp.'s hotel ads now plug low room rates --
$39 a day, in some cases -- while the remaining 25% of its
ads focus on service. In the mid-1980s, the ratio was the
reverse. "You have to work a lot harder to get customers,"
says Jackie Hurley, Marriott's ad director.
   The Hilton chain currently hammers pricing in about half
of all ads, although it plans to reduce that to 35% next
year. And some of the toniest inns shudder at the thought of
being so crass as to talk price. "We appeal to a small
marketplace that isn't oriented that way," says a spokeswoman
for Ritz-Carlton Hotels, where some suites go for more than
$1,000 a night.
   Successful or not, the price-peddling ads have at least
been a godsend for the recession-riddled ad world. While many
industries have cut back, hotels and resorts tripled their ad
budgets from 1987 to 1990, to $637 million. In the first half
of 1991, hotel ad spending rose less than 1%, but that
compares with a 7.8% drop for all advertising, according to
Leading National Advertisers, which collects data
advertising.
   Just one problem: Hotels aren't even delivering on some of
these eye-catching bargains because many of the deals are
loaded with restrictions. Experts say that's only to going to
alienate more customers. Chekitan Dev, marketing professor at
Cornell University's Hotel School, says, "You really harm
yourself when you start playing some of the games airlines
do."
   Hotels are risking years of good will by bannering their
bargains without heavily highlighting all the restrictions.
Usually the deals are valid only for a limited number of
rooms, and only on certain days -- but it says so only in the
tiny print buried at the bottom of the page.
   Marriott introduced the hotel industry's first
nonrefundable rates, long a sore point among customers of
airlines that do the same thing. But hotels have come up with
some new twists that even the airlines didn't think of. A
recent ad promoting a $240 weekend rate at New York's Pierre,
part of the Four Seasons Hotels Inc. chain, bears a
picturesque view of the hotel as seen from the greenery of
Central Park. But in extremely fine print, the ad mentions
that the rate doesn't apply to rooms with a view of the park.
Those rooms continue to cost $430 a night.
   Other hotel ads list cheap rates that turn out to require
two people staying in the room, each paying the advertised
rate. Stephen Gardner, an assistant attorney general in
Texas, says the practice is "clearly misleading." But he
hasn't received enough complaints to warrant a probe. The
rate might rarely work for single people traveling alone, he
notes, "depending on how much luck they have before they get
to the room."
   ---
   Zwiren Joins Needham
                                                                                                       

   Jan Zwiren has resigned as chief executive officer of
Ayer's Chicago office to join Omnicom's DDB Needham unit,
adding to speculation that Ayer may sell its Chicago
operation.
   But Ayer spokesperson Victoria Horstmann denied rumors
that Ayer would shed its Chicago office. "We're staying in
Chicago," she said. "We're trying to shore it up with added
sevices, like creative media research out of New York. We're
reinforcing the ties between New York and Chicago."
   Ms. Zwiren, who wasn't available for comment, left Zwiren
Ayer, as the Chicago office had been known, to become
director of strategic business development at DDB Needham's
Chicago office. New York-based Ayer's Chicago office will now
be known as Ayer Chicago, and its chief operating officer,
Frank Maher, assumes the top post of general manager.
   Ayer acquired Ms. Zwiren's small agency less than two
years ago, merging it with its own Chicago office and having
Ms. Zwiren report directly to the president of Ayer U.S.A.,
Dom Rossi. Her successor, Mr. Maher, will report to Dean
Proctor, an executive vice president in Ayer's New York
office. Ayer Chairman Jerry Siano couldn't be reached for
comment on rumors that the Chicago operation may be sold.
   In addition, Tim Prosch, director of account services in
the Chicago office, and John Trusk, creative director, were
named managing directors.
   ---
   Possible Ad Ban in Oregon
                                                                                                       

   Voters in Oregon may get the chance to vote on whether to
ban virtually all alcohol and tobacco advertising in their
state. But the Association of National Advertisers is
fighting to keep the issue off the ballot.
   Two Oregon residents, Anthony Taylor and Cheryl MacDonald,
are collecting signatures to get their proposed ban on the
ballot for the November 1992 election. Included would be all
forms of media advertising for alcohol and tobacco products,
except "ads on packages that aren't used for display," and
logos on letterhead and in trade journals.
   But the advertiser group's executive vice president,
Daniel L. Jaffe, has urged Oregon's secretary of state to
refuse to accept the ballot initiative, claiming it violates
the state's constitution and that it "raises serious concerns
about the constitutional protections afforded by the U.S.
Supreme Court to commercial speech."
   A draft of the proposed initiative contends: "Promoting or
glamourizing cigarettes, tobacco products and alcohol adds to
social problems and conflicts with sensible drug policy.
Effects of these acts should be minimized." The ANA hopes to
pursue the matter with Oregon officials.
   ---
   Ad Notes. . . .
                                                                                                       

   TOY REVIEW: Takara U.S.A. Corp., the U.S. unit of
Tokyo-based toy maker Takara Co., is reviewing 10 agencies to
handle its line of gift items and toys. Takara is in its
first year in the U.S., although its battery-operated
"dancing" beverage cans and flowers have been available
through U.S. distributors.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
