ID: 132	RANK: 62	SCORE: 9.815554
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910822-0044
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910822-0044.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Marketing &amp; Media -- Advertising:
   Ayer, Seeking an Investor, Held
   Failed Talks With Roux Seguela
   ----
   By Joanne Lipman
</HL>
<DATE>
08/22/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B5
</SO>
<CO>
   LVMHY NWS PEP U.GUI VOLVY WPPGY
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
</MS>
<IN>
ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)
AUTOMOBILES (AUT)
BEVERAGES (BVG)
CASINOS AND GAMBLING (CNO)
DISTILLERS AND BREWERS, MAKERS OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES (DST)
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
SOFT DRINKS, MAKERS OF NON-ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES (SFT)
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
</IN>
<NS>
ACQUISITIONS &amp; MERGERS, TAKEOVERS, BOARD BATTLES (TNM)
</NS>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION (FTC)
</GV>
<RE>
AUSTRALIA (ASA)
EUROPE (EU)
FAR EAST (FE)
FLORIDA (FL)
FRANCE (FR)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
SCANDINAVIA (SCA)
SWEDEN (SW)
GREAT BRITAIN (UK)
UNITED STATES (US)
WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)
</RE>
<LP>
   Ad agency Ayer, which has been seeking an investor to help
beef up its European operations, has held conversations with
French agency Roux, Seguela, Cayzac &amp; Goudard. But the talks
didn't pan out because of Ayer's unwillingness to give up
majority control and RSCG's refusal to settle for less than
51%.
   Executives at both RSCG and Ayer confirmed the talks but
insisted the conversations ended several months ago and
haven't been revived. The disclosure adds another name to the
burgeoning list of agencies that have talked with Ayer, all
with no success so far.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   On Monday, Ayer declined to comment on reports that it was
in negotiations with London's Gold Greenlees Trott. Ayer has
sought out potential partners for more than a year in a bid
to strengthen its European network.
   The apparently fruitless talks point up the difficulty
Ayer, one of the nation's oldest and largest agencies, is
having in trying to find an investor while remaining
independent. While Ayer has talked to 20 or 25 agencies,
"every agency that approaches, especially one that's
international or European, is interested in buying a
majority," says Jerry Siano, chief executive officer.
   Word of the talks with RSCG came as speculation heated up
earlier this week that the two agencies would meet again.
While RSCG's head of international operations, Jean-Michel
Goudard, conceded that he was in New York earlier this week,
he added, "I didn't meet anyone from Ayer. I didn't even have
telephone contact."
   Ayer's insistence on retaining majority control may make
finding a partner almost impossible. In a telephone
interview, RSCG's Mr. Goudard said his agency won't even
consider a deal without a controlling interest. In this day
and age, with money tight and economic worries high, other
firms too are reluctant to invest in a company if they can't
have a say in how it's run.
   "Having a minority {interest} makes no sense," Mr. Goudard
said. To build an international ad agency network, a company
needs enough control to work out conflicts and to forge a
single philosophy throughout, he says. "If you buy a
minority, you have no control of these things. So why should
you buy?" he asks.
   If RSCG's overtures had been successful, the French group
could have created a powerful new U.S. network. RSCG already
owns Tatham RSCG, one of Chicago's more prestigious agencies.
Tatham, like Ayer, handles Procter &amp; Gamble, one of the most
sought-after advertisers in the country. The two agencies
together, one dominant in Chicago and the other in New York,
would create a formidable challenge to the biggest agency
networks.
   But RSCG also owns New York-based Messner Vetere Berger
Carey Schmettere, whose MCI Commuications client would clash
with one of Ayer's major clients, American Telephone &amp;
Telegraph Co.
   Ayer's Mr. Siano says his agency will keep looking for a
minority partner rather than cave in and give away a majority
stake. Yet the agency clearly could use a boost from an
outsider, especially in Europe. Its European network, started
less than a decade ago, is tiny compared with those of other
big U.S. agencies, such as WPP Group's J. Walter Thompson or
Interpublic Group's McCann-Erickson. Mr. Siano says he would
even consider merging the European network with another
overseas network to give it a big boost.
   In the U.S., Ayer also has had its well-publicized share
of problems. Earlier this month, the agency was forced to
fire about 60 people to cut overhead. In June, it closed the
55-person Dallas office after losing the $45 million-plus
J.C. Penney account. The agency also lost several other
clients, including the $10 million account for Citibank's New
York branch.
   But Ayer still is considered one of the choicest
independent agencies in the nation. Founded 120 years ago, it
still has a blue-chip client list other shops pine for,
including General Motors and AT&amp;T. It also has had some new
business gains, most notably the Bayer aspirin account from
Sterling Drug.
   "We have turned down quite a few offers," says Mr. Siano,
who figures he gets two to three calls each month from
interested parties. "At this stage of the game, we want to
own ourselves. We're the last of the Mohicans."
                                                                                                       

   Volvo, Scali Settle With FTC
                                                                                                       

   Volvo Cars of North America and Scali McCabe Sloves, the
ad agency that made the faked "Bearfoot" ad for the Swedish
car maker, settled charges by the Federal Trade Commission,
with each agreeing to pay $150,000.
   But, as is typical in such settlements, neither party
admitted violating any law. And neither the car company, a
unit of AB Volvo, nor Scali admitted knowing the cars in the
ad were tampered with.
   The ad in question showed a huge-tire "monster" pickup
truck driving over the top of a row of cars, crushing the
roofs of every vehicle but a Volvo station wagon. A
settlement last October with Texas's attorney general
disclosed that the ad was rigged: The roof of the Volvo was
reinforced with lumber and steel, while the pillars of the
other cars in the ad were severed or weakened.
   As a result of that settlement, Volvo ran public apologies
for the ad in a number of major newspapers. Scali, a unit of
WPP Group, resigned the $40 million Volvo account shortly
afterward.
   The FTC settlement prohibits Volvo and Scali from any
similar misrepresentations in the future. Volvo, which
maintained that the cars in the ad were faked without its
knowledge, said, "We are pleased that this matter has been
resolved and we can put it behind us."
   Scali said, "The FTC did not find that Scali knew of or
condoned any alteration of, or tampering with, cars used in
the commercial." The agency declined to comment further.
   Some critics charged that the FTC settlement didn't go far
enough. Dan White, the whistleblower for the Texas attorney
general's office, said he was "appalled and furious" over the
agreement. "Clearly the settlement is nothing, particularly
for a case this strong."
                                                                                                       

   Johnnie Walker in Review
                                                                                                       

   Importer Schieffelin &amp; Somerset is putting its $7 million
to $10 million Johnnie Walker Red scotch ad account, which is
now at New York agency Smith/Greenland, in review.
   Schieffelin, a joint venture of Guinness PLC and LVMH Moet
Hennessy Louis Vuitton, said it is talking to McCabe & Co.;
Deutsch; Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg; and Lowe &amp; Partners, as
well as to incumbent Smith/Greenland. The $6 million account
for the premium Johnnie Walker Black scotch, also at
Smith/Greenland, isn't being reviewed.
   Schieffelin's president and chief executive, J. Penniston
Kavanagh, called Smith/Greenland's current "And he drinks
Johnnie Walker" campaign "very successful." "We're gaining
market share, but in a market that's as problematic as
scotch, it's appropriate to look as far afield as we can from
time to time," he said.
   Sales of Johnnie Walker Red have fallen, though not as
rapidly as the total scotch whisky market. Unit sales of the
brand dipped 2.6% from 1989 to 1990, while total scotch sales
dropped 7.7%, according to M. Shanken Communications, which
publishes surveys of the alcoholic-beverage industry. Frank
Walters, research director for Shanken, said nearly 90% of
scotch sales continue to come from consumers over 40, rather
than the yuppies Schieffelin seeks in its campaign.
   Smith/Greenland's campaign, which began running in 1988,
has attracted plenty of attention, both positive and
negative, for its bold departure from traditional scotch
advertising. One early ad that drew some boos showed a back
view of two scantily clad young women running along a beach.
The copy line: "He loves my mind. And he drinks Johnnie
Walker."
   ---
   Ad Notes. . . .
                                                                                                       

   VIDEO ACCOUNT: FoxVideo named Cox Landey &amp; Partners, New
York, to handle advertising for the video of "Home Alone."
FoxVideo, a unit of News Corp., plans to spend about $10
million advertising the video, which goes on sale today.
   ---
   REVIEW DEJA VU: The Florida Lottery will redo this
spring's ad account review, probably beginning sometime next
month, Lottery Secretary Marcia Mann said. The replay stems
from a protest filed with the lottery in May by Bozell's
Tampa office, the incumbent on the $25 million account. Earle
Palmer Brown, which won the pitch in May, will continue to
handle the account on an interim basis until a new decision
is reached.
   ---
   APPEAL: Earle Palmer Brown said it plans to appeal the
General Accounting Office's denial of its protest regarding
the Marine Corps ad contract. The Bethesda, Md., agency filed
the protest in April after WPP Group's J. Walter Thompson won
another five-year contract for the $15 million account. The
General Accounting Office turned down the protest two weeks
ago.
   ---
   SUBARU UPDATE: Wieden &amp; Kennedy plans to revise a
controversial ad for Subaru's new SVX sports coupe, agency
President Dan Wieden said. Agency officials on Tuesday met
with the ABC television network. "We discussed some possible
revisions that deal with the speed and safety issues," said
Harvey Dzodin, ABC's vice president of commercial clearance.
As reported, the tongue-in-cheek spot describes how the SVX
can exceed 140 miles per hour and promises drivers they'll
"be able to use most of the speedometer." All three networks
have been reviewing the ad; an NBC spokesman said the review
process is continuing, and CBS declined to comment. Subaru, a
unit of Fuji Heavy Industries Ltd., is counting on the SVX to
help boost its sales and sagging reputation.
   ---
   PROMOTIONS: Pepsi-Cola Co. named Tracy-Locke, Dallas,
agency of record for national marketing promotions.
Tracy-Locke, which also does advertising for Frito-Lay,
another PepsiCo division, has handled Pepsi-Cola's promotions
on a local and regional basis for about 10 years.
   ---
   DIED: Hal Dixon, 67, former chairman and president of Cole
&amp; Weber, Monday, from injuries suffered in a polo accident in
Victoria, British Columbia. The Seattle agency is a unit of
WPP Group.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
