ID: 132	RANK: 76	SCORE: 9.405272
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910528-0094
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910528-0094.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Marketing &amp; Media -- Advertising:
   Next Season's Prices for TV Ads
   Slide in Reversal of Long Trends
   ----
   By Joanne Lipman
</HL>
<DATE>
05/28/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4
</SO>
<CO>
   CBS CCB GE NWS PEP
</CO>
<MS>
CONGLOMERATES (CGL)
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
</MS>
<IN>
BEVERAGES (BVG)
CONGLOMERATES (CGL)
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
SOFT DRINKS, MAKERS OF NON-ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES (SFT)
TEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX)
</IN>
<RE>
AUSTRALIA (ASA)
CONNECTICUT (CT)
MICHIGAN (MI)
NEW YORK (NY)
</RE>
<LP>
   In a sharp reversal from the relentless price increases of
past years, prime-time TV ad prices for the fall season are
sliding, a sure sign that the media recession continues
unabated.
   "Upfront" negotiations -- the spring ritual when
advertisers buy time for the next TV season -- are just
starting and probably won't heat up for several weeks. But
already, network and ad-agency executives say prices for the
1991-92 season will likely tumble by 5% to 10% at all four
big broadcast networks.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The reason: Advertisers strapped by the recession are
continuing to slash budgets. Last year's upfront marketplace
saw more than $4.3 billion of ad time snapped up. This year,
even the most optimistic executives believe that number will
fall to between $3.8 billion and $3.9 billion.
   "There isn't much money in the marketplace. It doesn't
take a rocket scientist to figure that out," says Page
Thompson, an executive vice president with Omnicom Group's
DDB Needham ad agency. Advertisers want to keep what budgets
they do have flexible, he says, rather than committing now to
air-time for the fall: "If the {right} prices aren't there,
they'll just pull back."
   Not only are advertiser budgets scarce, but the networks'
audiences are continuing to dwindle, making them that much
less attractive to advertisers. Making matters even worse,
advertisers have been left cold by the fall lineups unveiled
last week. Unlike the late 1980s, when General Electric's NBC
network was red-hot, "all three networks are pretty much in
the same boat" this year, says Michael Drexler, an executive
vice president of ad agency Bozell Inc. "There are no
breakaway hits from what we've seen so far, and there really
is no significant ratings leader among the networks."
   The depressed pricing would be a big setback for the
networks in any year. But this year, the decline is
especially unnerving, because it comes during an
Olympic-selection season, when ad spending -- and prices --
traditionally get a major boost. Media experts say this may
be the first year upfront prices for prime time have declined
since the abolition of cigarette ads on TV more than two
decades ago.
   Part of the current problem is that advertisers aren't
pumping up ad budgets with extra spending to sponsor
Olympics-related coverage, as they used to in the past.
Instead, they're simply shifting around existing ad budgets.
Ad and network executives believe that $800 million to $900
million will be spent on ads in the winter and summer
Olympics -- but a third to half of that amount will come out
of existing ad budgets, cannibalizing annual ad expenses,
rather than adding to them.
   While prices are expected to decline across the board, the
ABC network of Capital Cities/ABC is expected to fare better
than its competitors, with about a 5% decline in the price to
reach each thousand prime-time viewers. Many ad executives
believe ABC, currently the second-ranked network, has a shot
at taking the top-ranked mantle away from NBC in the coming
season.
   NBC and CBS Inc.'s network, meanwhile, are expected to
weather price declines in the 5% to 10% area, while News
Corp.'s Fox Broadcasting is expected to drop by that much or
perhaps more. Fox's expected decline looks relatively steep,
because it is coming off an unusually strong year last year,
when advertisers turned to it because it guaranteed its spots
would reach a certain number of viewers. The Big Three
networks last year had temporarily abandoned that traditional
guarantee for a modified guarantee advertisers found less
attractive.
   Of course, some of the gloom and doom undoubtedly stems
from posturing by advertisers and agency executives. What's
more, the major upfront buys haven't yet begun, leaving room
for a last-minute uptick. So far, the only deals actually
agreed upon have been "pre-upfront" packages, in which
advertisers work out special deals that often cover more than
one year. A number of the nation's largest advertisers,
industry executives say, have already cut such deals,
generally at 5% to 10% discounts to last year's upfront
prices.
   Still, there is unusual -- and somber -- agreement on both
sides of the bargaining table that this season will be a
depressed one. Typically, the upfront market ends up as a
three-day to four-day ad buying frenzy breaking loose
sometime around the July 4 weekend. This year, though, agency
executives wonder whether the upfront season will ever "pop"
as it usually does. Says Mr. Drexler, "It could drag out for
weeks, because no one is really rushing in with potfuls of
money."
   ---
   Ad Notes. . . .
                                                                                                       

   JOINT VENTURE: Ayer's Detroit office agreed to a joint
venture with Brogan &amp; Partners Advertising, Southfield, Mich.
The venture includes a consolidation of services and
facilities, though each company will keep its own management.
Ayer said the move will let Brogan, which billed $12 million
last year, pitch more national accounts, and help Ayer's
office get more regional business.
                                                                                                       

   NEW ACCOUNT: Coach Leatherware awarded its $3 million ad
account to Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond, New York.
                                                                                                       

   SODA: PepsiCo Inc. will be playing up its red, white and
blue colors this summer, churning out cans and bottles of
Pepsi, diet Pepsi and caffeine-free diet Pepsi decorated with
flags and fireworks. The cans, which will be distributed
through July 4, will be promoted by a Diet Pepsi commercial
showing patriotic scenes and singer Ray Charles. The
commercial culminates with "Independence . . . Pretty cool,
huh."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
