ID: 270	RANK: 50	SCORE: 22.056072
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910114-0051
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910114-0051.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Marketing &amp; Media:
   Contempt Ruling
   May Be Appealed
   By Asian Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/14/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4
</SO>
<CO>
   DJ FREST
</CO>
<IN>
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
</IN>
<LP>
   HONG KONG -- The Asian Wall Street Journal is considering
an appeal against its conviction for contempt of court in
Singapore.
   In the Singapore High Court on Friday, Justice T.S.
Sinnathuray ruled that the Hong Kong-based daily newspaper
and its editor and publisher were guilty of contempt over an
article published in the paper in December 1989. He fined
them a total of 9,000 Singapore dollars (US$5,114) and
ordered them to pay the costs of the legal proceedings. The
judge also found the printer and the distributor of the Asian
Journal in Singapore guilty of contempt, but didn't impose
any penalty on them other than their share of the costs.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   In New York, a spokesman for Dow Jones &amp; Co., majority
owner of the Asian Journal, said: "We don't believe this
decision was warranted by the facts, and we are considering
whether to incur the expense of an appeal."
   The contempt charges are the latest in a long series of
legal and administrative actions taken by Singapore against
the foreign press, particularly against the Asian Journal and
the weekly Far Eastern Economic Review, which is also owned
by Dow Jones. Both publications have been "gazetted" by
Singapore, and neither publication now circulates in the
country. At the time the article at issue was published, the
Asian Journal was circulating its legally permitted 400
copies a day.
   The article contained a comment by Peter Kann, president
of Dow Jones, criticizing a Singapore court decision against
the Review. The comment followed a libel judgment against the
Review in a case brought by Lee Kuan Yew when he was prime
minister of Singapore.
   Mr. Kann said the Review's disputed report "contained an
essentially accurate portrayal of highly newsworthy events
relating to the detention without trial of Catholic social
workers by the Lee government, and relations between the
Catholic Church and Mr. Lee. Solely because it was read to be
critical of Mr. Lee, however, it has resulted in this
unwarranted determination against the Review. We can only
hope that in the long term, the Review's punishment will not,
as doubtlessly intended, still honest and independent voices
in Singapore."
   Singapore's attorney general filed criminal contempt
charges against five parties over publication of Mr. Kann's
comment: Barry Wain, the Asian Journal's editor; Michael J.
Wilson, the Asian Journal's publisher; Dow Jones Publishing
Co. (Asia) Inc., the Asian Journal's proprietor, and the
printer and distributor in Singapore. Mr. Kann wasn't
charged.
   In a 43-page judgment, Justice Sinnathuray said he had no
doubt an ordinary reader would find the article contemptuous
of the judge and of the High Court. "Clearly, the reader
would conclude that the plaintiff won the libel action
against the defendants because he was the prime minister and
not on the merits of his case," the justice said.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
