ID: 270	RANK: 62	SCORE: 21.479668
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910125-0100
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910125-0100.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Marketing &amp; Media:
   Dow Jones Reports
   41% Profit Drop
   For Fourth Period
</HL>
<DATE>
01/25/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4
</SO>
<CO>
   DJ
</CO>
<IN>
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
EARNINGS (ERN)
</IN>
<LP>
   NEW YORK -- Dow Jones &amp; Co. said net income in the fourth
quarter fell 41% to $23.4 million, or 23 cents a share, from
$39.8 million, or 39 cents a share, in the 1989 period.
Operating income declined 34%, to $54.5 million, as revenue
rose 0.8% to $442.9 million from $439.3 million.
   In the year, net fell 66% to $106.9 million, or $1.06 a
share; the 1989 net of $317 million, or $3.15 a share,
included a net gain of $164.1 million, or $1.63 a share, from
the sale of an investment. Without that gain, net in 1990
fell 30%.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The company said earnings for the quarter and the year
were adversely affected by increased interest expense and
goodwill amortization charges related to Dow Jones's
acquisition of Telerate Inc., and one-time charges of about
seven cents a share, largely for staff reductions.
   Consolidated operating income decreased 32% to $229.2
million. Revenue rose 1.9% to $1.72 billion.
   Dow Jones's Information Services segment, which includes
Telerate and the Dow Jones Information Services Group,
reported a 40% decrease in operating income to $129.1
million. Revenue increased 5.8%, to $736.4 million.
Telerate's operations in Europe and Asia had strong growth.
   The company said the unfavorable comparison in information
services operating income reflected the inclusion of 100% of
the costs of The Trading Service, an electronic system for
foreign-exchange transactions marketed by Telerate. Another
factor in the drop was the retrenchment taking place
throughout the financial services industry on Telerate's
other businesses in North America. Also, operating income was
lowered by the increase in goodwill amortization associated
with the completion of Dow Jones's acquisition of Telerate in
early 1990. In 1989, The Trading Service was 50%-owned with a
partner, since bought out, and was reported as an equity
investment.
   Operating income at Dow Jones's business publications,
which include The Wall Street Journal and its overseas
editions, Barron's magazine and other publications, decreased
16%, to $83.7 million, while revenue eased 0.5% to $748.9
million.
   Wall Street Journal advertising linage declined 9.7% in
1990, 10.8% in the fourth quarter. Advertising linage at
Barron's declined 7% in 1990, the company said.
   Ottaway Newspapers Inc., the company's community newspaper
unit, had 1990 operating income of $31.4 million, down 21%.
Revenue fell 1.6% to $234.7 million. Advertising linage at
Ottaway's 23 daily newspapers declined 7.2%.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
