ID: 270	RANK: 67	SCORE: 21.311062
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910109-0093
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910109-0093.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Letter from the Publisher:
   A Report to The Wall Street Journal's Readers
</HL>
<DATE>
01/09/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A11
</SO>
<CO>
   DJ
</CO>
<IN>
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
</IN>
<LP>
   (This progress report carries forward a custom begun 14
years ago. It reflects our belief that publishing a newspaper
is a public trust for which we are accountable first of all
to you, our readers.)
                                                                                                       

</LP>
<TEXT>
   To the Readers of The Wall Street Journal:
   The world enters a new year worried and waiting.
   There are the very visible risks of going to war in the
Persian Gulf, but also the risks, at least equally serious,
inherent in not doing so. The Soviet Union seems almost
inexorably to be disintegrating, politically  as well as
economically -- for good or ill no one quite knows. Across
much of America there is deepening economic gloom -- an
increasingly conspicuous recession that is beginning to
spread to other nations as  well.
   If 1991 opens as a year of anxiety, 1990 was one of those
years many high and mighty individuals and institutions would
just as soon forget.
   Among the departed or defrocked, the down or out: the
Michaels Tyson and Milken; Charles Keating and Marion Barry;
Donald Trump and the emir of Kuwait; Danny Ortega and Manny
Noriega; Rajiv Gandhi and Benazir Bhutto; S&amp;Ls and many P&amp;Ls;
Dick Darman's legerdemain and Sam Nunn's bipartisanship;
Perrier and "no new taxes"; the Berlin Wall and real estate
values; communism and Milli Vanilli.
   Also, lamentably, global manager Margaret Thatcher, who
was pushed out; money manager Peter Lynch, who bowed out; and
four eccentrically successful entrepreneurs who passed away:
Armand Hammer, William Paley, Malcolm Forbes and An Wang.
And, finally, the longest peacetime economic expansion in
modern American history.
   But if 1990 was a year of falls and failures, it also was
a year of survivals, revivals and hopeful beginnings, some of
which ought to more than offset new year anxieties. Germany
was reunified, Western Europe moved closer to economic
unification, and North America to becoming a true free-trade
continent. Free societies and freer markets replaced Marxism
across Eastern Europe and almost surely will survive a winter
of discontent.
   The U.S., however reluctantly, again picked up its mantle
of global leadership, in the Persian Gulf and elsewhere. The
United Nations actually seems to be realizing its long
dormant potential for facilitating great power cooperation.
Spreading recession so far hasn't accelerated the greater
danger of global protectionism. And, the U.S. moved to
further liberalize immigration, thereby accelerating the
infusion of new talents and energies that are the greatest
strengths of American society.
   McDonald's opened and thrived in Moscow. Cadillac, Federal
Express, IBM and Wallace Co. won coveted Baldrige Awards for
quality. And, amid much gathering economic gloom, there are
counter-trends of revival and resurgence in U.S. "rust belt"
and "oil patch" regions disparaged or pitied but a few years
ago.
   In one such "Rocky" business comeback, a once down-and-out
Milwaukee manufacturer, Harnischfeger Industries, saw its
business boom by coupling traditional Midwest manufacturing
skills with a modern global marketing effort for its mining
shovels. American competitive instincts and successes, in
short, are alive and well in a great many industrial zones
between Wall Street and Silicon Valley. Main Street, as
usual, is displaying resilience and resourcefulness despite
woes on Wall Street and hand-wringing in Washington.
   Those are just some of the issues and events that the
Journal covered, interpreted and editorialized on over the
past 12 months and that it will be focusing its attention on
in the months ahead. Very few of these issues and events are
uniquely American these days. And neither is the Journal.
   It has become almost a cliche to say that business is now
global, but that makes it no less true or significant.
Japanese bond buyers and Hong Kong real estate investors,
British merchant bankers and German industrialists, Italian
designers and Korean manufacturers, and of course American
producers and consumers -- all are playing in the same Great
Game, even if not always by precisely the same rules.
   The Journal moves ahead into the '90s with the mission and
mandate to cover this global game, not just for its more than
five million American readers, but for a rapidly growing
world-wide business constituency.
   The Journal, founded in 1889, long has been America's
pre-eminent business daily, knitting together this nation's
intricate business fabric. Over the decade of the '80s, The
Asian Wall Street Journal, published in Hong Kong, developed
into Asia's dominant regional business daily. And now in
Europe, The Wall Street Journal Europe, less than a decade
old, is successfully challenging London's venerable Financial
Times as the essential international business daily on the
European continent.
   Altogether more than two million men and women buy the
Journal every business day. It is printed in 18 locations
across America and another six world-wide -- Adligenswil in
Switzerland, London, Heerlen in the Netherlands, Tokyo,
Singapore and Hong Kong. A new printing center in Bangkok is
scheduled to open this year. As a result, the Journal now
circulates in more than 100 countries and is available
day-of-issue in every major international business and
financial center. The Journal has moved into the '90s as the
only newspaper that truly can claim the title of The World's
Business Daily.
   This hasn't been accomplished simply by satelliting pages
of a U.S. paper around the world, although that is a simple
route that some other publications have followed. The Journal
knows there is world-wide interest in essential business
news, but it also believes that reader interests and
priorities differ significantly from one region of the world
to another. In short, the Journal, like some of the
international companies it covers and serves, has learned to
think globally while operating regionally.
   The Journal operates as three editorially distinct papers
on three continents. Each Journal has its own expert staff of
reporters and editors who cover their region with the
domestic as well as international needs and interests of
their own readerships foremost in mind.
   Yet, all three Journals are much more than regional
newspapers precisely because they also are inextricably
linked. Each draws on the others' news resources to cover the
wider business world and the broader story of global business
competition.
   All three Journals operate by the same set of editorial
standards -- accuracy, fairness and independence -- that have
made The Wall Street Journal America's most trusted newspaper
in survey after survey over the years. And all three speak
with the same editorial voice on world issues -- for example,
supporting free markets, free trade and free societies in
every part of the world to every audience, fully sympathetic
or not.
   News stories or editorials sometimes upset governments or
other institutions in various parts of the world, for
instance in Singapore, where The Asian Wall Street Journal
has been effectively banned for its independent coverage of
former Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew's regime. Yet, the Journal
perseveres in seeking and speaking the truth in every part of
the world. We pretend to no monopoly on the truth, but the
truths we try to tell our readers are not divisible or
negotiable. If we compromise that independence to serve
anyone's agenda in any place, we compromise our credibility
to all readers everywhere. That credibility, of course, is
our ultimate asset, and the most valuable benefit we can
provide to you, our readers.
   The Journal's evolution from national business daily to
global business daily is a natural one. It reflects the
increasing internationalization of the news we cover, the
reader needs we seek to serve, and also the global marketing
needs of our advertisers. The Journal these days can offer an
advertiser the most influential audience in any major U.S.
metropolitan area or any major industrial nation -- or it can
offer the world at large.
   The audience that you, our readers, constitute is an
extraordinary one by any measurement. It is a global
community of highly educated, motivated and mobile business
people and professionals who are leaders in their enterprises
and societies. It's a prosperous community as well: average
household income of U.S. subscribers is $146,000; of Asian
subscribers, $184,000; of European ones, $230,000.
   Serving readers is our primary mission. And we seek to do
this both through the quality of the news coverage we provide
and the personal care we devote to serving our subscribers.
Journals are moved by trucks and minivans, commercial planes
and chartered aircraft, from our printing sites to cities
around the world where they increasingly are hand-delivered
to subscriber offices or home doorsteps.
   Delivery, particularly abroad, entails surmounting some
surprising and even exotic obstacles: collision with a horse
on the midnight minivan run through rural Germany; periodic
confrontations with over-zealous customs agents or censors in
a few still-nervous Asian nations; typhoons in Taiwan and
coups d'etat in the Philippines.
   The essential point is that today's news is of use
tomorrow morning, not next week, and Journal staffers around
the world make every conceivable effort to ensure that the
paper is available when and where readers want it.
   The Journal's transformation into a global business daily
is part of a larger corporate expansion that has seen Dow
Jones &amp; Co., the Journal's parent, grow in many new
directions. Through its acquisition of Telerate a year ago,
Dow Jones has become one of the world's leading suppliers of
instantaneous global financial information with some 90,000
customer terminals spread across 60 countries around the
globe. This is part of a broader corporate strategy of
providing business news and information however, wherever and
whenever customers need it.
   In Europe Dow Jones is a partner with France's Groupe
Expansion and Germany's Handelsblatt in a network of European
business publications spanning more than a dozen countries
from Spain to Scandinavia and including Eastern Europe.
Through this partnership, Dow Jones helps serve Europe's
national-language business news needs. In Asia, Dow Jones
publishes The Far Eastern Economic Review, the region's
premier economic weekly, and has publishing partnerships in
countries from Japan to Thailand.
   This international expansion and Dow Jones's
diversification into electronic publishing are among the many
initiatives and legacies of Dow Jones Chairman Warren H.
Phillips, who has announced his retirement at midyear 1991 at
the age of 65. Warren Phillips joined Dow Jones as a newsman
nearly 45 years ago, served as a foreign correspondent in
postwar Europe, and returned to lead the Journal and Dow
Jones through an era of enormous growth and success. All this
was accomplished because Warren Phillips steadfastly has held
that editorial quality and independence and customer service
are the highest priorities of this publishing enterprise.
   All of the people of the Journal around the world are
committed to upholding those same priorities and values. The
reporters and editors based in more than 40 news bureaus
across the globe and their colleagues in sales, marketing,
production, technological support and distribution all join
me in wishing you and your families a healthy and happy new
year.
   Cordially,
                                                                                                       


   Peter R. Kann, Publisher
</TEXT>
</DOC>
