ID: 249	RANK: 37	SCORE: 8.180613
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911004-0139
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911004-0139.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Enterprise:
   Using Japanese Tactic, States Back New Technologies
   ---
   Life Systems, With Help From Ohio,
   Develops Commercial Potential
   ----
   By Dana Milbank
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
10/04/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B2
</SO>
<MS>
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
AEROSPACE (ARO)
MEDICAL &amp; BIOTECHNOLOGY, GENETIC RESEARCH, PROSTHETICS (MTC)
CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)
</IN>
<NS>
CORPORATE PROFILES (PRO)
SCIENCE &amp; TECHNOLOGY (SCN)
</NS>
<GV>
VETERANS AFFAIRS DEPARTMENT (VET)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
OHIO (OH)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   A government, trying to beat foreigners to market with a
new technology, encourages competing companies to collaborate
and subsidizes their development efforts.
   It's a tale often told in Tokyo. But the latest chapter
takes place a bit farther west -- in Ohio.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The new setting delights Rick A. Wynveen. Founder and
president of Life Systems Inc., a small space and defense
contractor in Cleveland, Mr. Wynveen says an Ohio state
government program has put new life into Life Systems.
   For years, Life Systems has had trouble commercializing
some of its most promising technology. The 22-year-old
concern's growth and profit were constrained by its
dependence on erratic government work. But now, with a
government program helping it and its rivals develop a new
technology and markets, Life Systems hopes to soon become a
partner in a nerve-stimulation business that could multiply
its sales. "We never could have done this without {the
government program}," Mr. Wynveen says.
   Life Systems' benefactor, Ohio's state-run Thomas Edison
Program, is one of the oldest and most advanced of more than
700 state and local government-funded programs that surfaced
in the last decade to help small companies bring new
technologies to market. By sharing and eventually
transferring technology to member companies and providing
them with contacts, the programs encourage small companies to
pursue risky technologies that otherwise wouldn't be
developed -- or would be left to the Japanese to develop. "In
an ad hoc, grass-roots sense, this is our response" to
Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry, says
Christopher Coburn, former head of the Ohio program and now
with the Battelle Memorial Institute.
   Of course, these small programs lack the central
coordination and funding that MITI provides Japanese
companies. They also have a mixed record of success. Ohio's
Edison program had to close one of its nine technology
centers, for applied information technology, when member
companies decided it wasn't worth their dues. In another
case, a growth hormone concern, Embryogen Inc., thanked the
Ohio program by leaving the state.
   Yet such programs have clearly helped small-business
owners such as Mr. Wynveen. The 58-year-old chemist worked as
a project manager for TRW Inc.'s life-support systems for
space and defense applications in the 1960s. But he says that
when the company told him in 1969 that it would gradually
dismantle the business, he decided to form a rival business.
That same year, Mr. Wynveen invested his personal savings of
$25,000 in the venture, took on two partners and opened a
two-room office in Beachwood, Ohio. For a research lab, he
used his partner's basement.
   Nine months later, Life Systems won a NASA contract to
devise a system to dechlorinate water aboard a space center.
Since then, revenue has grown to $12 million. Now, Life
Systems employs 100.
   But Life Systems found that working for the government was
no moon walk. Contracts would pile up all at once and then
disappear, causing big revenue swings for Life Systems and
forcing cutbacks. The government also limited profit margins
to 8%. By the late 1980s, with defense budget cuts looming,
Mr. Wynveen sought to tap the private sector.
   But Life Systems couldn't find commercial customers. Its
labs overflowed with new technologies -- devices that remove
chemical warfare agents from air and turn carbon dioxide to
oxygen and sewage to drinking water. But it never found
buyers for more than five units of any invention. "We knew
how to develop the technology," Mr. Wynveen says. "Our
problem was we didn't know if anybody would want it."
   Life Systems looked for a product with more commercial
appeal, and found it in "functional electronic stimulation."
Borrowing concepts first developed by researchers at
Cleveland's Case Western Reserve University, Mr. Wynveen's
company in 1988 began to design a system that would allow
paralyzed people to move their limbs using a control box
linked to surgically implanted electrodes.
   The market was potentially broad, but Life Systems
couldn't risk investing in 10 years of development if the
market didn't materialize or fell to the Japanese first.
   That's where the Edison BioTechnology Center came in. A
unit of Ohio's Edison program, the center seeks to form a
self-supporting biotechnology industry in northeastern Ohio.
The center in 1989 won a $5 million grant from the federal
Veterans Administration to develop the new technology along
with local hospitals, companies and academics; since then, it
has funneled technical and market support to Life Systems and
rivals as well.
   Using federal, state and county funds, the center is
turning local hospitals into teaching facilities to spread
the word about the new technology. It finds vendors to supply
Life Systems and its rivals and helps member companies sort
through red tape at government agencies. It conducts market
surveys for members, finds them academic advisers and
monitors government regulations. The center also built a
"technology library" to aid development.
   The efforts have been rewarded. While only three patients
have received the implanted devices, hospitals have committed
to 30 implants in the next few years.
   Life Systems also says the BioTechnology Center helped it
get a $2 million Veterans Administration grant July 22 that
calls for it to manufacture 200 devices over the next four
years. Now, Life Systems is seeking potential partners that
will join it in buying the commercial rights to the
technology from the center. Dorothy Baunach, president of the
BioTechnology Center, says Life Systems is the front runner
for the transfer, expected in six months.
   Even so, the technology has a long way to go. The industry
still must persuade enough doctors to use the unfamiliar
device, and it must stand up in the government's clinical
trials. Also, the market will shrivel quickly if the
government and insurance companies decide not to reimburse
patients for the procedure. Life Systems and its rivals must
also fend off Japanese and European producers, for whom
government nurturing is nothing new.
   But such fears are secondary to Life Systems and other
small businesses now competing in markets they wouldn't have
approached without government help. "Biotechnology is an area
where the United States is still in the lead," Mr. Wynveen
says. "This is a way to hold on."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
