ID: 249	RANK: 95	SCORE: 6.632618
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910416-0005
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910416-0005.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Gone Are the Days
   When Tom Swift
   Was a Serious Nerd
   ---
   `I'm Back in Print,' Says Tom
   Bookishly; `And Hip,' He
   Throws Out Disjointedly
   ----
   By Cynthia Crossen
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
04/16/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
</IN>
<LP>
   "They're bringing me back to life]" says Tom Swift
animatedly.
   Tom Swift, fictional boy inventor and inspiration for the
Tom Swiftie word game, has been a character in the lives of
American boys since 1910, when he began his inventing career
by souping up a motorcycle. That Tom, blond, blue-eyed,
brilliant but not stuck-up, disappeared in 1941 after selling
more than 14 million books. But first he married his
high-school sweetheart and sired Tom Jr. That Tom, a blond,
blue-eyed chip off the old block, became the hero of the Tom
Swift books between 1954 and 1981.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Amazingly, today's Tom is also the 18-year-old son of the
original Tom Swift. But this Tom is a teen for the '90s. He
lives in Southern California instead of New York state; he
invents superconductive surfboards instead of telescopes;
he'd rather be rocking at a beach party than saving the world
with aerial warships; and his girlfriend's brother says
things like, "Hey, babe, there are two choices here. We could
go swimming together or I could rub tanning oil on that
lovely bod."
   "The new Tom Swift isn't quite the serious science nerd
many of us thought the old Tom Swift was," says Irwyn
Applebaum, president of Tom Swift's new publisher, Pocket
Books, a division of Simon &amp; Schuster. "This one is fun on a
date."
   In fact, the new Tom looks a lot like Michael J. Fox in
the "Back to the Future" series. Mr. Applebaum says the
success of those movies -- rather than any attempt to woo the
young into science careers -- inspired Tom's return to
bookstores this month.
   Back when the original Tom Swift series appeared, being a
serious science nerd was hardly the worst fate that could
befall someone. Inventors like Thomas Edison, Cyrus McCormick
and Glenn Curtiss, the early 20th-century aviator/inventor
who was the model for Tom Swift, were national heroes, driven
men who worked alone to improve the world.
   And Tom was a boy of those times. He'd spot developments
in science and engineering, and figure out a way to make them
better. Along the way, the neighborhood bully, Andy Foger,
would do something nefarious, like steal the invention,
hoping to use it as a force for evil. But Tom would triumph,
enriching the forces of good and also, not coincidentally,
himself.
   "It was a simpler, more honest time," says James D.
Keeline, a San Diego, Calif., Tom Swift fan. "Today if Tom
Swift was going to do something for the military, they'd have
him bidding. But Tom would invent and perfect something
before he'd offer it to anyone."
   When inventors began to move out of small shops and into
giant research operations, Tom moved, too -- in his case,
from his modest lab in Shopton, N.Y., to Swift Enterprises,
where a legion of laborers turned his ideas into reality.
Eventually, old Tom got too rich from his inventions, and,
some believe, too tamed by matrimony to Mary Nestor
("cheerleader and worried face," Mr. Keeline describes her).
Tom Swift experts postulate that the first series ended
because Tom had become too, well, bourgeois.
   In 1954, the Stratemeyer Literary syndicate, which gave
the world Tom Swift, Nancy Drew and the Hardy Boys, among
others, created the Tom Jr. series. Edward Stratemeyer and
later his daughter, Harriet Adams, used a highly successful
method: making up the plots and, in most cases, hiring
writers to flesh them out. Both creators are now deceased. In
1984, the syndicate was bought by Simon &amp; Schuster, which is
owned by Paramount Communications Inc.
   Tom Jr. appeared on the scene just as atomic power,
computers and rockets were revolutionizing science. At the
same time, America and Russia were racing to build
rocketships and advanced weapons. Tom Jr.'s nemesis wasn't a
teen bully but fictional Communist countries like Brungaria.
Gone, too, were the racial and some of the sexual stereotypes
of the earlier books. There were no more black handymen
providing what was considered comic relief, and Tom Jr. got a
sister with a little spunk. But the Tom Jr. books never
achieved the popularity of the original series, and Tom fell
out of print.
   As with the earlier Tom Swift adventures, today's books
are geared to pre-teen boys, so the humor and dialogue aren't
exactly Noel Cowardesque. When Tom demonstrates a new weapon
that hurls cream pies at the enemy, his best friend, Rick
Cantwell, can't contain himself. "Rick laughed at Tom's crazy
sense of humor -- cream pies]" When Tom jokes about needing
blast shields for his black hole experiment, "Mandy aims a
mock punch at Tom's blond head. `You nut. I should have
realized you were goofing with us.'"
   Although Tom Swift books weren't exactly literary, they
did inspire Tom Swifties, the word-game fad of the early
1960s in which players tried to create adverbial links
between what was said and how it was said: "I just lost a
game of Russian roulette," said Tom absentmindedly. Although
the Tom Swift books didn't contain any real Tom Swifties, the
game was so named because Tom was alleged never to have
simply said something, but always to have said it excitedly
or soberly or angrily. The Tom Swiftie fad inspired a book,
many newspaper and magazine articles and a series of Tom
Dirties in Playboy magazine ("It isn't easy making love in a
canoe," said Tom tipsily). In 1964, they were succeeded by
elephant jokes as the nation's gag of choice.
   The new Tom Swift books, which will also be written by
hired writers fleshing out plot lines developed by the
publisher, will contain no Tom Swifties. "We didn't think
readers of any age would sit still for Tom Swifties," says
Mr. Applebaum. "They're just too corny."
   Diehard fans like John Dizer, a retired English professor
who has been studying Tom Swift for 35 years, says the game
is wrongly named anyway. "It's not nearly as prominent in Tom
Swift as people thought," says Mr. Dizer. "But Tom Swifties
used to get Harriet Adams upset because some of them were
pretty earthy."
   Although Tom Swifties have all but disappeared from the
American consciousness, one newspaperman, Smiley Anders of
the Baton Rouge Morning Advocate, keeps the wordplay alive in
his six-day-a-week column. "We started running jokes," says
Mr. Anders, "but we ran out of good jokes pretty quickly, so
we degenerated to puns and then to Tom Swifties. It's a low
class of humor but we're not proud."
   Mr. Anders's favorite: A young lady was posing for a
cheesecake photograph in a drafty studio. "`Hurry up and take
the picture, I'm freezing,' she snapped candidly with a
shudder."
   Since the beginning, some adults have faulted the Tom
Swift books for being boring, predictable and devoid of
literary merit. In the early part of the century, the chief
librarian of the Boy Scouts denounced their fast pace as
potentially dangerous to the tender imaginations of young
readers. Mr. Applebaum of Pocket Books acknowledges that Tom
Swift books aren't great literature. But "if we all sat back
and hoped our kids would read and reread `Alice in
Wonderland,' we'd be waiting a long time," he says. "Our hope
is that these will get kids into the habit of reading."
   Or even inventing. One of Tom's fans is Jack Cover, the
inventor of the stun gun that was used in the recent Los
Angeles police brutality incident. Mr. Cover named it Taser,
a loose acronym of Tom Swift's Electric Rifle, a gun that
could send out wireless bolts of energy to subdue enemies
without killing them.
   "I think I read every Tom Swift book that was out by 1932
or '33," says Mr. Cover, the 71-year-old inventor, who is
also a nuclear physicist. "Today, the role of the individual
inventor is almost impossible, but back then, Tom Swift could
really get things done."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
