ID: 144	RANK: 10	SCORE: 15.115965
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911016-0150
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911016-0150.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Theater:
   Scenes From the Wild West
   ----
   By Edwin Wilson
</HL>
<DATE>
10/16/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14
</SO>
<LP>
   Princeton, N.J. -- Buffalo Bill Cody and Wild Bill Hickok
are at the White House performing a scene from a play for the
president and the first lady. In the scene, written by
19th-century author Ned Buntline, Cody and Hickok play
themselves: It features the two men rescuing an Indian maiden
in distress. Halfway through, Wild Bill rebels: He won't
"play-act" any longer. Suddenly he turns and puts a knife
into Buntline's back, and starts out after the actress who's
playing the maiden, to seduce her himself. The president and
his wife, thinking this is part of the action, are delighted.
   For Buffalo Bill, the chief character in Arthur Kopit's
play "Indians," this is symptomatic of his whole life:
Nothing turns out the way he thought it would. Hired by the
railroads to provide workers with food, he kills 4,280
buffalos, practically wiping out the Indians' supply. "How
did I know buffalo breed so slow?" he moans.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Sitting Bull, who had ignominiously defeated Gen. Custer
at the Little Bighorn, became Buffalo Bill's friend. After
promising Sitting Bull that he would persuade the president
to come talk to him in person about Indian grievances,
Buffalo Bill can only produce three pompous, insensitive
senators. Attempting, finally, to effect some compromise
between the government and Sitting Bull, he must stand by
helplessly as Sitting Bull is brutally assassinated and a few
days later his Sioux Indian followers are massacred at
Wounded Knee.
   After being made a hero by Buntline in novels and plays,
Buffalo Bill, prior to Wounded Knee, produced his own Wild
West show in which he featured not only Wild Bill Hickok and
Sitting Bull, but Annie Oakley, Geronimo and others. It was
playwright Kopit's inspired idea to use the Wild West
framework to produce a play that moves back and forth from
actual events to scenes from the show. As in real life, there
is a natural affinity between show business and history. We
have the pageantry of Indian ceremonies and mock shoot-outs,
mixed with heartbreaking scenes of betrayal and
misunderstanding between the federal government and the
Indians.
   In some ways Mr. Kopit's play was ahead of its time. First
produced by the Royal Shakespeare Company in London, it
opened on Broadway in 1969, after which it disappeared from
sight. It is one of those underrated, overlooked plays that
not only speaks to an issue still very much alive, but is a
highly charged coup de theatre. "Indians" is just the kind of
play important regional theaters should produce. And now,
McCarter Theater, in its recently renovated space, has done
just that.
   That's the good news. The not-so-good news is that
director George Faison has not given it the kind of
production it deserves. The visual elements are there --
stunning scenery, lighting and costumes -- but the show
itself does not do justice to the theatrical nature of the
play. Being part of a Wild West show, we should be caught up
in hoopla and razzle-dazzle; we should rush headlong from one
scene to the next. But Mr. Faison, quite unaccountably, moves
the action at snail's pace. He lets one scene come to a
complete halt, takes a long pause, and painstakingly begins
the next scene. The action should unfold the way Buffalo Bill
fells fake buffalo or Annie Oakley shoots clay pigeons: bam,
bam, bam.
   Mr. Faison fares no better with his lead performer, Robert
Joy. Instead of his tepid performance, Buffalo Bill should be
charisma personified, not only to give the play a lift and a
self-assurance, but to provide a contrast with the lost,
bewildered figure who stumbles about the stage at the end.
   Despite these handicaps, there is still much to enjoy at
McCarter. The electric scene between Sitting Bull (Mel Duane
Gionson) and the three senators (John Tillotson, Don Perkins,
Gordon Stanley) is theater at its best, and several
performances -- Jay Patterson as Wild Bill Hickok, for
instance -- let us see just how much excitement "Indians" can
produce.
   Meanwhile, the first production of the Broadway season is
also a revival: Paul Osborn's "On Borrowed Time" at the
Circle in the Square Theater. The chief attraction here is
actor George C. Scott, who has traded in the gruff Gen.
Patton of films and the "Bah, Humbug" Scrooge of television
for lovable Gramps. Mr. Scott not only plays the lead but has
directed the production, assembling a strong cast that
includes Teresa Wright, Bette Henritze, Nathan Lane, Conrad
Bain and a very talented young actor, Matthew Porac.
   "On Borrowed Time" opened on Broadway in 1938, one night
before Thornton Wilder's "Our Town," with which it has much
in common. Both are set in small-town America, both rely
heavily on fantasy and both underscore the necessity of
accepting the inevitability of death. In "On Borrowed Time,"
Gramps (Mr. Scott) is taking care of his grandson Pud (Mr.
Porac) when the boy's father and mother, away for the day on
a trip, are killed in an auto accident.
   Death appears in the form of Mr. Brink, played with
tremendous eclat by Mr. Lane dressed in formal 1930s men's
attire. Mr. Brink has come to claim Gramps's wife (Ms.
Wright), who dies during the course of the action, and also
Gramps, who has several sinking spells. Before Mr. Brink can
corner him though, Gramps traps him in a tree, which means
that as long as Mr. Brink remains there, not only Gramps, but
no one on earth can die.
   Despite the emphasis on death, "On Borrowed Time" has
several uproarious scenes, some between Gramps and Mr. Brink
and others between Gramps and the prune-faced maiden aunt
(Ms. Henritze) who wants to get her hands on Pud and raise
him according to the strict precepts of her church. Gramps's
doctor (Mr. Bain) and lawyer (George DiCenzo), who cannot see
Mr. Brink, are convinced Gramps is insane and bring the head
of the local mental asylum (Allen Williams) to take him away
in a straitjacket. The joke here is that the head of the
asylum is far loonier than any of his patients.
   In the end, Gramps realizes that you cannot forestall
death, that inevitably it must be accepted. At the same time,
death will never be pleasanter, on stage or off, than it is
in "On Borrowed Time."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
