ID: 144	RANK: 31	SCORE: 11.508563
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910109-0103
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910109-0103.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   Where the Buffaloes Roam
   ----
   By Michael Pearce
</HL>
<DATE>
01/09/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8
</SO>
<LP>
   Russell Springs, Kan. -- The two hunters left the warmth
of the campfire in the grove of towering cottonwoods and
stepped out onto the vastness of the native prairie. A
serpentine path led them around the pointed leaves of yucca
cactus, around brittle sagebrush and impenetrable clusters of
tumbleweed.
   As they walked across the calm, sundrenched grassland I
noticed that one of the pair was shaking. "Cold?" I asked.
"No," he replied, "excited to be here." Not a sportsman in
the world could blame him.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The Kansas prairie that surrounded him is home to some of
America's most magnificent whitetail and mule deer. Where the
habitat is right there are antelopes, wild turkeys and
countless coveys of quails and pheasants. Without a doubt,
it's some of the finest game country that can be found today.
   Yet the hunters were looking for a hunt of the past rather
than the present. The short walk that took them to the top of
a small rise, in a way, took them back a dozen decades or
more. It was then that they saw it -- a half-ton, humpbacked
animal cloaked in a thick brown and chestnut coat, wearing a
pair of short, ebony horns on its massive head.
   A stalk was planned and the hunters were off. Though
unusual in modern times, a buffalo hunt is something that the
plains above the Smokey Hill River had seen countless times
through the centuries.
   "This used to be some of the finest buffalo country in
America," said Wilbur Williams, as he looked out over the
prairies of his Smoky River Buffalo Ranch, which offers
guided hunting expeditions. The main season runs from
November through March. "They were here in the millions; old
accounts tell of herds stretching as far as the eye could
see."
   And according to Mr. Williams, a self-trained naturalist
and historian, the vast herd attracted a variety of hunters
throughout the centuries. While roaming the ranch as both a
boy and a man, Mr. Williams has found tools and weapons from
such past hunters as the Pawnee, Cheyenne and Arapaho tribes.
   The grounds that now make up his buffalo ranch were
utilized by white hunters as well. Trappers headed for the
mountains and travelers headed for the promise of California
or Oregon relied on the buffalo for a source of food. Those
who followed, however, relied on them as a source for
money-making hides.
   "This area was at the heart of the big buffalo-hunting era
of the late 1860s and 1870s," said Mr. Williams. "There was a
lot of history made around here. Bill Cody and Bill Comstock
had their famous buffalo-hunting contest just north of here
to see who could use the name Buffalo Bill. And over the
years I've found at least two shoe boxes full of old
cartridges left behind by the hide hunters."
   The original herds and the hide hunters disappeared
roughly a century ago. A lifelong love of the big animals
caused Mr. Williams to bring them back. With a careful
breeding program and supplementation, the native Kansan has
reestablished a self-sustaining herd here. And the hunters
have returned, hunting an experience, trying to relive a life
of old.
   "The main reason I came was to fulfill a lifelong dream,"
said Darrell Wuertz, one of the pair of hunters. "Ever since
I was little I dreamed about walking the ground where the
buffalo lived and taking one with a black-powder rifle in the
way that the mountain men would have so many years ago. For
someone like me, just being here is worth the drive from
Indiana."
   That weekend eight hunters from a halfdozen states had
traveled to Mr. Williams's ranch for the same reasons as Mr.
Wuertz. All but one hunted with replicas of original
percussion or flintlock muzzleloaders, most of which they'd
built with their own hands. Some even walked the plains in
buckskin clothing.
   Other groups have pitched tepees and camped among the
cottonwoods. Mr. Williams contributes to the realism by
serving meals of buffalo around an open campfire. He and his
assistants wear dress of the period, and hunters who choose
to can hunt with one of Mr. Williams's original Sharps
"buffalo rifles."
   No matter what the gun of choice, those who come meet with
success. Though an animal of surprising quickness and speed,
the buffalo has never been as challenging as, say, whitetail
deer. The two hunters eventually were able to sneak within
range in the midst of the expansive prairie. Roy English was
first to fire and Mr. Wuertz was quick to add a humane
insurance shot.
   But the day was far from over for Messrs. English and
Wuertz. They, Mr. Williams and an associate labored far into
the afternoon. When they were done they had the skin removed
and readied to be made into a massive buffalo robe. More
importantly, the meat was trimmed and ready for the trip back
to Indiana.
   "That's another big reason why we came," said Mr. English.
"We're going to be taking home meat and you can bet we're
going to use it all."
   The two hunters will not only be eating a lot, they'll
also be eating well. According to Mr. Williams, the
three-year-old bull will produce close to 500 pounds of
superbly delicious meat. As an added bonus, it's a meat that
the hunters can feast on to their heart's content. "Buffalo
is a meat that's high in protein but very lean," said Mr.
Williams. "It's not zero-percent cholesterol, but it's much
less than beef. It's a very healthy meat."
   ---
   Mr. Pearce is a free-lance writer in Manhattan, Kan.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
