ID: 144	RANK: 44	SCORE: 10.965115
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910130-0133
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910130-0133.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Letters to the Editor:
   Hey, Buffalo Bill,
   Why Do You Kill?
</HL>
<DATE>
01/30/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A11
</SO>
<LP>
   Michael Pearce's Jan. 9 Leisure &amp; Arts article, "Where the
Buffaloes Roam," or, more appropriately, "Won't You Come
Home, Buffalo Bill?," is another approach to cleansing guilt
by rationalizing the final phase of hunting -- the killing
portion. And with every paper on justifying the need to kill,
there is a paper expressing the ridiculous thesis of such a
farce.
   I am not a "weed eater" or animal-rights fanatic. So what
grinds me about Mr. Pearce's article? It's the contention
that hunting farm-raised buffaloes by men dressed in
buckskins and using black-powder rifles somehow overcomes the
true nature of the hunt. Hunting and killing animals is an
issue of control, of playing God over a living thing, and
nothing more. Unless, of course, you are stranded in the
middle of the wilderness and it is a means of survival.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Roy English of the story went to get meat. Sure, right.
And low in cholesterol -- hey, that's important. Don't get me
wrong. When I hunted as a boy, I was taught not to shoot
anything I didn't plan to clean and cook. But I didn't hunt
with the idea that I was reliving history or putting food on
the table. It was for sport, and that is what hunting
buffaloes is. If hunting a herd of ranch-raised animals can
be considered much of a hunt. At least I assume that the ones
on the Smoky River Buffalo Ranch are wilder than the ones
that stroll out of Yellowstone National Park.
   The article should have been written for one of the
hunting magazines; then Mr. Pearce could have gotten the
romance for his article that it justly deserved. The article
may have been appreciated in this paper had it ended one
sentence before Darrell Wuertz's "humane insurance shot." But
Mr. Pearce has a right to submit his work to anyone. And this
paper has the right to print what it wants. Wilbur Williams
is within his rights to have a hunting ranch. He can stock it
with buffaloes or Holstein cows. Say, there's an idea.
   How many of you hunters out there ever got to sit around
the campfire and talk about the Holstein cow you brought
down? As for Mr. English, he could take a pail and stool with
him, milk the cow, then shoot it.
   S.J. Sanor
   St. Louis
</TEXT>
</DOC>
