ID: 144	RANK: 79	SCORE: 10.092490
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910129-0009
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910129-0009.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
   Next Time Maybe They'll Huddle
   ----
   By Frederick C. Klein
</HL>
<DATE>
01/29/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16
</SO>
<LP>
   Tampa, Fla. -- That football of the '90s -- it's really
exciting, huh? The New York Giants ran left, and then they
ran right. Their quarterback flipped little passes to his
backs and tight ends, and when in doubt he tucked in the ball
and ran it himself. Who needs the no-huddle offense, or the
run-and-shoot, when you can do stuff like that?
   And who needs big gains when you can grind out four, five
or six yarders, ad infinitum? "A good offense is a good
defense," noted Ottis Anderson, the Giants' noted running
back. "The other team can't score when it doesn't have the
ball."
</LP>
<TEXT>
   It all made wonderful sense here Sunday night because
coach Bill Parcells's boys made it so, defeating the Buffalo
Bills, 20-19, in the XXVth, and possibly best, Super Bowl.
The game might have lacked dash, but it certainly had smash,
on both sides of the ball. The two teams went at each other
like determined prizefighters, and after one notable lick on
Jeff Hostetler, the shifty Giant quarterback, smelling salts
-- a substance usually associated with the ring -- were
applied.
   "It didn't smell good, but I guess that's the idea, isn't
it?" Hostetler smiled later.
   That the Bills also could smile afterward, though not
quite so broadly, was another measure of the contest's
excellence. They led 12-3 at one point, regained the lead
after losing it, and launched a dying-seconds drive that gave
them a chance to come away golden. They weren't beaten until
Scott Norwood's 47-yard field-goal try spun through the
Florida night wide of the right goal post with but four
seconds to play.
   "We'll be back -- we showed we can play with anyone,"
declared Thurman Thomas, the do-everything Buffalo running
back.
   "They did everything but score the last three points,"
agreed Giant center Bart Oates.
   There was reason for satisfaction in the off-field aspects
of the game as well. Due to the tensions caused by the Gulf
War, this was the edgiest Super Bowl, and the week
immediately preceeding the fest was consumed more with
concern over Tampa Stadium security than with the usual
football blather. That just about all of the announced crowd
of 73,813 managed to get through airport-style baggage X-ray
machines, plus electric-wand body frisks, and still be on
hand for the kickoff testified to the relative efficiency of
the process and to their own good nature.
   Yellow-jacketed security men dotted the stands, and
helicopters buzzed the premises and environs for hours after
play ceased. The sigh of relief that greeted the evening's
conclusion matched that of recent Olympics, where such
precautions are an entrenched feature. "We didn't enjoy doing
it, but it's awfully nice to have it done," remarked one
league official.
   The Giants' buttoned-down attack was fully in keeping with
the security cordon; they reeled off 386 yards in all, but
netted 20 or more on just two individual plays. Still, its
architect, offensive coordinator Ron Erhardt, disdained the
"conservative" tag.
   "Our plan was to mix the run and pass so as to keep the
other guys off balance, and to play within our abilities," he
said. "It just so happens that the plays we use match the
abilities of the players we have now."
   Indeed, a couple of the Giants' main actors Sunday were
subs on the team's 1987 championship team, and if not for
injuries to others might still be so. They were quarterback
Hostetler, a late-season fill-in for Phil Simms, and running
back Anderson, who assumed a starting role last year after
Joe Morris went down. That both are veterans said much about
the Giants' makeup. "We have lots of older players, and they
all know my boundaries," said Parcells. "As for leadership, I
couldn't ask for anything else."
   Hostetler was a seven-year backup who threw nary a pass in
his first four seasons in Giant blue. Unlike the stately
Simms, his forte is mobility, and his roll-out and scrambling
ability helped keep Bills' defenders honest while he threw
for 222 yards.
   His performance was all the more remarkable because he was
knocked wobbly by a couple of first-half hits, one of which,
by huge Buffalo tackle Bruce Smith, resulted in a safety that
gave the Bills their 12-3 edge; thus, the smelling salts. "I
couldn't focus for a while, but that cleared up between
periods," said he.
   Anderson, an all-pro as a St. Louis Cardinal before
warming the Giants' bench, ran for 102 yards and one
touchdown, and was named the game's most-valuable player. "I
was basically a spectator at the '87 game, and I promised
myself my next Super Bowl trip would be different," he said.
   The Giants scored a touchdown on their last possession of
the first half to cut the Bills lead to 12-10, and went ahead
on their first drive of half two. That thrust, keyed by a
24-yard Anderson run, found the end zone and consumed more
than nine minutes, setting the pattern for a half in which
Buffalo owned the ball for only seven minutes.
   The Bills nonetheless made one of their possessions count,
taking a 19-17 lead when Thomas made like a pinball and
bounced off several Giant tacklers on a 31-yard touchdown
run. But New York (New Jersey, really) took 7 1/2 minutes to
tramp to the Buffalo three-yard line next trip, and Matt
Bahr's 21-yard field goal made it 2019.
   The no-huddle Bills got the ball back with 2:16 left, and
that almost was enough time. Jim Kelly, who emerged this
season as the consummate pro, ran and passed his team 61
yards to the Giants' 29-yard line, setting up Norwood's
field-goal attempt. "I hit it solid but a bit strong, and it
stayed wide," the kicker explained. "They don't all go
through."
   "It was a heckuva game, wasn't it?" said Buffalo
linebacker Shane Conlan. "We played hard, but I guess they
played harder. You can't complain about that, just give 'em
credit and start thinking about next year."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
