ID: 144	RANK: 99	SCORE: 9.513398
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911210-0137
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911210-0137.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
   Bills Snatch Victory From Paws of Raiders
   ----
   By Frederick C. Klein
</HL>
<DATE>
12/10/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   Los Angeles -- If the NFL is smart, and from time to time
it gives indications that it is, it'll sneak a rerun of
Sunday's Buffalo Bills-L.A. Raiders game into its coming
playoff schedule. Sure, a lot of folks will have seen it, but
there's a 90-10 chance they'd still like it better than
whatever else might fill the slot.
   The game, contested in 58-degree weather here before a
near-full Coliseum of Angelenos who dressed as if the
temperature were 38 and complained as though it had been 18,
had everything. It had long passes and short runs, and short
passes and long runs. One guy returned a kickoff for a
touchdown. Another turned a nineyard pass into a 78-yard TD
play.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   There were goats as well as heroes, but that only made the
show better. Jay Schroeder, the L.A. QB, threw his first 19
passes with generally good effect, only to have his last two
intercepted and his gang done in thereby. The second of
those, in an overtime period, set up the winning, 42-yard
field goal by the Bills' Scott Norwood and saved the latter
from terminal goathood.
   Norwood previously had missed fieldgoal tries from 49, 32
and 36 yards and -- gasp] -- botched an extra point that
would have given his mates the victory in regulation time.
You may recall that he's the fella whose 49-yarder was wide
right with four seconds left against the New York Giants in
the last Super Bowl, dooming the Bills to a 20-19 loss. It
was a measure of the fervor of Sunday's game that he said
that it, not his SB failure, was the toughest kicking day
he's had.
   Buffalo won, 30-27, after trailing 14-27 well into the
fourth quarter, and the victory over playoff-caliber
opposition had the Bills and their coaches talking afterward
about "character."
   "John Wooden said ability gets you to the top but it takes
character to stay there," Buffalo coach Marv Levy quoted the
former UCLA basketball coach as saying. The parallel between
the Bills -- champions of nothing of late but the Eastern
fraction of the NFL's American Conference -- and the masters
of the collegiate-hoops universe Wooden once tutored wasn't
altogether clear, but nobody called Prof. Marv on it.
   In Levy's defense, though, it should be noted that this
was a game his Bills might have phoned in. Los Angeles is a
nice place to visit but a tough place to win when the Raiders
are hosts. Moreover, the Raiders, 9-4 in the won-lost column
going in, were scrapping for a divisional title and playoff
berth while the Bills, 11-2, had clinched both and had only
the home-field playoff advantage for which to strive. So
maybe superior character did enter in, although an aversion
to airline food also might have played a role.
   One thing that certainly had a part in the game's outcome
was the offensive explosiveness that has put the boys from
Nickel City atop the NFL's yardage chart this campaign. The
Bills strike from a formation that often utilizes four wide
receivers and emphasizes the passing of quarterback Jim
Kelly. Yet their ace running back, Thurman Thomas, leads the
league in rushing and, before Sunday, had alone recorded more
net yards overland (1,316) than the entire infantry of 12 NFL
clubs.
   The Bills, moreover, strike swiftly, sans huddles, and
have put the lie to that overused statistic measuring time of
ball possession. They'd owned the spheroid an average of just
25 minutes, 45 seconds a game over their first 13 contests --
last in the league -- but their point total of 379 was second
only to Washington's 409. The moral, obviously, is what
counts ain't how long you own the ball but what you do with
it when you've got it.
   With that as backdrop, the Raiders' defense could take
bows for the way it performed for the first 50 or so minutes
of Sunday's action. The Bills managed but two touchdowns in
that stretch, and neither resulted from a sustained offensive
drive. Al Edwards got the first all by himself on a 91-yard
kickoff runback. Cliff Hicks, usually a defensive back, set
up the second with a 59-yard punt return.
   The Raiders, meantime, nicely mixed pass and run to score
five times in their first eight possessions. Three tailbacks
-- veterans Marcus Allen and Roger Craig, and rookie Nick
Bell -- shared the running load, while Schroeder hit speedy
receivers Tim Brown and Mervyn Fernandez with short passes
that those worthies turned into long gains. The highlight was
the 78-yard Schroeder-to-Brown connection in quarter one.
   L.A. took a 27-14 lead midway through the third period,
and led in yardage better than three-to-one, but then a funny
thing happened: L.A. stopped passing. Its next four
possessions consisted of 10 runs and a single pass, and it
surrendered the ball without a first down each time.
   A couple of missed field goals kept the Bills from getting
closer for a while, but Kelly &amp; Co. couldn't be denied
indefinitely. The ex-U. of Miami strongboy led a 67-yard,
12-play drive that made it 27-20 with four minutes left
(Norwood missed the extra point). Next trip, Kelly took his
mates 64 yards to the end zone on eight plays, all passes,
with a minute to go, and this time the extra point was good.
   L.A. finally passed again during its last possession of
regulation time, but Schroeder's heave was intercepted.
Norwood missed that field goal try, but made his next one
after Mark Kelso intercepted Schroeder's first pass in
overtime and a 31-yard Kelly-to-Andre Reed connection put the
Bills in scoring range.
   Buffalo carries two placekickers, and Levy later commented
that he wouldn't say it never crossed his mind to use backup
Brad Daluiso for the overtime boot. But he said he thought
Norwood needed the chance to redeem himself, and the kicker
agreed. "It'd be tough to have a positive attitude after a
day that's all negative," said he.
   In the Raiders' post-game locker room, there was testiness
about questions concerning the last-quarter play-calling,
which bespoke a lack of confidence in the historically
scatter-armed Schroeder. ("The plays were OK. We just didn't
run them right," snapped coach Art Shell.) And even the fact
that L.A. backed into a playoff spot because the New York
Jets lost couldn't dull the pain of a missed opportunity.
   "When you get a lead like we had, you should hold it,"
said Shell. "No more to say about that."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
