ID: 299	RANK: 100	SCORE: 11.475311
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890306-0240 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-03-06-89 0756EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r f PM-Eastern-Cities     03-06 0546</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Eastern-Cities,0564</SECOND>
<HEAD>Eastern Strike's Effects In Airline's Major Cities</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Here is a city-by-city wrapup of the effects Sunday of the
3-day-old Eastern Airlines strike at key airports and transit
systems. Almost all Eastern flights were canceled Sunday; effects on
other airlines and mass transit were negligible.
   MIAMI: Pickets were held at Miami International Airport and
nearby Eastern corporate headquarters. No violence was reported.
Twenty flights left the airport on Sunday; normal daily schedule
calls for 100 departures. No reported problems at other airlines.
   FORT LAUDERDALE: All 24 flights canceled Sunday.
   ORLANDO, Fla.: Some 140 pickets were working in shifts, with 20
at a time at about a half-dozen locations. One flight departed
Sunday; on a normal day 31 flights are scheduled. No reports of
violence or problems at other airlines.
   TAMPA, Fla.: Machinists picketed minimally at six locations. No
Eastern flights out of 28 normal Sunday flights left.
   ATLANTA: Eastern's schedule at Hartsfield Atlanta International
Airport, the airline's largest hub, was extremely limited Sunday.
   At a rally of about 1,500 people across from Eastern's
maintenance headquarters, Jesse Jackson urged President Bush to use
his power to persuade labor and management to ``sit around a common
table.''
   BALTIMORE-WASHINGTON: Just four pickets at a time walked at
Baltimore-Washington International Airport. No other carrier
employees joined in sympathy. Eastern said it had no flights out
Sunday. Ten are scheduled daily.
   Amtrak added 12 Metroliner trains today, and Greyhound Lines Inc.
planned special bus service in the Northeast and had 200 buses
deployed for extra duty.
   NEWARK, N.J.: A total of 60 pickets marched at Newark
International Airport. All 18 Eastern flights out of Newark were
canceled A ticket agent said passengers were being put on other
airlines with ``no problem'' and that no one had been stranded.
   NEW YORK: A federal judge signed a temporary restraining order
blocking sympathy strikes by railroad workers ready to join the
striking Machinists. The order covered the Long Island Rail Road,
Metro-North Commuter Railroad and New Jersey Transit, which carry
about 320,000 commuters daily. Unions said they planned to honor the
order and Machinists nationwide agreed not to set up pickets.
   Forty Eastern workers, including several pilots, picketed outside
the Eastern terminal at LaGuardia Airport. Eighteen flights took off
Sunday. The Eastern terminal at Kennedy International Airport had
shut down operations, and about a dozen pickets walked in the rain.
   BOSTON: At least three Eastern flights departed Logan
International Airport, which normally handles about 100 Eastern
flights a day servicing 7,200 passengers. Some travelers were
successfully placed on other airlines. About 50 striking machinists
spread out at six picket locations.
   CHICAGO: All 15 Eastern flights from O'Hare International Airport
Sunday were canceled; airport police said strikers were peaceful and
hadn't set up picket lines at other airlines. An airport official
said other airlines were honoring Eastern tickets.
   HOUSTON: Eight people picketed at Hobby Airport, where Eastern's
four daily flights were canceled Sunday. No pickets appeared against
Eastern's sister carrier _ Houston-based Continental Airlines _
which operates a large hub at Houston's Intercontinental Airport.
   SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico: About 125 pickets at Munoz Marin
International Airport; Eastern said four flights took off Sunday,
equal to Saturday. The airline chartered four planes from
Continental on Sunday for cruise ship passengers.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
