ID: 299	RANK: 16	SCORE: 27.035179
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911122-0011
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911122-0011.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   U.S. Outlines Plan
   For New Structure
   On Landing Fees
   ----
   By Laurie McGinley
   Staff Reporter of the Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
11/22/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C18
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
AIRLINES (AIR)
</IN>
<NS>
TRAVEL (TVL)
</NS>
<GV>
TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT (TRN)
</GV>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   WASHINGTON -- Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner
announced plans to allow airports to charge airlines higher
landing fees during peak travel hours and lower fees during
slack periods.
   The policy would reduce congestion and delays by creating
"incentives to travel at off-peak times," he said. Mr.
Skinner made his remarks at an airline-industry conference.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Patrick Murphy, the deputy assistant transportation
secretary for policy and international affairs, said the
department will seek public comment soon on a proposed
peak-hour pricing policy. In an interview, Mr. Murphy said
it's hoped that such pricing would create sufficient economic
incentives to prompt airlines and private pilots to switch
some flights to slower periods. "All we have to do is shift a
couple of flights per hour, and that will have a big impact
on airlines' on-time performance," he said.
   Peak-hour pricing would probably mean higher airline fares
during rush hours as the airlines pass along their costs to
consumers. But many analysts contend that would be only fair.
"It's like advertising on prime-time television," said Kevin
Murphy, an airline analyst for Morgan Stanley &amp; Co. "You have
to pay more than in the middle of the afternoon."
   But Robert Aaronson, president of the Air Transport
Association, which represents the airline industry, noted
that the airlines already are practicing peak-hour pricing by
making fewer discount fares available during rush-hour
flights.
   In addition, he said that although the concept may be
good, it would be difficult for airports to put peak-hour
pricing into effect. For example, he argued, landing fees
would have to be increased drastically -- 20 or 30 times --
in order to compel carriers to switch their flights from peak
periods. Otherwise, he said, airlines wouldn't change their
schedules out of fear they would lose passengers to
competitors. And he said that such high fees would shut out
commuter lines.
   The Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association, which
represents 300,000 private pilots, also is worried that its
members would be hurt by peak-hour pricing. "We're concerned
that it would keep out aircraft that should be able to use a
runway just the same as a commercial airliner," said Phil
Boyer, president of the group. Increases in landing fees are
more burdensome for private pilots because they have to
absorb the entire cost themselves.
   Mr. Boyer said peak-hour pricing was like "putting a
Band-Aid" on the nation's long-term airport capacity problem.
Jonathan Howe, president of the National Business Aircraft
Association, which represents corporate jet owners, said he
would support a "properly constructed system" as long as it
isn't "used as a device to limit access" to airports by
smaller planes.
   Currently, landing fees at airports are weight-based;
those for small planes generally range from $2 to $25, while
jetliners pay hundreds of dollars for each flight. There
isn't a flat prohibition against tying the landing fees to
time of day. Airports, however, have been leery to impose
such a system because of a flap that occurred in the late
1980s involving Boston's Logan International Airport.
   To cut congestion, the Massachusetts Port Authority, which
runs the airport, sharply increased landing fees for smaller
planes while slashing them for airliners. But the fees
weren't tied to peak hours; they were in effect for the
entire day.
   A number of groups, including AOPA and NBAA, sued, and in
late 1988 successfully overturned the Logan fees. The
Transportation Department also opposed the Massachusetts Port
rules, arguing they discriminated against small-plane
operators.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
