ID: 299	RANK: 68	SCORE: 12.616129
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910425-0128
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910425-0128.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Close My Town's Army Base
   ----
   By James S. Robbins
</HL>
<DATE>
04/25/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14
</SO>
<GV>
CONGRESS (CNG)
DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)
</GV>
<RE>
MASSACHUSETTS (MA)
</RE>
<LP>
   Communities across the country are yelling about Secretary
of Defense Dick Cheney's announcement that 30 military bases
will soon be closed or downgraded. Ayer, Mass., where I live,
has been one of the complainers.
   Fort Devens has been a major presence in Ayer since 1917.
It accounts for half of the city's tax base and most of its
retail trade. Fort Devens is the second largest employer in
Massachusetts, and brings about $450 million per year to the
region. The Massachusetts congressional delegation, not known
for its pro-defense views, has been waging a quiet but
determined struggle to maintain the fort.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   From this perspective, the closing of Devens seems tragic.
But Ayer existed before Fort Devens. When the town was
incorporated in 1871, it was an important transportation hub,
the junction of the east-west railroad between Boston and
Albany, and the north-south route between New York City and
Portland, Maine. Access to railroads was one reason for the
placement of Fort Devens in Ayer. By the 1960s most of the
passenger rail traffic had dried up, but Ayer remained,
supported by the fort. It is this relationship that the
Massachusetts congressional delegation wishes to perpetuate.
   Ayer has opportunities reaching far beyond the income
provided by Fort Devens. The land occupied by the fort tops
the list of sites for a second Boston-area airport. Boston's
Logan airport, overcrowded and hemmed in by Massachusetts
Bay, has no expansion potential. An airport in Ayer could
equal, even surpass, Logan. Such an airport would more than
replace the jobs lost from the closing of Fort Devens,
especially during the construction phase. Increased air
traffic would bring more business to the region. A proposed
high-speed rail system from Maine to New York could link up
with the airport, making Ayer again an important
transportation center.
   The alternative for Ayer is to preserve Fort Devens, which
will keep things just about where they are. Fort Devens will
continue to contribute to the local economy, but Ayer will
remain no more than a "base town," and the citizens will
continue to suffer the annual anxiety that Devens will be
shut down in a future round of closures. It is a relatively
small installation that cannot expand, and that has little
use other than National Guard and Reserve training.
   Fort Devens has been threatened with closure for 14 years.
It may survive longer. But sooner or later the life-support
supplied by Massachusetts Congressmen will fail. The new
airport will be in operation by 2010, if a location is found.
It is doubtful that Fort Devens will survive that long.
   Other cities facing closure may not have such immediate
opportunities, but they could adopt a similar perspective. A
military base provides a guaranteed income for a city or a
region, but in return the city or region must accept that the
livelihoods of its citizens will depend not on their personal
abilities, but on the ability of their Congressmen to secure
funding in the annual fight over the shrinking federal
defense budget. A military base may seem to promise economic
security, but the promise is false. Bases create unnatural
economies that can be wiped out with a single bureaucratic
decision.
   The Congressmen who rise in defense of their local bases
must do so in the name of national defense; while the
economic benefits of bases to their constituents are their
primary concern, they cannot reasonably argue that a base
should be kept open merely to serve as a vehicle for
transferring wealth into their districts. Preserving a base
in order to preserve a town, after all, puts the cart before
the horse; the town exists to serve the base, not vice versa.
   So every threatened base is lauded as an indispensable
contributor to the nation's safety, despite the fact that the
Pentagon disagrees. Just once, it would be refreshing to
witness a Congressman supporting the closure of a base in his
district, and explaining to the citizens that their long-term
interests would be better served by relying on private
initiative rather than government spending. But I fear such a
brave politician has never been born, or would never be
re-elected.
   ---
   Mr. Robbins, an historian, lives in Ayer, Mass.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
