ID: 299	RANK: 79	SCORE: 12.085065
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890313-0203 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-03-13-89 1038EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u f PM-Eastern 1stLd-Writethru f0037 03-13 0906</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Eastern, 1st Ld-Writethru, f0037,0930</SECOND>
<HEAD>Eastern's $12 Shuttle Attracts Thousands; Leaves Hundreds Stranded</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: LEADS with 12 grafs to UPDATE with stranded passengers returning
home; new quotes, other detail, picking up 13th graf pvs, `Most of ...';
SUBS 21st graf, `The airline...' , with 2 grafs to add detail on Delta
pilots backing of pickets. PICKS UP 22nd graf, ``I can't...'</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos BX2, MH1, AX1</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By ROBERT W. TROTT</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Hundreds of people who bought $12 tickets on Eastern Airline's
Northeast shuttle headed home this morning, one day late, after
getting stranded in three cities when there were no bargain-basement
seats for them on planes.
   ``Nightmare of nightmares,'' was how Catherine Holtz, 24,
described her night sleeping on the carpet at New York's LaGuardia
Airport before she returned home to Boston today. ``I'm not so sure
if it was worth it. It was a good idea in theory.''
   Eastern's three-day offer of rock-bottom fares on the
Washington-New York-Boston shuttle attracted 8,000 passengers
Friday, 11,000 Saturday and 12,500 Sunday, said John Siefert, vice
president for the shuttle.
   Although fares went up to $49 today, Eastern said it would honor
through Friday the $12 tickets sold over the weekend. After Friday,
prices will return to $69 on weekends, $99 on weekdays and Sunday
evening.
   About 250 passengers were stuck at LaGuardia late Sunday, 200
failed to get on flights from Boston's Logan Airport and at least
100 were turned away at Washington's National Airport. Many spent
the night at the airports and took the first shuttle flights out
this morning.
   ``The first two went out full, so I'm hoping we got most of
them,'' said Rosa R. Williams, shuttle manager at National Airport.
On Sunday night, Eastern employees had given stranded shuttle
passengers peanuts and decks of cards.
   Pickets outside the Eastern terminal in Boston today took note of
stranded passengers with a sign that read: ``Pay $12 and sleep at
the terminal.''
   On Sunday, the Bush administration reiterated its determination
to stay out of the 10-day-old strike by Eastern's 8,500-member
Machinists union.
   ``We are not in the business of running Eastern Airlines or
negotiating the contract for labor,'' Transportation Secretary
Samuel Skinner said on CBS' ``Face The Nation.''
   Eastern trumpeted the reopening of flights to seven Latin
American cities Sunday as a new start for the troubled airline,
which filed for bankruptcy protection last week after most of its
3,600 pilots honored picket lines.
   The carrier launched 75 flights Sunday and hopes to boost that
number to 140 a day by the end of the week, compared with a
pre-strike schedule of 1,040 a day, spokesman Robin Matell said.
   Debbie McLoughlin of New York planned to spend the night at
Eastern's terminal in Boston. ``It's got to be an adventure,''
McLoughlin said. ``I'm a scab, though, with the $12 flight. I took
advantage of a good thing.''
   Most of those left at LaGuardia were promised a seat on an
Eastern flight this morning or flew on Pan Am's rival shuttle, said
Port Authority Police Lt. Alexander Harvey.
   ``When Eastern said `that's it,' these people went over to Pan
Am,'' said Harvey, whose agency runs the airport. Pan Am added a
flight to Washington and chartered two buses to Boston, he said.
   David Hess, a spokesman at Washington's National Airport, said
some passengers waited five hours for seats. About 40 were spending
the night at the airport.
   Eastern maintained that passengers knew what they were getting
into when they bought the cheap tickets.
   ``Those people were not stranded. We advertised the flights were
on a first-come, first-served basis,'' Matell said. ``I'm sorry they
have to wait for the next flight, but they should have gotten there
earlier.''
   One pilot on a picket line at Logan said he held no animosity
toward shuttle passengers, but he questioned Eastern's strategy in
slashing fares.
   ``They're trying to warm the house by burning the furniture to
keep people coming,'' said pilot Dennis Caldwell.
   Eastern's unions have accused Frank Lorenzo, chairman of Eastern
parent Texas Air Corp., of trying to cannibalize the airline. Pilots
and flight attendants have honored Machinists' picket lines, which
went up when the union refused to grant $125 million in concessions
to the airline.
   In Miami, Atlanta and other cities Sunday, dozens of off-duty
Delta Air Lines pilots walked picket lines with Eastern employees in
the first major public show of support from workers at another
airline. ``Our company has made a moral and economic commitment to
our 50,000 employees' dreams and aspirations,'' said Delta pilot
Michael Foley. ``No one at Eastern has done that.''
   Eastern claims it is losing $4 million a day, but Lorenzo was
quoted in today's Wall Street Journal as predicting the airline
would come out of bankruptcy proceedings with its Atlanta hub and
its operations from the Northeast to Florida and Latin America
intact.
   ``I can't imagine that Eastern isn't going to be a major
(airline) and very similar to what it is today,'' he said.
   Planes departed Sunday with ``relatively light'' passenger loads
from Miami for Bogota, Colombia; Guatemala City; Lima, Peru; Panama
City; Quito, Ecuador; Guayaquil, Ecuador; and San Jose, Costa Rica,
Matell said. Thrice-weekly flights were to resume this week to
Asuncion, Paraguay; Cali, Colombia; and La Paz, Bolivia.
   Eastern also intended to resume thrice-daily flights between
Miami and Puerto Rico today along with service to Montreal, then add
direct flights later this week between Washington and Boston.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
