ID: 299	RANK: 9	SCORE: 31.924744
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890418-0257 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-04-18-89 1340EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>s a BC-TheLoganLogjam Adv23-2Takes   04-18 1132</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-The Logan Logjam, Adv 23-2 Takes,1163</SECOND>
<HEAD>$Adv23</HEAD>
<HEAD>For Release Sunday, April 23, and Thereafter</HEAD>
<HEAD>Logan Airport Seeks to Cut Delays; Challenged by Federal Government</HEAD>
<HEAD>With LaserPhoto</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By CHRISTOPHER CONNELL</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>BOSTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The man who runs Boston's Logan Airport faced the
same problem plaguing major airports worldwide: how to cut the
delays that were making flying an ever more unpleasant experience.
   His solution: discourage small planes from using the airport by
raising their takeoff and landing fees while cutting the charges
for commercial airliners.
   ``If you think that all planes are created equal, then I'm
wrong,'' says David W. Davis, executive director of the
Massachusetts Port Authority. ``But there's no way you can convince
me that a small plane with two people aboard has the same priority
as a large airplane with 400.''
   Small aircraft that had paid a flat $25 to land at Logan found
themselves facing a bill for $100-plus every time they set down.
Jumbo jets, by contrast, had their $800 landing fee cut in half.
   Davis' plan worked. The number of private and commuter planes
using the airport fell by one-third. Logan, ranked last in on-time
performance among the 27 biggest U.S. airports last May, surged to
second place in the December rankings.
   But the federal government disagreed with the move, saying the
new regulations violated federal aviation laws and were
``inconsistent with national transportation policy.'' As 1988
ended, the port authority suspended its fee revisions until a
federal appeals court hears arguments in the dispute early next
month.
   On one side are the nation's air travelers and airport
operators, struggling as they are with steadily growing demands for
limited runway space. On the other, private aircraft owners,
corporate plane users and commuter airlines, all of which contend
that a six-seat Piper Cub has the same right to use a runway as a
400-seat DC-10.
   Airports operate like bakery counters: Pilots wanting to take
off or land are all given numbers and must wait their turn. And,
like the bakery customer out to buy two dozen doughnuts, three
loaves of bread and a pound of cookies but who must wait for the
person before him to purchase his lone sticky bun, pilots are all
treated alike.
   Davis argues that the result of such an egalitarian policy, for
more and more people, comes down to a single word: wait.
   Wait to board the plane. Wait for clearance to take off. Wait at
the other end for permission to land. Wait with other passengers
whose trips have likewise been bollixed up for luggage, for a cab
and for the traffic on jammed highways to clear.
   But critics accuse the Massport director of trying to
single-handedly dictate transportation policy and transgressing
long-established laws that guarantee aircraft equal access to the
nation's runways.
   John Baker, president of the 265,000-member Aircraft Owners and
Pilots Association, says eliminating all the small planes wouldn't
cure congestion at Logan. What the airport really needs, he says,
is another runway _ one set aside for private planes.
   Jonathan Howe, president of the National Business Aircraft
Association, says that if the Massport program stands, other
airports might follow with their restrictions, creating ``chaos''
in the skies.
   But even critics give Davis credit for forcing a debate on
capacity at the nation's overburdened airports.
   Consider these facts:
   _Air passenger traffic has doubled since Jimmy Carter
deregulated airlines a decade ago. In 1976, 11.5 million people
flew through Logan; by 1988, terminal traffic more than doubled, to
23.3 million.
   _Requests to take off and land frequently hit 100 an hour during
Logan's peak periods. That's fine in good weather, when the airport
can handle 110 flights each hour, but not so fine on the one day in
five of bad weather. Then, capacity shrinks to 80 takeoffs and
landings an hour.
   _Before Davis restructured runway fees, port authority officials
say, private and commuter planes accounted for 40 percent of
Logan's takeoffs and landings, but just 6 percent of passengers.
   _Port authority officials say rush-hour backups routinely hit 60
minutes in 1987. Sometime next year, they project, the delays may
stretch to 100 minutes unless the number of takeoffs and landings
falls.
   To deal with these issues, Davis rejiggered the way runway-use
fees were assessed, arguing that many airport costs are fixed and
bear no relation to the size of planes using the facility.
   ``If a Cessna needs fire and crash assistance, you're not going
to send one pick-up truck with a fire extinguisher,'' he says. ``If
a Beechcraft needs to land on a snowy day, you're not going to plow
the middle third of the runway and let it go at that.''
   Authorities felt their logic was unassailable and noted besides
that discouraging a single small plane from using Logan could help
speed hundreds of jumbo jet passengers on their way.
   The U.S. Department of Transportation felt differently.
   In November, a federal administrative law judge ruled that
Logan's fee restructuring violated aviation laws and unfairly
saddled small planes with ``a disproportionate amount of airport
costs.''
   The next month, Deputy Transportation Secretary Mimi W. Dawson
upheld the ruling by law judge Burton S. Kolko.
   At the same time, New England legislators had gotten Congress to
threaten the port authority with a cutoff of $10 million in aid
unless the old fee structure was reimposed.
   Massport backed off; the $25 minimum was reborn.
   Opponents of the plan make these arguments:
   _The Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association says that even
before Davis' revisions, private planes accounted for just 3
percent of Logan's peak-hours operations.
   ``They phony up the numbers by using 24-hour numbers,'' says
Baker. ``There are periods at Logan where you can shoot a cannon
through there and not hit an airplane.''
   Besides, he adds, few pleasure flyers use airports like Logan
these days.
   ``You put yourself in the elephant line and you suffer the same
privations that everybody else does in the airlines because of
irrational airline scheduling,'' Baker says.
   _The National Business Aircraft Association, which represents 83
percent of the Fortune 500 companies, says the issue in Boston is
the right of equal access to airports and airspace.
   Says Howe:
   ``If you've got the chairman of the board of IBM flying into
Boston to sign an agreement to open up a major computer
manufacturing business that's going to employ 5,000 people in a
Boston suburb, is it more important for him to arrive there in time
to sign that agreement than it is to delay a load of passengers
coming back from Bermuda on vacation?''
   Thomas Champion, Davis' assistant, responds to Howe's argument
by maintaining that a majority of airline passengers suffering
lengthy delays ``weren't charter loads of revelers on their way to
Bermuda or Cub Scouts going to Disneyworld. They were business
travelers.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>MORE</NOTE>
</DOC>
