ID: 116	RANK: 29	SCORE: 21.423914
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910221-0124
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910221-0124.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   ENVIRONMENT
   ----
   By David Stipp
</HL>
<DATE>
02/21/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   EUROP
</CO>
<IN>
ENVIRONMENT (ENV)
AUTOMOBILES (AUT)
AUTO PARTS AND EQUIPMENT INCLUDING TIRES (AUP)
CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS (HPR)
POLLUTION CONTROL, WASTE MANAGEMENT SERVICES (POL)
RAW AND FINISHED PAPER PRODUCTS (PAP)
</IN>
<LP>
   Lighter Cars' `Fluff'
   Fouls Up Scrappers
                                                                                                       

</LP>
<TEXT>
   CUTTING cars' environmental costs is complicated by a
solid-waste issue.
   Lightening up cars has been one way to raise their fuel
efficiency, saving oil and lessening air pollution. Further
efficiency gains probably will require more substitution of
relatively light plastic parts for metal ones in cars.
Therein lies the rub: More plastic means more "fluff."
   That's the nonmetal stuff that remains after cars are
shredded and their metal parts are salvaged. Car scrappers
send fluff to landfills. In some regions, skyrocketing
landfill costs, coupled with the shrinking amount of
profitable metal in junked cars, threaten to force scrappers
out of business, says Thomas Byro, a fluff specialist at the
Institute of Scrap Recycling Industries in Washington. "That
could be an environmental catastrophe," because shredders
grind up some nine million U.S. cars a year that otherwise
might be left to litter the landscape, leaking oil and other
toxins into ground water.
   One solution may be to make cars lighter by using more
aluminum, which scrappers love. But auto design experts say
that could make cars too costly. Mr. Byro is studying a
cheaper idea that entails separating fluff's organic parts,
including plastics, from glass and metallic fragments. Car
scrappers could sell the former as burnable fuel and the
latter as a cement ingredient, he hopes.
   In Europe, policy makers are pressuring car makers to help
find ways to recycle fluff, says Ibis Associates, a
Wellesley, Mass., consultant that advises auto makers.
Innovations are emerging to do that, such as microwaving
fluff to break it down into reusable parts. But making the
new methods cost-effective may be difficult, Ibis says.
                                                                                                       

   Cheap Retrofit Kits
   Save Toilet Water
                                                                                                       

   ATTENTION Southern Californians: You don't have to pay
$200 for a low-flush toilet to save a lot of water.
   Cheap flush-control devices are proliferating to cut older
toilets' water use. They fit most models and can save much
more water than a brick in the tank can, says Thomas Babcock,
a Phoenix water department official who tests the devices.
There are two main kinds: early-closure flappers and
dual-flush devices.
   The flappers, which cut off water flow early during a
flush, are the simpler and cheaper alternative. Frugal Flush
of Phoenix claims its $15.95 flapper, which it sells through
plumbing-supply wholesalers, can cut older, five-gallon
flushers' water use by 50%.
   Dolphin Engineering, North Chelmsford, Mass., offers a
similar device by mail in a $21.95 kit that includes shower
and faucet attachments to conserve water.
   The dual-flush alternative provides for small flushes of
less than three gallons and also regular-sized flushes, which
help alleviate "line clogging," says Kim Hout, Colorado water
conservation coordinator. She's helping to arrange a Colorado
test of a dual-flush retrofit kit made by ConTech Industries,
Creswell, Ore. It retails for $24.95 and comes with an
install-it-yourself, two-part handle, new flapper and other
parts. U.S. AquaTec, Mesa, Ariz., also offers a $29.95
dual-flush kit, whose handle pushes up for big flushes and
down for small ones.
                                                                                                       

   Taking the Mystery
   Out of Composters
                                                                                                       

   THE U.S. WASTE stream could be cut by 25% if people
composted their food and yard wastes.
   But how to do it without a big mess? Send away for a $200
rotating drum composter? Or settle for a $20 wire-and-plastic
bin?
   Composting experts say the costly rotating devices work
fast, turning leaves and grass into fertilizer-like material
within a few weeks. But they represent overkill for most
people. "What you really want is a simple container, vented
at the bottom and with a cover to prevent sunlight from
killing the bacteria" that break down compostables, says
Robert Beachy of Toro, the lawnmower maker.
   The trouble is, he adds, most commercially sold bins for
composting are too small. "We did experiments, and it took a
critical mass" of at least 12.5 bushels for composting to
work right. A cube three feet on a side would do.
   Carl Woestendiek, who manages Seattle's Solid Waste
Utility backyard composting program, says size seems less
important than putting in the right 50-50 mix of
high-nitrogen waste, such as grass, and high-carbon waste,
such as leaves. He adds that a composter the size of a large
trash can breaks down yard wastes in 12 to 18 months. But
putting in food wastes, he warns, may attract vermin.
   An "intriguing" potential solution to that problem, he
adds, is the $79.95 Green Cone, a closed, sun-heated
composter just introduced by Eco Atlantic, Baltimore. He's
testing one in his yard and says it has worked well so far.
                                                                                                       

   Odds and Ends
                                                                                                       

   NEW SELF-STICK labels developed by Adhesives Research,
Glen Rock, Pa., may help solve a recycling headache. Most
label adhesives gum up paper recycling machines, forcing many
recyclers to shun envelopes and other paper with the labels.
Adhesives Research claims it has developed a long-adhering,
water-soluble glue for labels that doesn't mess up the
machines. Several label-using companies are mulling a switch
to the new labels, including newspaper publishers. . . . A
recycling museum is being planned by Boston Turns 2000, a
nonprofit group developing projects to show the city's
positive side. The museum would travel on a barge and would
include exhibits such as art made with recycled materials and
a demonstration of paper recycling, says a group spokesman.
The museum's cafe would serve soups made from leftovers.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
