ID: 116	RANK: 40	SCORE: 19.062021
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910423-0218
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910423-0218.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   California Storms Ease Water Shortage,
   But Struggle Against Drought Continues
   ----
   By Charles McCoy
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
03/21/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), NO PAGE CITATION
</SO>
<IN>
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
</IN>
<NS>
ECONOMIC NEWS, TRENDS, INDEXES, PROJECTIONS, ANALYSES (ECO)
</NS>
<LP>
   Heavy storms pounding California this month have eased
some of its water woes, but they amount to just a drop in the
bucket in the state's continuing struggle to cope with five
years of drought.
   Since the beginning of March, storms roaring down from the
Gulf of Alaska have inundated many parched sectors of the
state. The storms have dumped as much as five inches of rain
and five feet of snow in 24-hour spurts on some parched
areas. More big storms are expected to arrive this weekend.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The rains are welcome relief from several months of nearly
bone-dry weather, the worst stretch of a drought that has
gripped California since about 1986. The drought threatens to
cost the California economy -- the world's eighth-largest --
billions of dollars this year. In the longer term, dry times
have raised questions about California's water system and its
capacity to keep up with the state's torrid growth.
   The storms have damped the water panic that swept
California in recent weeks, as reservoirs disappeared and
cities all over the state adopted or proposed Draconian
rationing systems. Gibraltar Reservoir, a small lake near
Santa Barbara, has water in it for the first time since it
ran dry over a year ago and may soon begin supplying the
community with water once more. Orange Cove, a dusty little
farm town in the San Joaquin Valley where residents were
facing rationing that would have limited them to 10 gallons
of water per household a day -- enough to flush a toilet 1.5
times -- now will probably get plenty of water this year.
State officials estimate that the storms have added one
million acre feet of runoff to shriveled lakes and rivers. An
acre foot is 326,000 gallons.
   But even with the downpours, rainfall remains at only
about 50% of normal levels for the year. Most of the state's
major reservoirs are still pitifully low. For example, rains
have swollen Shasta Lake, a big federally operated dam and
reservoir system on the Sacramento River, by 300,000 acre
feet since late February. It now holds 1.8 million acre feet.
Its capacity is 4.8 million acre feet. Hetch Hetchy
reservoir, San Francisco's main water source, is currently at
12% of capacity; last year at this time, it stood at 25% of
capacity.
   "The situation has gone from god-awful to pretty
terrible," observes Alan Jones, a spokesman for the state
Department of Water Resources.
   The rains have taken away much of the pressure on
California's new governor, Pete Wilson, to declare a state of
emergency that would have enabled him to transfer water from
farm users to thirsty cities, regardless of water rights.
That is a relief to the governor; such transfers would have
been politically explosive. Farmers use about 80% of
California's water.
   But state water agencies and the federal Bureau of
Reclamation, which control how much water is released from
behind state and federally financed dams in the state, say
they expect to hoard almost all of the storms' runoff to
refill reservoirs that have dropped to record lows. That's
bad news for thirsty cities and farm areas, which had hoped
that the storms might mean more deliveries from the state and
federal systems. Earlier this year, the state cut its planned
deliveries to cities by 90% and eliminated planned
agricultural shipments; the bureau, a big farm supplier, has
cut most of its farm shipments by 75%.
   The rains may mean some scaling back of recently enacted
rationing plans in areas that don't rely heavily on state and
federal water projects, but in most cities, water officials
expect to keep tough conservation measures in place. In San
Francisco, for example, water department officials say the
storms have given them enough water to proceed with a plan to
impose a 45% rationing plan as of April 1; if it hadn't
rained, they might have had to propose even stricter limits.
The San Francisco plan is one of the state's toughest: If
customers exceed their limit twice in a row, the city
installs a device that automatically restricts water flow. If
customers go over the limit three consecutive times, the city
shuts off their water completely.
   Some water officials fear the rains may complicate the
fight against drought. The wet weather may erode the sense of
urgency they hoped would compel people to skimp on showers,
toilet flushing and lawn watering. "A lot of people may ask
themselves why they have to put up with this Draconian water
rationing when their feet are getting soaked as they walk
down the street," said Cheryl Davis, manager of customer
relations at the San Francisco Water Department, adding,
"We're concerned they won't take it as seriously as they
should."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
