ID: 116	RANK: 58	SCORE: 17.462091
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP890830-0204 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-08-30-89 2138EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>a i AM-BeirutLife-AFamily Adv04-1stadd   08-30 0740</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Beirut Life-A Family, Adv 04-1st add,0768</SECOND>
<HEAD>$Adv04</HEAD>
<HEAD>For Release Mon AMs, Sept. 4, and Therefter</HEAD>
<HEAD>BEIRUT: a sigh.</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   Everyone had to wash with just half a bucket of water.
   Mrs. Abboud said they once went without washing for four days
because the shelling was so heavy no one could go out to fetch water
from a spring in the neighboring Ashrafieh district, a constant
target for the Syrians.
   When there's gasoline to be found and the shelling stops, Rabih
drives through the rubble-strewn streets to fill six 10-liter
(2\-gallon) plastic canisters with water from the spring.
   His mother frets while he's out, praying he'll get home before
the shelling starts again.
   The family needs about 13{ gallons of water a day for drinking,
washing dishes, bathing, flushing toilets and keeping the house
clean.
   Mrs. Abboud has learned to wash the dishes in a bucket, then use
the water to flush the toilet.
   Many Beirutis use bottled water for ``showers.'' One woman said:
``I use one for the front and another for the back.''
   The Abbouds use the water sparingly, trying to keep some in
reserve for the days when the shelling is heavy and Rabih can't go
to the spring.
   At 8 a.m. one recent day Mrs. Abboud sent Rania to fetch cheese,
milk and yoghurt from Mrs. Azar's ``collective fridge.''
   Rania returned empty-handed. Mrs. Azar was out and Rania couldn't
get into her apartment. The Abbouds made do with stale bread dipped
in olive oil and thyme.
   Abboud goes to the local bakery, if it's open, three days a week
at 5 a.m. On a good day, he'll have to wait in line only an hour.
   Sugar is in short supply, to Rabih's chagrin. He likes his tea
sweet.
   After breakfast, Abboud looked out the window at the street below.
   ``When I see people in the street, I reckon it's safe to go to
work,'' said Abboud, whose office is a 10-minute walk from his
apartment.
   There was some traffic this day, so he made a run for it. He wore
a wrinkled shirt because with no electricity his wife can't iron
clothes.
   After he left, his wife fidgeted nervously until he telephoned to
say he'd arrived safely.
   Abboud earns 80,000 Lebanese pounds ($160) a month at calligraphy
and, unlike many Lebanese, gets paid regularly. He supplements his
salary with freelance work at home. His eldest son, Fadi, 26, who
works in Liberia in western Africa, regularly sends money home.
   Asked why he hasn't taken the family out of Beirut, Abboud said
Moslem forces are near his cottage in the mountains at Bikfaya and
it is just as exposed to shellfire as the Beirut apartment. He
doesn't think there's much difference where the family lives.
   As for fleeing abroad, ``I can't afford it,'' he said.
   Schools have been closed for five months. But Rabih and his
sister do school work at home and turn it in to their teachers every
two weeks, when they receive new assignments.
   Their father nags them to study for two hours a day. But Rabih
said: ``It's really hard because I just can't concentrate.''
   Mrs. Abboud makes sure everyone's there when she prepares a meal
because gas for cooking is scarce and she doesn't want to waste it
to reheat food.
   She buys gas for the stove in a container that once cost the
equivalent of $1.50 and now sells for $16.
   As Mrs. Abboud was making lunch this day, Hazmieh came under
shellfire again.
   The family ended up eating half-cooked french fries in the
stairwell as the steaks lay uncooked on the kitchen table.
   When the shelling intensified, the Abbouds scurried to Mrs.
Azar's apartment. The fetid air and the constant pounding of
exploding shells made everyone jittery.
   At nightfall, the shelling eased and the Abbouds groped their way
back to their apartment in the dark to make sandwiches before
returning to their ``bedroom'' in Mrs. Azar's apartment.
   Rabih held a large bottle of Pepsi and said longingly: ``If only
you were ice cold.''
   At 8 p.m. Mrs. Azar turned on her television set to watch the
evening news on the Christian network.
   Everyone listened intently to learn which areas had been hit,
who'd been killed.
   The newscaster started on the foreign news.
   ``Switch it off,'' Mrs. Azar said, curtly. ``The world doesn't
care about us. Why should we care what's happening to them?''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Mon AMs, Sept. 4</NOTE>
</DOC>
