ID: 291	RANK: 75	SCORE: 14.100366
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910205-0071
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910205-0071.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Marketing:
   Critics Call Cuts
   In Package Size
   Deceptive Move
   ----
   By John B. Hinge
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/05/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   HNZ PG KMB WLA
</CO>
<IN>
CONTAINERS &amp; PACKAGING, BAGS, CANS, BOXES (CTR)
FOOD PRODUCTS (FOD)
CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS (HPR)
</IN>
<LP>
   For more than 30 years, StarKist Seafood put 6 1/2 ounces
of tuna -- the industry standard -- into its regular-sized
can. Check a store shelf today, though, and you'll find
StarKist's cans weigh 3/8 of an ounce less for exactly the
same price. The result: a nearly invisible 5.8% price
increase.
   What StarKist did to its cans is called "downsizing" --
decreasing package size while maintaining price. In a
recession, manufacturers say, downsizing helps them hold the
line on prices despite rising costs. But manufacturers use
the practice in inflationary periods, too, as a way of
keeping prices from rising beyond psychological barriers for
their products.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Consumer advocates charge that downsizing, or "packaging
to size," is an increasingly common way of raising prices
without telling consumers they're paying more for less. This
month, New York State Attorney General Robert Abrams will
issue a report charging that such practices are deceptive.
Mr. Abrams also plans to press for a bill in the state
legislature requiring marketers to signal such changes on the
package.
   Downsizing is done in "a subtle and unannounced way, to
take advantage of consumers' buying habits," charges Sandy
Mindell, an assistant attorney general who has been working
on the report.
   StarKist, a unit of H.J. Heinz Co., defends its
downsizing, saying that the new can handles and stacks better
and uses less steel -- a boon to the environment. A company
spokeswoman also argues that the smaller-sized can has a
higher ratio of tuna to the oil or water it's packed in,
benefiting the consumer.
   But other manufacturers acknowledge that downsizing has
more to do with pricing than anything else. "It's a price
increase any way you slice it," says Scott Stewart, a
spokesman for Procter &amp; Gamble Co.'s diaper division, which
makes Pampers and Luvs disposable diapers. Over the past few
months, both Procter &amp; Gamble and Kimberly-Clark Corp. have
cut the number of diapers in their packages, leaving prices
the same. A package that used to contain 88 diapers now has
80, effectively a 9.1% price increase, while the old 28-count
package now has 26, for a 7.1% increase.
   Mr. Stewart says Procter &amp; Gamble needed to cover
increased costs of raw materials and preferred to do it by
maintaining a "consistent retail price." A spokesman for
Kimberly-Clark, which makes Huggies, says only that the size
change was "a marketing and business management decision."
   Manufacturers note that weight or unit counts are clearly
marked on packages as required by federal law. But for
products like paper towels and toilet tissue, changes in the
count are nearly invisible because consumers so rarely check
the numbers. P&amp;G, along with other makers of paper products,
has routinely cut the number -- and size -- of sheets in its
rolls. Consumer Reports magazine reported in 1988 that, in
five rolls of P&amp;G's Bounty towels bought in succession,
contents dropped steadily from 85 square feet to 70.
   Similarly, several big toilet-tissue makers cut the number
of sheets in a roll to 300 from 350 a few years ago. They
were trying to keep a four-roll package priced at less than a
dollar. While most manufacturers maintain the count is
clearly marked on the package, a spokesman for one of them
concedes that although a few consumers notice, "not enough
people are aware of it to affect sales."
   Besides the price-barrier issue, marketers claim a number
of other reasons for cutting size. Warner-Lambert Co.
recently replaced its 96-tablet box of Efferdent denture
cleaner with a 90-count box that's nearly the same size --
and exactly the same price. The motive, according to a
Warner-Lambert spokesman: to come closer to the 84-count box
produced by its competitor, Block Drug Co's Polident. "When
you're on a shelf over or under your biggest competitor," the
Warner-Lambert spokesman says, "you want to be comparing
apples and apples."
   Similarly, when Near East rice pilaf cut the contents of
its box to six ounces from seven a year and a half ago, "it
brought our product more in line with the competition in the
rice mix category," says a spokeswoman for H.J. Heinz, which
makes the line.
   Makers of many food products that get mixed with water
defend downsizing as a response to modern technology,
allowing them to reduce the weight of a package but maintain
its yield of finished product.
   "We regard as somewhat irrelevant the net weight inside,"
says a spokesman for Thomas J. Lipton Co., a unit of Unilever
Group. Last year, Lipton cut the weight of a jar of instant
tea to 3.7 ounces from four ounces but left the price the
same. The company says the jar still contains the same volume
and makes the same number of servings.
   "I don't think you'd say we pulled a fast one on the
consumer in that case," says Larry Hicks, a Lipton vice
president and general counsel.
   General Foods and other coffee makers have also downsized
because of changes in the manufacturing process. The Philip
Morris Cos. unit last November cut the weight of its Brim
coffee to 11 1/2 ounces from 12, leaving can size and price
the same. But the yield -- the number of cups of coffee the
can will make -- stayed the same because of a roasting
process the company says expands the surface area of coffee
beans. "The can gives consumers the same volume and quality
they had before," a General Foods spokeswoman says.
   Such techniques, known as agglomeration, involve puffing
up a dry product that gets mixed with water. During the
1980s, the coffee industry moved from a 16 oz. can to a 13
oz. "pound" can by making changes in the roasting process.
   Experts in food technology say such claims about yield may
be valid but the companies are still coming out on top. "If
you produce a more efficient extraction process, you've saved
money for the producer that probably is not passed on to the
consumer," says Joseph Hotchkiss, a professor of food science
at Cornell University. More efficient coffee roasting
techniques, he says, "don't change the fact that the consumer
is getting less coffee."
   A spokesman for Mr. Abrams, New York's attorney general,
echoes that sentiment and says coffee and tea will be covered
by the proposed law. "If they're charging the same price and
putting less product in," he says, "isn't that tantamount to
a price increase?"
   Under New York's proposed law, a manufacturer that
downsized a product would be required to put a notice on the
"principal display panel" for six months, assuming the item
had already been on sale in the state for at least six
months. The notice, which would have to say "reduced,"
"decreased," "less" or use similar words, would apply if net
weight were cut by at least .25 ounces or if contents were
otherwise cut by at least 5% and packaging was left "the same
size or substantially the same size."
   Other states, including Texas and California, are also
looking into the practice. A spokesman for Texas Attorney
General Dan Morales says his office may take action against
some companies on a case by case basis. "If you do one"
company, the spokesman says, "that sends a message to the
others."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
