ID: 133	RANK: 44	SCORE: 14.664217
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911125-0012
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911125-0012.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Southeast Asia's Growth Alters Shipping
   ----
   By Luke Cyphers
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
11/25/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A7F
</SO>
<CO>
   J.NPY P.NEP
</CO>
<MS>
INDUSTRIAL (IDU)
</MS>
<IN>
MARINE TRANSPORTATION (MAR)
</IN>
<NS>
ANALYSTS COMMENTS ON STOCKS, INDUSTRIES &amp; COMPANIES (ANL)
</NS>
<RE>
ARABIAN PENINSULA (ARA)
CALIFORNIA (CA)
FAR EAST (FE)
INDIA (II)
INDONESIA (IO)
JAPAN (JA)
MIDDLE EAST (ML)
MALAYSIA (MY)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PAKISTAN (PK)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
SOUTH KOREA (SK)
SINGAPORE (SN)
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (TC)
THAILAND (TH)
TAIWAN (TW)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   The growth of Southeast Asian manufacturing is putting its
stamp on container shipping, spawning new services to ferry
the region's goods through the Suez Canal to the U.S. East
Coast.
   These "pendulum services" -- shuttling back and forth
between the two regions -- reduce delivery times by making
fewer stops en route than the more-established
around-the-world operations covering the same territory. They
also offer another alternative to Pacific land-bridge
services, which ship Asian cargo to the U.S. West Coast and
load it onto trains bound for the Midwest and East Coast.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   One new service in particular -- the Asia-East Coast
Express, operated by Singapore-based Neptune Orient Lines
Ltd. (NOL) in partnership with Japan's Nippon Yusen Kaisha --
is being watched by both the shipping industry, which has
been hurt by recession and overcapacity in recent years, and
by East Coast ports, which are eager to grab more of the
lucrative Asian market dominated by West Coast rivals.
   The Suez route doesn't pose any near-term threat to the
Pacific Rim shipping business, according to businessmen and
analysts. But it gives some East Coast ports a needed boost
and points to the increasing importance of Southeast Asia as
a manufacturing center.
   "The Asian manufacturing base moving south is changing
the game, the whole playing field" in the cargo industry,
says Arnold Davis, spokesman for the Port Authority of New
York and New Jersey. Ports such as New York, Norfolk, Va.,
and Charleston, S.C., "are certainly a beneficiary of this
new development, and we're excited about it."
   Lower labor costs have attracted many international
companies to Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia and parts of India
and Pakistan. The region has taken over production of many
lower-value-added goods from Japan, Taiwan and South Korea.
U.S. retailers' demand for these goods, especially in the
volatile apparel and toy industries, has given rise to calls
for speedier transport from the region to the U.S., says
Patrick Mongno, senior vice president of Tricom Shipping
Agencies Inc. of New York, the general agents for NOL.
   Much of Southeast Asia's cargo feeds into Singapore, which
in 1990 surpassed Hong Kong as the world's busiest container
port. Because Singapore, via the Suez, is closer to the U.S.
East Coast and doesn't require a rail link to get to the
seaboard's major markets, it makes sense for shipments to
that area, says Mr. Davis. In an increasingly competitive
industry, the carriers "want to use their main asset, the
ship, as much as possible and minimize rail and trucking
trips," he says, adding that "the Singapore route is a
natural progression of this trend."
   NOL's express service, the only nonstop service between
Singapore and New York, starts Dec. 7 and departs from
Singapore every 10 days. The company says it will take 22
days for cargo to reach New York. That betters by two weeks
NOL's all-water East Coast service through the Panama Canal,
which ends this month, and equals the best landbridge service
between Singapore and New York via the West Coast.
   The NOL express ships also will stop in Norfolk and
Charleston, and will call in Halifax, Nova Scotia, before
heading back across the Atlantic to Singapore. The service
then stops in Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore again, before
returning for New York.
   NOL is operating the venture with backing from another
major Asian shipping company, Japan's NYK Line. NYK will
supply four of the six ships to be used on the route, and
will itself charter about 14% of the service's capacity.
   Earlier this year, Dubai-based United Arab Shipping Co.
started a smaller-capacity, 32-day service between Singapore
and the U.S. East Coast, with stops in New York, Baltimore,
Norfolk and Savannah, Ga., as well as Middle Eastern and
Mediterranean ports.
   The companies are "targeting a niche market, for
time-sensitive items that need to move from manufacturers to
retailers quickly," says Nai Boon Hiong, who tracks NOL for
Schroder International Merchant Bankers Ltd. in Singapore.
"The prospects are very good."
   NOL and NYK hope to increase the frequency of their
sailings to every seven days by the middle of 1992. They say
the main selling point of their service is speed. Other lines
move cargo on all-water routes from Southeast Asia to the
East Coast, but generally as part of around-the-world routes,
with many stops.
   In comparison with land-bridge routes, all-water service
doesn't require a transfer of cargo to railroads, and
therefore is more reliable, says Donald McCallian, general
manager and assistant to senior corporate executives for NYK
Line (North America) Inc. "One move instead of two is always
good in this business," he says.
   The goods coming in from Southeast Asia consist mostly of
"anything you can buy in a department store," says Mr.
Mongno. Toys, apparel, small appliances and some electronics
equipment are expected to fill the service's containers.
   What's going out from the U.S., Mr. Mongno says, is
"basically one step above junk" -- scrap paper and plastics,
chemical residues and logs that the Asians recycle or hone
into new products.
   Southeast Asia appears well positioned for more growth,
and the shipping companies are trying to prepare for that,
analysts say. NOL, for instance, has expanded its network of
relay services within Asia, starting a feeder route between
Vietnam and Singapore, and is making more feeder trips to and
from Bangkok, Thailand, as well as India and Pakistan.
   NYK, meanwhile, has reduced its transit time between
Singapore and Los Angeles to 18 days, and is maintaining its
around-the-world service to the East Coast through the Panama
Canal.
   Other major container lines are looking into the
possibility of pendulum services between Singapore and the
East Coast, according to Mr. Davis. Most observers agree that
the Suez route has potential, but there are obstacles to its
growth.
   Land-bridge services to move Southeast Asian container
cargo from East Coast ports as far west as Chicago and north
to Toronto make geographical sense, says John Covaney, senior
managing director of marketing for the port of Norfolk. "You
can have a much lower distribution cost in the East," he
says.
   But East Coast ports lag their West Coast competitors in
experience with such transport, industry participants say,
and large retailers may resist rerouting their distribution
networks.
   Perhaps more important, several major shippers have
long-term investments in U.S. land-bridge services that will
encourage them to continue unloading cargo on the West Coast
and transporting it by rail to the East, industry observers
say.
   They also point out that as fast as Southeast Asian
countries are growing, their exports to the U.S. aren't
likely to overtake those of the South Koreans, Taiwanese and
Japanese any time soon. "Bear in mind that the import market
from Southeast Asia is tiny compared to East Asia," says
NYK's Mr. McCallian.
   Officials at West Coast ports, some of which saw years of
double-digit growth in cargo loads because of Asian imports
in the 1980s, don't seem to be worried. Jeff Leong, spokesman
for the Port of Los Angeles, points out that the major
container lines, including NYK and NOL, are expanding rather
than diminishing their presence in West Coast ports, in some
cases building new terminals.
   Still, Schroder's Mr. Nai believes the Suez route will
prove attractive to shippers. "We see an acceleration of the
region's growth in the next two years," he says. "Perhaps
within a year or two, other companies also will be coming
in."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
