ID: 133	RANK: 59	SCORE: 13.300825
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911230-0072
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911230-0072.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Major Truckers
   Are Hitching Up
   With Railroads
   ---
   Partnerships of Rivals Mark
   Breakthrough for Trains,
   Cut Costs for Shippers
   ----
   By Daniel Machalaba
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
12/30/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), NO PAGE CITATION
</SO>
<CO>
   JBHT SFX
</CO>
<MS>
INDUSTRIAL (IDU)
</MS>
<IN>
LAND TRANSPORT EQUIPMENT, RAILCARS, BUSES (LDT)
RAILROADS (RAI)
COMMERCIAL TRUCKING AND RELATED WAREHOUSING (TRK)
ALL TRANSPORTATION EQUIPMENT (TRQ)
</IN>
<NS>
ANALYSTS COMMENTS ON STOCKS, INDUSTRIES &amp; COMPANIES (ANL)
JOINT VENTURES (JVN)
</NS>
<RE>
ARKANSAS (AR)
ILLINOIS (IL)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   A few years ago trucker Donald Schneider didn't think much
of rail service.
   "It was so undependable that many shippers just wouldn't
use it," says Mr. Schneider, president of Schneider National
Inc., a Green Bay, Wis., trucking company.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But last month Mr. Schneider started loading some of his
customers' container shipments onto freight trains between
Chicago and Los Angeles operated by Rio Grande Industries'
Southern Pacific Transportation Co. He found he could charge
less and still make a profit by paying the railroad to haul
the shipments rather than using his own trucks.
   And early next year he plans to route shipments between
Chicago and the Pacific Northwest on the rails of Burlington
Northern Inc.
   Amid higher costs and a shortage of long-distance truck
drivers, major trucking companies are forming partnerships
with their archrivals, the railroads, whose service is
improving. The joint truck-rail services, which are being
formed in the western U.S., promise lower costs to shippers
and a boost to railroad transport.
   So far, the shift from highway to rail represented by the
these partnerships is small. But "these services will
continue to grow as an economical and environmentally more
attractive alternative" to highway trucking, says William
Transue, a transportation consultant at DRI/McGraw-Hill in
Lexington, Mass.
   Shippers say they welcome the alliances between truckers
and railroads, which were pioneered nearly two years ago by
J.B. Hunt Transport Inc., a Lowell, Ark., trucking company,
and the rail unit of Santa Fe Pacific Corp., Schaumburg, Ill.
By some estimates, their Quantum partnership, which combines
the flexibility of trucks for pickup and delivery and the
economics of long-haul rail transport, has grown to nearly
$100 million in annual revenue.
   The partnerships are a breakthrough particularly for the
railroads, which are trying to win back freight lost to
trucks. Big truckload carriers like J.B. Hunt and closely
held Schneider compete most directly with the railroads for
higher-rated freight shipments of paper, food products,
machinery parts and consumer goods.
   Railroad executives say the alliances will help them put
aside a reputation for inconsistent service. "There's a big
image problem, and we earned it," says John Philp, assistant
vice president of merchandise markets of Union Pacific
Corp.'s rail unit, which currently is the only major western
U.S. railroad company not engaged with a truckload carrier.
"Service wasn't very reliable, equipment wasn't very good and
we did damage a lot of {freight}," he says. But Mr. Philp
adds that partnerships with truckload carriers "help upgrade
the image of rail service."
   And to safeguard their reputations this time, some rail
partners are offering shippers a safety net by providing
alternative road or air freight service if a shipment is
delayed on the rails.
   "Both J.B. Hunt and Don Schneider recognized there's an
opportunity to improve the way they do business through a
combination of rail and truck," says Alexander B. MacWatt, a
transportation manager of Procter &amp; Gamble Co.'s distribution
unit. Adds Jeff Ritacco, a transportation manager for Dayton
Hudson Corp.'s Target Stores: "In the long run {truck-rail
services} will keep our shipping rates down."
   Transportation consultants say the appeal of these
partnerships is likely to increase further. Truck costs are
headed higher in the 1990s, they say, reflecting increased
truck taxes, rising environmental costs and mounting expenses
to recruit and retain truck drivers. Truck industry efforts
to boost efficiency by winning approval for larger and
heavier trucks, including 110-foot double-trailer rigs, were
derailed earlier this year by fierce opposition from
railroads and environmental groups.
   At the same time, rail costs are declining because of
higher-capacity rail cars, automatic train control systems
and new labor contracts that are reducing manning levels on
freight trains.
   "The margin of opportunity to cut costs is much greater
for railroads and virtually non-existent for truckers
throughout the 1990s," says Mr. Transue, the DRI/McGraw-Hill
consultant.
   Mr. Schneider says a typical shipment from Chicago to Los
Angeles using the railroads would cost a shipper 10% to 20%
less than shipping by truck.
   Marvin May, president of May Trucking Co., Salem, Ore.,
says he began to move some of his truck trailers between
Portland, Ore., and Los Angeles on Southern Pacific trains
last May. He adds that by forming an alliance with rival
Southern Pacific, May Trucking will be able to reduce the
effects of rising costs. May Trucking and Southern Pacific
"have gone from fierce competitors to partners," Mr. May
says.
   Truck executives also acknowledge that rail intermodal --
the transport of highway trailers and containers on rail
flatcars -- has improved markedly in recent years. Railroads
have spent billions of dollars to buy smoother-riding,
higher-capacity rail cars, boosted the frequency of freight
trains and sped the handling of freight at terminals. And
they have tried to shake up the tradition-bound rail culture
by hiring non-railroaders, including former truck company
executives.
   Even Mr. Schneider, who in the past has been critical of
rail service, says that railroads in the busy freight
corridors between the Midwest and the Pacific Coast have
become "more competitive."
   In announcing its new truck-rail service, Schneider
National said it is using efficient double-stack trains,
which carry one container loaded above another, to cut rail
costs. And to keep track of its customers' shipments on the
rails, Schneider plans to put portable transmitters linked to
its satellite communications system aboard railroad
locomotives.
   Executives of Quantum, the joint J.B. Hunt-Santa Fe
service, played down the competitive threat from the
Schneider-Southern Pacific service. Not only is Quantum's
rail intermodal network more extensive, but the train trip on
its service between Chicago and Los Angeles takes about 48
hours, compared with 70 hours for Schneider's new service.
Besides, says Paul Bergant, J.B. Hunt's executive vice
president, marketing: "Anytime you are doing something right
you can expect others to follow."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
