ID: 133	RANK: 83	SCORE: 12.323273
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920123-0109
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920123-0109.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Major Railroads
   Show Strong
   Performance
   ---
   Santa Fe, Union Pacific Post
   Fourth-Quarter Profit;
   CSX Takes a Charge
   ----
   By Daniel Machalaba
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/23/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A4
</SO>
<CO>
   CSX SFX UNP
</CO>
<MS>
INDUSTRIAL (IDU)
</MS>
<IN>
EARNINGS (ERN)
RAILROADS (RAI)
</IN>
<NS>
EARNINGS (ERN)
</NS>
<RE>
ILLINOIS (IL)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
PENNSYLVANIA (PA)
UNITED STATES (US)
VIRGINIA (VA)
</RE>
<LP>
   Three major railroads reported stronger fourth-quarter
operations, but one of them, CSX Corp., reported a
restructuring charge that resulted in a loss.
   Union Pacific Corp. and Santa Fe Pacific Corp. reported
reasonably strong fourth-quarter earnings, reflecting some
traffic gains and major improvements in railroad efficiency.
CSX, while showing similar operating improvements, said its
restructuring charge will lead to cost savings and improved
earnings in the long term.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Analysts said they aren't surprised by the railroads' good
performance in a recessionary period. Major railroads have
begun to benefit from steps taken in recent years -- improved
asset utilization, new technology and management procedures
and changes in rail work practices and conditions, including
reductions in the size of freight train crews.
   "The rail industry is completing a really strong year in a
really difficult environment," said Anthony Hatch, an analyst
at PaineWebber Inc. "It sets the groundwork for what should
be a renaissance in railroad earnings in the next five
years."
   Officials of Union Pacific and Santa Fe Pacific said their
1992 earnings are poised to rise. Drew Lewis, chief executive
officer of Union Pacific, addressing a meeting of securities
analysts in New York, said that he expects 1992 earnings to
be up at least 8% to 12% compared with earnings of $639
million, or $3.16 a share, excluding an after-tax charge of
$575 million for restructuring. Mr. Lewis said Union
Pacific's earnings could rise 10% to 15% with a stronger
economy.
   Robert Krebs, chief executive of Santa Fe Pacific, said
after a meeting with analysts in New York that he is
comfortable with their estimates that the company will have
1992 earnings per share of 75 cents to 95 cents compared with
1991 net of 54 cents a share.
                                                                                                       

   Union Pacific
                                                                                                       

   Union Pacific reported that fourth-quarter earnings
reflected strong growth at its rail unit, despite a 1%
decline in revenue to $1.8 billion.
   The Bethlehem, Pa., railroad and energy company, said rail
earnings increased 13% in the quarter to $163 million. The
company cited gains in some traffic categories and continuing
major increases in railroad efficiency.
   However, earnings of its energy unit declined to $80
million from $83 million in the year earlier quarter, while
earnings at its trucking and hazardous waste disposal units
also were down.
   Mr. Lewis, Union Pacific's chairman, said his forecast for
improved 1992 earnings are largely based on continued
efficiency gains at the railroad and some improvement in
pricing. He said coal and grain shipments are showing signs
of improvement. Reductions in the size of train crews and
other changes in work rules and health and welfare items will
save the railroad more than $75 million before taxes in 1992.
   In trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Union Pacific
shares fell $1 to $46.75.
                                                                                                       

   Santa Fe Pacific
                                                                                                       

   Santa Fe Pacific said it was encouraged by improvements at
its rail unit and continued growth of its precious metals
segment.
   The Schaumburg, Ill., company said operating profit at its
rail unit was $65.1 million in the fourth quarter, nearly
triple the $22.4 million reported in the year earlier fourth
quarter. Mr. Krebs, Santa Fe Pacific's chief executive
officer, said the rail unit was aided by increased traffic
volume and continued to benefit from actions taken to reduce
costs and improve efficiency. He said that fuel expense
decreased $14.7 million, reflecting a decline in fuel prices,
which more than offset an increase of 3% in fuel consumption
due to the increase in traffic volumes.
   Fourth-quarter operating earnings for Santa Fe Pacific
Minerals of $21.2 million represented a significant increase
from $6.6 million reported in the year-earlier quarter. The
increase reflected a 131% surge in gold sales. Higher coal
sales also contributed to the increase.
   Mr. Krebs said he expects Santa Fe Pacific to benefit this
year from improved operating results at both the railroad and
minerals companies and further decreases in interest
expenses. He said he expects rail revenue to increase 5% to
7% in 1992 based on higher freight traffic and rates, while
revenue of the minerals unit will grow substantially with a
doubling of gold production and sales this year.
   In New York Stock Exchange trading yesterday Santa Fe
shares rose 50 cents to $12.75.
                                                                                                       

   CSX
                                                                                                       

   Excluding the restructuring charge, CSX said earnings in
the fourth quarter would have increased 4% to $134 million,
or $1.33 a share.
   "Despite the continuing weakness of the general economy,
we are making progress by focusing on the basics of our core
businesses, improving performance and reducing the cost
structure across the company," said John Snow, chairman and
chief executive officer. He said that strong earnings at the
railroad and container-shipping units were "masked" by weak
real estate sales.
   CSX, which is based in Richmond, Va., said operating
revenue for the fourth quarter increased $89 million to $2.3
billion. The revenue increase reflected strong increases in
container traffic, particularly on routes between the Far
East and Europe and in intra-Europe markets. In addition,
yields on rail merchandise traffic improved.
   In trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, CSX
shares rose 50 cents to $59.125.
   ---
                 FOURTH-QUARTER NET INCOME
                                                                                                       

                           1991             1990
                      in      per      in        per    %
                   millions  share  millions    share  chg.
                                                                                                       

 Union Pacific ....  $184    $0.90    $176      $0.87a   5
 Santa Fe Pacific .    32.8   0.18    - 54.6b   -0.32   ..
 CSX Corp. ........  -356c   -3.47     129       1.31   ..
                                                                                                       

                      1991 NET INCOME
                                                                                                       

 Union Pacific ....   $64.0d $0.31    $618.0    $3.08a -89
 Santa Fe Pacific .    96.4   0.54    -111.8e  - 0.69   ..
 CSX Corp. ........  -272.0c -2.70     416.0     4.15   ..
                                                                                                       

   a-Adjusted for a two-for-one stock split paid in October
1991. b-Includes after-tax charge of $15.6 million from early
retirement of debt. c-Includes after-tax restructuring charge
of $490 million, or $4.80 a share. d-Includes after-tax
charge of $575 million for restructuring. e-Includes net
charge of $115 million related to settlement of litigation
and a $28.7 million charge from early retirement of debt.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
