ID: 264	RANK: 36	SCORE: 12.797087
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891008-0028 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-10-08-89 1323EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u w AM-CollegeCurriculum 1stLd-Writethru a0674 10-08 0931</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-College Curriculum, 1st Ld-Writethru, a0674,890</SECOND>
<HEAD>EDS: Subs 17th graf with three grafs, beginning, ``Cheney's core
xxx to expand and clarify suggested curriculum; edits throughout to fix
typos and style errors</HEAD>
<HEAD>For Release at 6 p.m. EDT - time set by source</HEAD>
<BYLINE>Christopher Columbus Did What? ^By TAMARA HENRY</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>AP Education Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>WASHINGTON (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   A Columbus Day poll suggests one-fourth of
American college seniors either never heard or do not remember the
childhood ditty: ``In 1492, Columbus sailed the ocean blue.''
   In addition to finding that one in four do not know Christopher
Columbus made his famous landing in the Western Hemisphere prior to
the year 1500, the Gallup Poll suggests considerable ignorance of
other basic facts about history and literature.
   Nearly 60 percent did not know the Korean War started when Harry
S. Truman was president, 58 percent did not know that William
Shakespeare wrote ``The Tempest'' and nearly a quarter believed a
famous saying from Karl Marx is part of the U.S. Constitution.
   ``If the students' answers were to be graded, more than half of
those tested would have failed,'' concluded the survey, which was
conducted for the National Endowment for the Humanities.
   Armed with the survey results, NEH Chairman Lynne Cheney called
Sunday for colleges and universities to revise their curricula so
undergraduates study ``essential areas of knowledge.''
   In a booklet titled ``50 Hours,'' she outlined a suggested core
curriculum for college students.
   Responding to her admonition, several college presidents
essentially told the NEH chief _ in more or less polite terms _
either to mind her own business or that she was behind the times.
   Here are some of the Gallup Poll highlights:
   _24 percent of the college seniors surveyed thought Columbus
landed in the Western Hemisphere some time after 1500.
   _42 percent could not place the Civil War in the correct half
century.
   _58 percent did not know that Shakespeare was the author of
``The Tempest,'' but 95 percent knew that Mark Twain wrote ``The
Adventures of Huckleberry Finn.''
   _58 percent did not know Truman was president when the Korean
War began. Fourteen percent thought it started when John F. Kennedy
was president.
   _55 percent could not identify the ``Magna Carta.''
   _23 percent believed that Marx' phrase, ``From each according to
his ability, to each according to his need,'' is part of the U.S.
Constitution.
   According to the survey, 39 percent of the college seniors
failed the 49-question history section. On the portion of the
survey devoted to literature, which consisted of 38 questions, 68
percent of the students failed.
   Cheney said many colleges and universities allow students to
earn bachelor's degrees without taking courses in history,
literature, science or mathematics and urged trustees and
administrators to support faculty members who are working to
strengthen general education requirements.
   Cheney's core curriculum suggests study in five basic areas of
knowledge.
   The first area, 18 semester hours on cultures and civilizations,
would start with a one-sememster survey course on the origins of
civilization in general to be followed by two semesters of Western
Civilization and one of American Civilization and then two,
one-semester courses to be chosen from among the following: African
Civilization, East Asian Civilization, Islamic Civilization, Latin
American Civilization and South Asian Civilization.
   The other four areas of basic study: foreign language, 12 hours;
concepts of mathematics, six hours; natural sciences, eight hours;
social sciences, six hours.
   The courses, Cheney said, should be taught in small classes and
in an integrated fashion, so that, for example, students reading
Descartes' philosophy in a Western Civilization course are reminded
of his contributions to mathematics. She also suggested that the
classes be taught by the college's most distinguished faculty.
   James Underwood, dean of faculty at Union College in
Schenectady, N.Y., criticized the NEH for recommending a
``superficial, rigid, and impractical'' college curriculum. He
added that Union College this fall began a general education
curriculum with an emphasis on history and literature.
   ``A reform that relies so heavily on the traditional western
civilization course runs the risk of a dangerous superficiality,''
said Underwood. ``The Western Civilization course tries to `do
everything' and demands for its success the mythical `Renaissance
man' as teacher. History should be taught by broadly educated
historians and literature by professors of literature.''
   Norm Adler at the University of Pennsylvania said, ``It is
encouraging to notice how much the report mirrors the curricula
revisions that have taken place'' at his school.
   Similar sentiments were echoed by Michigan State President John
DiBieggio, who said the school already has gotten an revised
curriculum approved by the community and board of trustees.
   Elton Bruins of Hope College in Holland, Mich., said, ``Hope
never gave way to current fads of dropping core curriculum. We've
always believed it is very important. For many years we were
probably considered old-fashioned by a lot of schools.''
   The Gallup survey included 33 questions taken from a 1986
NEH-funded survey of 17-year-olds and five questions from
examinations that the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service
administers to prospective American citizens.
   Grading the 87-question survey on the standard ``A'' to ``F''
scale, where scoring less than 60 percent correct constitutes a
falling grade, 55 percent of the students would have earned an
``F.'' An additional 20 percent would have received a ``D.'' Only
11 percent of the respondents would have earned an ``A'' or ``B.''
   The Gallup survey of 696 seniors was conducted between April 4
and April 27, using a self-administered test booklet. It had a 4
percent margin of error. The participating students attend 67
four-year American colleges and universities, both public and
private.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
