ID: 264	RANK: 4	SCORE: 26.524393
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910816-0102
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910816-0102.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Its Claim to Twain
   Brings Elmira, N.Y.,
   Fortune and Fame
   ---
   Author Visited His In-Laws,
   Became Favorite Son;
   Hannibal, MO., Cries Foul
   ----
   By Dana Milbank
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
08/16/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
INDUSTRIAL (IDU)
</MS>
<IN>
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)
</IN>
<RE>
FAR EAST (FE)
JAPAN (JA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   ELMIRA, N.Y. -- Reports of Mark Twain's death have been
greatly exaggerated.
   At least that's how it seems in this isolated factory town
of 32,000. Drive past the billboard welcoming you to "Mark
Twain Country," and there is the Mark Twain Motor Inn, where
the water in the swimming pool is as muddy as the
Mississippi. Downtown, Greyhound buses unload at the
Connecticut Yankee Building, where passengers munch on
cheeseburgers at King Arthur's Pub. Over at the Holiday Inn,
guests buy Mark Twain tote bags, and the Kiwanis Club meets
in the Injun Joe conference room. Outside, two Huck Finn
Little League teams play a last game before the playoffs
against the Mark Twain League.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "Everytime you turn around you hear about Mark Twain,"
gripes Pat Shaw, vice president of the Huck Finn Little
League, who, despite his protests, is wearing a T-shirt of
Huck poling down the Mississippi. "I think they overdid it."
   There is a lot more of Mark Twain in Elmira, an upstate
New York town on the Chemung River, today than when he was
alive. It all began in the mid-1980s, when Elmira -- which
jokingly called itself "buckle of the rust belt" -- was rated
the sixth-most-distressed city in the U.S. In a bid to save
the city with tourism, the Chemung County Chamber of Commerce
proclaimed the area "Mark Twain Country." (Elmira has since
attracted Japanese business and says it leads the state in
job growth.)
   The city figured if it could promote its link to the
beloved author, it could skim off some of the tourists who
came to visit the glass museum in nearby Corning, N.Y., and
the area's wineries. After all, Samuel Clemens (a.k.a. Mark
Twain) summered here at his in-laws' home in the 1870s and
1880s, and wrote most of the "Adventures of Huckleberry Finn"
and other books in a study they built for him.
   There were, however, a couple of problems with Elmira's
plan. It turns out the author was never an Elmira resident
and never mentioned the town in his writing. To make matters
worse, a dozen other areas where the author did have a home,
from Buffalo, N.Y., to Jackass Hill, Calif., had already
claimed him.
   Such troublesome details wouldn't have bothered Mark
Twain. "Many a small thing has been made large by the right
kind of advertising," he once noted. In that spirit, visitors
to Elmira can now sleep at the Huck Finn Motel, lick Becky
Thatcher ice cream and sink putts at the Mark Twain Community
Golf Course.
   Not every Elmira resident is thrilled with the town's
campaign. When the Chamber of Commerce (1-800 MARK TWAIN)
tried to change the name of Church Street, the city's main
thoroughfare, to "Mark Twain Boulevard," citizen opposition
killed the idea. The recent naming of Mark Twain State Park
angered the Mark Twain Golf Course, which thought golfers'
loyalties would be split in twain. And the Chamber's
ill-fated First Annual Mark Twain Summer Festival was also
the last. Finally, the city relented: Its most recent park
wasn't named after Mark Twain -- it was named after his
servant, Katy Leary.
   Other cities that believed they had a corner on the
author's name are also annoyed. "We've been promoting Mark
Twain since the mid-1930s, and they've only done it in the
last few years," says Dorothy Minear, director of the
visitors' bureau in Hannibal, Mo., Twain's boyhood home.
Hannibal lures 250,000 tourists a year to such attractions as
Mark Twain's childhood home and a Mark Twain museum -- not to
mention the Huck Finn Shopping Mall, the Tom &amp; Becky
look-alike contest and even a Mark Twain lettuce. Elmira gets
only about 50,000 Twain buffs a year.
   Meanwhile, Hartford, Conn., site of Mr. Clemens's home for
two decades, claims the author was there when he wrote "Tom
Sawyer," "Huckleberry Finn," "A Connecticut Yankee in King
Arthur's Court" and several other volumes. Not so, challenges
Darryl Baskin, director of Elmira College's Center for Mark
Twain Studies. "He was looking out on the Chemung River and
writing about the Mississippi." The Hartford museum director
concedes the author did a lot of writing in Elmira, but only
because he was "bored."
   Elmira does have one edge over the others: It has his
grave. Yet even this has been exploited. No sooner does a
visitor enter the gates of Elmira's Woodlawn Cemetery than a
green plastic sign with white lettering shouts: Mark Twain
Next Right. Four signs later, a plastic marker beckons to a
humble, anticlimactic headstone.
   Elmira has also tried to use the Twain name to attract
investors. The local development commission runs an
advertisement featuring mug shots of Mr. Clemens and the
chief executive of Toshiba Corp., which will make television
tubes in Elmira. The caption: "Mark Twain did his best work
in Elmira. Joichi Aoi plans to do the same." Elmira's Mark
Twain Drama features a scene of the author visiting Japan,
even though it never happened. "We have a lot of Japanese
investment in the area," explains the Twain center's Mr.
Baskin.
   Yet Mr. Baskin believes such crass promotion would have
delighted the author. "He was one of the pioneers of modern
marketing," notes Mr. Baskin. Indeed, Mr. Clemens once
remarked that he was embarrassed by compliments because they
invariably "have not said enough."
   If that's true, he would be pleased to know that Nancy
Pruden-Keefer, Elmira's tourism director, says the area
hasn't even begun to test the limits of the Twain theme.
Apparently, it wasn't enough to throw celebrations for Mark
Twain's 115th wedding anniversary, his 150th birthday and
Huck Finn's 100th anniversary -- all in one year. Now she's
threatening to introduce a frog-jumping festival.
   It's a breathless pace, but Elmira has some catching up to
do. The city in 1939 tore down the Langdon mansion, childhood
home of Mr. Twain's wife. It was replaced by the Langdon
shopping plaza, home of Picnic Pizza, which led one confused
schoolboy to tell his teacher that Mark Twain had married
"one of the Plaza sisters."
   Elmira's main claim to Twain is off-limits. Quarry Farm,
where Mr. Clemens summered, is now the Center for Mark Twain
Studies, and closed to the public. So, too, is the Mark Twain
library, which includes a restoration of the author's
favorite local bar. The one open feature, the Mark Twain
Study (now on the college campus alongside the Mark Twain
watering trough), lured 10,000 visitors last season from some
26 countries. Unfortunately, tour guides say the most common
question on viewing the small octagonal hut is, "This is it?"
   Then there's the Mark Twain Musical Drama, peppered with
scenes of the Clemens couple admiring the Chemung River from
their front porch and their children singing about "Our House
on the Hill." The Drama has earned critical acclaim but no
profit, and may not reopen next year. Still, its founders
estimate it brings the area some $5 million a year.
   Elmira's mayor, James E. Hare, isn't so sure. "I don't
think it makes a dollars-and-cents difference to the city of
Elmira," he says. "You don't see a business come and locate
here because it's Mark Twain country."
   But just in case, Mr. Hare keeps an 18-inch statue of the
author on his desk and gives out "Mark Twain in Elmira" books
at official functions. He confesses he will skip this year's
Huck Finn River Race, but for good reason: His son is playing
baseball for the Mark Twain All-Stars.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
