ID: 264	RANK: 48	SCORE: 10.914249
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910923-0137
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910923-0137.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Letters to the Editor:
   The Twain Cities Keep
   Their Wit About Them
</HL>
<DATE>
09/23/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A15
</SO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
</MS>
<IN>
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)
</IN>
<RE>
CONNECTICUT (CT)
MISSOURI (MO)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   As a Hannibal, Mo., native, I enjoy reading your paper and
was surprised to find "Hannibal, Mo., Cries Foul" as part of
the headline of your story on Mark Twain (page one, Aug. 16).
Mark Twain wrote fiction, so he enjoyed the leisure of using
exaggeration to entertain. I was disappointed to find you
doing the same.
   I never found the Hannibal tourism industry to hold
animosity toward Elmira, N.Y., or even Hartford, Conn. Your
reporter didn't mention anyone actually crying foul either,
only one resident tiring of the Mark Twain lore. Hannibal has
even sent Tom and Becky, its goodwill ambassadors, to visit
Elmira. No one can steal the small-town friendliness from the
town with the Mississippi River, the bluffs, the islands and
the caves that bred Mark Twain's humor and wit.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Julie A. Northcutt
   Washington
   ---
   Elmira had such a special place in Twain's heart that he
buried his son, two daughters and wife (all of whom
predeceased him) here in Woodlawn Cemetery, where he was
later buried with them.
   The mid-1980s reports of Elmira's death, like Twain's
famous quote about himself, were greatly exaggerated. This
formerly distressed community united and pulled itself up by
its bootstraps to stage the most dramatic economic recovery
in New York state since 1985. The significance of our
recovery is simply that any united, aggressive, alert
community can do what we've done.
   America's beloved, complex, internationally known writer,
Mark Twain, continues to live in spirit in Elmira and helps
us in our exciting renaissance.
   Robert W. Bivens
   Executive Director
   Southern Tier Economic Growth Inc.
   Elmira, N.Y.
   ---
   As the only member of the family living in Elmira (my
great-aunt was Olivia Langdon, Mark Twain's wife), I point
out that in Elmira there has been in progress since 1983 a
program of Twain scholarship that, for solid achievement, has
already gained international recognition. A steady flow of
Twain scholars has been in residence at Quarry Farm for
periods ranging from a week to two or three months. They have
been concerned with "Mark Twain, his works, his philosophy
and the environment in which he lived." The Mark Twain
Foundation, a concept first described in Twain's will, is an
enthusiastic supporter.
   This work, it is hoped, will go on at Quarry Farm
indefinitely -- if not under the auspices of Elmira College,
then under the National Trust for Historic Preservation. The
agreement accompanying my gift of Quarry Farm to the college
is ironclad. My underlying and basic intention was to avoid
any possible commercial use of Quarry Farm. Only Twain
scholars are invited to use it.
   In the current state of affairs in our nation, with its
many and deeply serious problems in education, health, drugs,
morals, economic and political malaise, and the very real
threat to America's standing in the world, a broader
understanding of Mark Twain's writings might possibly offer
some comfort and conceivably inspiration for the turnarounds
that must come. During the congressional debate over the Gulf
War, the Park Congregational Church of Elmira (where Thomas
K. Beecher was the minister for almost 50 years during the
past century) used Mark Twain's "War Prayer" as the theme of
the sermon. For those despairing over the political situation
in this country, a reading of Mark Twain's essay on Satan as
"a person who for untold centuries maintained the imposing
position of spiritual head of four-fifths of the human race
and political head of the whole of it" might be amusing if
not instructive.
   Jervis Langdon Jr.
   Elmira, N.Y.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
