ID: 264	RANK: 61	SCORE: 9.191325
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910502-0014
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910502-0014.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Theater:
   Pullman and Twain on Stage
   ----
   By Joel Henning
</HL>
<DATE>
04/03/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A18
</SO>
<LP>
   Chicago -- This might have been called white history month
in Chicago theater. The Organic Theater Company has mounted
the world premiere of "American Enterprise," an ambitious
musical play about railroad-car magnate George Pullman and
the company town he built near Chicago in the late 19th
century. Touchstone Theatre is producing the world premiere
of "Roughing It," based on Mark Twain's narrative about his
adventures in the Wild West of the mid-19th century.
   Pullman and Twain, two swashbuckling characters central to
American industry and literature, are gold mines of dramatic
material. How disappointing that neither playwright could
shape these treasures into a compelling evening of theater.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Playwright Jeffrey Sweet obviously fell in love with his
material -- the life and times of George Pullman -- and
decided to avoid the temptation merely to pit a powerful
robber baron against his suffering workers and their
families. Pullman provided decent homes, good schools and
high culture to the workers in his utopian company town. His
only failing was an inability to recognize that workers have
any right to bargain collectively for a living wage, or at
least an abatement in the rent he levied for his neat and
clean homes when he ruthlessly cut wages.
   OK so far, but Mr. Sweet's love for the material blinded
him to the imperatives of the stage. For example,
dramatically speaking, there is no first act. Instead,
skillfully managed by director Wesley Savick, an excellent
troupe of actors led by Gary Houston as Pullman and Larry
Russo as J. Patrick Hopkins merely runs through masses of
exposition.
   Trouble is that nothing happens with all of this stuff.
For example, we are told about the assassination of Chicago
Mayor Carter Harrison as one of a multitude of inert minor
facts. At the intermission, I overheard one spectator comment
to her escort that she hoped we would learn who killed Mayor
Harrison. Poor woman was praying that a drama would unfold.
No such luck.
   Something actually happens in the second act -- the great
Pullman strike of 1894 -- but Mr. Sweet's commitment to
Pullman's undeviating principles coupled with his
unwillingness to probe any other characters means that we
leave the theater with nothing dramatic having occurred. We
don't even get to know who killed Mayor Harrison.
   Tom Creamer similarly comes a cropper with "Roughing It."
One could suspect there was trouble ahead by reading the
press kit. Twain's prefatory note to "Roughing It"
characterizes the book as a loosely autobiographical
narrative of his "several years of variegated vagabondizing"
out West. The press kit describes it as a "novel." Skillfully
adapted, novels can work as plays. Chicago's Steppenwolf
Theatre Company brilliantly adapted John Steinbeck's "The
Grapes of Wrath" and won last year's Tony for best play.
"Roughing It," on the other hand, contains lots of delightful
stories, but a novel it emphatically ain't.
   Mr. Creamer could have culled a few of the more theatrical
stories from "Roughing It" and constructed a musical or
nonmusical revue. (Jim Ragland's original music for this
production is one of its best features.) Instead, he chose to
inflate some minor characters and move them through an
attempt at a plot. But except for Twain himself, these
characters lack substance, and the plot is thin and vague,
largely focusing on Twain's adventures in reaching Nevada and
trying his hand at mining. Director Ina Marlowe is left with
little to do but have the actors broadly bluff and bluster
through the script. The result is a pallid attempt at
re-creating the ambiance of John Huston's "Treasure of the
Sierra Madre," without Humphrey Bogart.
   Twain is simultaneously played by two actors, Nick Polus
as the mature narrator and Ron Livingston as Sam Clemens, the
young man in the stories. Having one character portrayed by
two actors can be a powerful dramatic device. Elizabeth
Swados used it brilliantly in "Haggadah," at New York's
Public Theater several years ago: Moses was played throughout
by an enormous actor wearing the mask of a Greek demigod and
also by a frightened, near-naked little boy.
   The device works less well here. Mr. Polus looks
remarkably like our image of Twain from photos and Hal
Holbrook's portrayals. And he's good, sardonically commenting
on the action, and occasionally joining in to play a minor
character. But Mr. Livingston seems under instruction from
Mr. Creamer and Ms. Marlowe to play the young Sam Clemens not
just as Twain 10 years younger but as if he were a wholly
different person, rustic and stupid. So a good dramatic
device is wasted.
   Neither of these productions is a mere workshop reading.
The production of "American Enterprise" had a major grant
from the Fund for New American Plays, a project of the John
F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts with support from
American Express. AT&amp;T supported the world premiere of
"Roughing It." Mr. Creamer and his composer, Mr. Ragland,
began their collaboration on it in a subsidized artist's
community in Lake Forest, Ill., known as the Ragdale
Foundation.
   My strong hunch is that this grant money is part of the
problem. In the olden days, before regional theater became a
strong adjunct to Broadway, new plays would open on the road.
If they weren't "ready," audiences might doze off, or fail to
return for the second act. This would help provoke some hard
thinking that might lead the producers to conclude that the
play lacked a plot, or a first act.
   These two scripts contain the seeds of good plays, but
neither is "ready." My guess is that George Abbott or some
other venerable play doctor would take the playwrights aside,
tell them to tear up these scripts, and start over again. But
these generous grants seem to lead inexorably to gala opening
nights, whether or not market forces would produce the same
results.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
