ID: 264	RANK: 73	SCORE: 8.571567
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP901010-0085 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NY-10-10-90 1350EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>r k BC-EditorialRdp 1stAdd   10-10 0793</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-Editorial Rdp, 1st Add,0994</SECOND>
<HEAD>UNDATED: least informed.</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   Oct. 4
   The Arizona Republic, Phoenix, on the Persian Gulf:
   Predicting the future is a job best left to prophets and gypsy
fortune-tellers. It is a risky business in any circumstance, and is
even more so in the Byzantine world of the Middle East.
   All sorts of fanciful scenarios are being concocted by so-called
``military analysts'' as to how a U.S.-Iraq battle would unfold.
They all end with the U.S. winning a decisive victory with minimal
loss of life.
   The scenarios are all very neat. The good guys win and the bad
guys lose.
   But, of all human activities, war is perhaps the least
predictable. There never was a war that conformed to expectations.
   If war breaks out in Kuwait, this much is certain: it will
develop in directions that are utterly unpredictable. It will not
be neat or surgical or sanitary. It will be what war has always
been: ugly and vicious and more deadly than anyone can imagine.
   No one should be fooled by the glitzy video-game scenarios being
spun by armchair generals and sunshine soldiers. War in the Persian
Gulf would not be a Tom Clancy novel or a Clint Eastwood movie.
William Tecumseh Sherman said ``War is hell'' because that is
precisely what it is.
   ---
   Oct. 5
   The State, Columbia, S.C., on linking Israel to the Persian
Gulf:
   When world leaders go upon a world stage such as the U. N.
General Assembly, they do not as a rule, speak lightly or
intentionally misspeak.
   As he joined the parade of presidents and potentates who kicked
off the current session of the world body's General Assembly,
George Bush quite naturally concentrated on Iraq's Aug. 2 takeover
of Kuwait and its subsequent refusal to leave, even though much of
the world, operating largely with U.N. sanction, has made it
absolutely clear that the Iraqi action is totally unacceptable
conduct that must be reversed.
   During his address, President Bush made this observation: ``In
the aftermath of Iraq's unconditional departure from Kuwait, I
truly believe there may be differences permanently, for the states
of the (Persian) Gulf themselves to build new arrangements for
stability and for all the states and peoples of the region to
settle the conflict that divides the Arabs from Israel.''
   Earlier at the United Nations, French President Francois
Mitterand said if Iraq would ``declare its determination to
withdraw from Kuwait and free the hostages ... all things might be
possible.'' That got a rise out of Iraqi despot Saddam Hussein, who
has been demanding that the Arab-Israeli dispute and the complex
Lebanon question be put on the table with the kidnapping and rape
of Kuwait.
   It does sound like both ... Bush and ... Mitterand might be
willing to make such a linkage one day, and that surely sends
shivers down the spine of Israel. The Arab-Israeli set-to is 42
years old, and the Israeli occupation of Arab territories populated
by Palestinians goes back to the 1967 Six-Day War. The civil war in
Lebanon that has led to partial occupation by Syria dates back to
the mid-1970s.
   Those issues have defied solution despite endless efforts, and
Israel's security concerns are bound up in both. The rape of Kuwait
is a matter of the moment, an international crime of a most
egregious variety that demands solution right now. It was a mistake
to link these matters, even with the ambiguous words of diplomacy
used by the French and American presidents.
   ---
   Oct. 8
   Argus Leader, Sioux Falls, S.D., on the purpose of textbooks:
   For three years, small bands of critics across the United States
have been attacking the textbook series ``Impressions.'' ...
   The books are interesting and colorfully illustrated, and they
challenge students. Tey are a big improvement from the days of
Dick, Jane and Spot and boring reading programs.
   ``Impressions'' appears far more likely than older books to
encourage pupils to learn to read and think. The intent does not
appear to be instilling negative values, as some critics might have
you believe.
   Critics cite passages they claim promote witchcraft, mysticism
and other evils. ...
   Yes, there is fantasy, even tales that could be interpreted as
rebellious or violent. But children's literature has dealt with
such subjects for generations in, for example, ``Little Red Riding
Hood'' and ``Huckleberry Finn.'' ...
   Textbooks should not instill values; that's the responsibility
of parents and churches. Textbooks should instill a sense of wonder
and curiosity. ``Impressions'' has the potential to do that job
well.
   ---
   Oct. 5
   The Meridian (Miss.) Star on education in Japan:
   The Japanese ... feel they have much to learn from the American
education system, but in view of the much-heralded performance of
Japanese students, what can we learn from them?
   The cultural diversity that is one of our strengths also
presents challenges to American educators that the Japanese don't
have to worry about. Secondly, Japan has no American-style
tradition of individualism. The individual is subordinate to the
group in Japanese culture, which makes group learning easier.
   There are other qualities of Japanese culture we could learn
from. Foremost is the absolute priority that is placed on
education. Japanese children go to school more hours a week and
many more days a year than U.S. children. Japanese teachers are
paid on the average 60 percent higher than U.S. teachers. Honor the
profession in tangible ways and it will attract bright and
committed people.
   Ingrained in Japanese parents is the principle that education
matters more than anything else for their children. Family-imposed
standards of educational discipline, as well as heavy parental
involvement in schools, are the norm. Widespread emulation of that
aspect of Japanese culture would probably do more than anything
else to improve U.S. student performance.
   ---
</TEXT>
<NOTE>MORE</NOTE>
<TEXT>
</TEXT>
</DOC>
