ID: 264	RANK: 76	SCORE: 8.351360
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880226-0219 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-02-26-88 1103EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>a a PM-PoorWestVirginia Adv02-1stAdd   02-26 0308</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Poor West Virginia, Adv 02 - 1st Add,0314</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv02</NOTE>
<NOTE>For Release Wednesday PMs, March 2, and Thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>CHARLESTON, W.Va.: service cutbacks.</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   In rural Preston County, county hospital administrator Hilda
Heady, said she has had to impose a 20 percent layoff and other
cutbacks, such as reduced operating room hours, in order to keep
the doors open.
   Jerry Ash, a spokesman for the West Virginia Hospital
Association, said continuing revenue losses, and especially late
payments by the state, have created a medical care crisis.
   ``Two small hospitals went bankrupt last year and we did a
recent survey that showed six more of the state's 35 small, rural
hospitals are on the verge of bankruptcy. Another six are just a
step behind them,'' he said.
   Farley, who advocates a combination of budget cuts and tax
increases to try and stave off financial disaster, said a national
energy policy is needed to help states such as West Virginia,
Louisiana and Texas, whose economies have been crippled by erosion
of natural resource-based industries.
   Asked what West Virginia would do if it did go belly up, Farley
just shook his head.
   The governor, when asked recently what would happen should West
Virginia be unable to pay its bills in April, replied by quipping,
``Who says there will even be a state government by then?''
   But the question is no joke to many West Virginians, and
especially thys out for the
poor in Pahokee, long bypassed by the opportunity burgeoning in
other parts of Florida.
   Pahokee High School _ with 150 male students now enrolled _ has
26 graduates attending college on football scholarships. Many hope
to follow the lead of Jackson, who returns here in the offseason,
and Pahokee alumnus Andre Waters, now a safety for the National
Football League's Philadelphia Eagles.
   Football coach Don Thompson said 34 players from the high school
have earned scholarships in the past 4{ years.
   ``That's a million dollars worth of education,'' said the coach.
   Few could afford the schooling otherwise in a town where no
college means joining the armed forces or a life of seasonal
agricultural work.
   Economic statistics are imprecise, but average family income in
Pahokee ranges between $12,500 and $15,000, compared to $38,000
statewide. Florida's unemployment rate is only 4.9 percent. There
are no reliable unemployment figures for Pahokee because most work
is seasonal.
   ``In Pahokee, a few families are filthy rich, and some people
are dirt poor,'' said Warren Nevad, city finance director.
   While Florida's population has grown to 12 million from 5
million in 1960, Pahokee's has fallen below 7,000 people for the
first time since the Depression, when it hit 15,000.
   Nearly 45 percent of the residents are black, many of them
young. The median age is 26.2 years.
   Rural towns in many parts of the nation, but especially in the
South, have seen their fortunes and numbers decline in recent
years, as farming and small manufacturing employment have dropped
and people have migrated to cities for opportunity.
   Pahokee's history tells a peculiar tale of decline _ but
recently, too, of hope for a new start.
   Country singer Mel Tillis, who left his hometown in 1951,
recalls a ``Huckleberry Finn-Tom Sawyer'' existence in his boyhood.
Pahokee's living history book, 92-year-old Carmen Salvatore,
remembers that when he arrived in 1919 he found the land ``like God
made it.''
   That was before this part of the Everglades was drained. The
only way to get to Pahokee was by boat.
   ``The wildlife was in abundance,'' Salvatore said. ``The lake
was filled with fish; there were birds of every kind. We had plenty
of beans and fresh vegetables.''
   But powerful financial, political and natural forces threatened
that bucolic lifestyle.
   Sugar corporations moved in after Fidel Castro's communist
revolution in Cuba three decades ago and the subsequent end in U.S.
purchases of Cuban sugar.
   The dark, rich Everglades muck around giant Lake Okeechobee was
bought up from small farmers and converted from winter vegetable
fields by U.S. Sugar Corp. and smaller companies to grow cane. Some
450,000 acres around the lake produce $1 billion in sugar each year.
   It's at harvest time, when the fields are torched to burn off
leaves and drive out snakes and other animals, that the rabbit runs
bring a burst of activity in the quiet town, which has no night
spots or community center for teen-agers.
   ``We don't have jobs. That's the way we have to get some
money,'' said Willie Littlejohn, an all-state sophomore defensive
tackle at the high school. The rabbits bring $1.25 to $2 apiece.
The likes of Littlejohn can bring home 10 to 20 a day.
   Salvatore recalls a thriving Pahokee. During Prohibition,
bootleggers flocked to the isolated town on boats full of homemade
South Florida booze destined for Chicago speakeasies.
   In the late 1920s, hurricanes and floods washed away precious
topsoil _ and then the Great Depression hit.
   Even then, Pahokee's low cost of living _ Salvatore, a father of
five, recalls getting by on $9 a month _ and plentiful work in the
vegetable fields, increased the population to 15,000.
   Pahokee became one of South Florida's up-and-coming towns. A
native was elected speaker of the Statehouse. The town's political
clout led to roads, schools, and everything else Pahokee seemed to
need.
   ``We had high hopes,'' Salvatore said, sitting on his porch as a
morning breeze delivered a sugary scent from nearby fields.
   ``Like so many pioneers, we had all the trials and tribulations,
then someone else came in and reaped the benefits,'' he said,
referring to recent shifts in the labor force.
   The sugar industry requires less labor than previous
agriculture, and most harvesting is done now by West Indians
imported under a special immigration agreement.
   Desegregation in the 1960s meant more change. Many white
families sent their children away to private school or moved out.
   Salvatore, whose grandson Carmen III is police chief, details
the dozens of stores, restaurants, motels and even barbershops that
have closed.
   He predicts Pahokee will shrivel, but he seems to be in the
minority.
   ``People are saying, `I like this town and I'm going to take a
stand,''' said James Bennett, a funeral home operator who just
completed four years as president of the Chamber of Commerce.
   It's not the style of people here to talk publicly about one
major reason for change: the death 1{ years ago at age 80 of Mayor
Duncan ``Uncle Dunc'' Padgett, who ran the city for 25 years.
   ``Uncle Dunc'' dominated Pahokee and was determined to protect
it from the onslaught of Florida growth.
   Those who run the city now say Pahokee had become a textbook for
how not to run a city. Water meters weren't read for years, and the
city was paying $69,000 a year to insure a fleet of vehicles, many
no longer in service.
   The city council of ``Uncle Dunc'' rebelled in the 1970s against
federal regulations that found water, sewerage and housing were not
up to minimum standards.
   At one point, Pahokee City Council voted to secede from the
Union.
   Today's council is more pragmatic.
   Mayor Clark Wilkinson was elected last year on a reform platform
and she helped gain 3-1 passage of a Feb. 9 referendum changing the
city government from the strong mayor system to a city manager
running a professional city government.
   ``This has turned the city around 100 percent,'' said Councilman
Ramon Horta, the first Hispanic ever on the five-member council.
Roy Singletary last year became the first black on council.
   The mayor followed the city charter referendum with a series of
meetings among more than 50 residents and researchers from state
universities to look at Pahokee's needs.
   They are working out plans to develop fishing-based tourism,
improve housing and lure new businesses.
   Said City Council President John Norman, ``We love Pahokee and
we're going to keep it alive.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Thurs PMs, March 3</NOTE>
</DOC>
