ID: 146	RANK: 33	SCORE: 9.382833
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-3591</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CLGBYACGFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921207
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 DEC 92 / Arts: Sparse beauty in a drab landscape - Architecture
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By COLIN AMERY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
Every year the Civic Trust announces its awards for schemes that it
considers to be the best contributions to the improvement of the quality of
the environment. The quality of the architecture, planning, landscape and
civic design are all taken into account.
In order to cover the whole country thoroughly it is divided by alternate
years into the Metropolitan counties and the 'shire' counties. This year is
the turn of the shires of England as well as Scotland, Wales, Northern
Ireland, the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man. The awards are sponsored
by Redland plc.
The value of these wide ranging and catholic awards is that they paint a
clear picture of the state of the arts of architecture and design. In the
middle of the harshest recession in the building and construction industry
for some 45 years it may be surprising to find that nearly 1,100 entries
were received. Cynics may say that publicity is even more important during
recession; or is it that architects and developers have time on their hands?
Despite the large number of entries, the trust is forced to admit that high
quality new development is disappointingly rare. The assessors reported that
far too many were mediocre and ordinary and that there are still far too
many 'overscaled, bland and totally inappropriate modern developments.' It
is a depressing picture of the new buildings of the last two years and a
very poor reflection of the low standards that the majority of the
architectural profession finds acceptable.
The report of the awards, written by the director of the Civic Trust, Martin
Bradshaw, makes depressing reading. On the evidence before him of all the
entries he is forced to say that the centres of too many British provincial
towns and cities are spoilt by new schemes that 'seem designed to secure
planning permission and avoid criticism, and are all too often lifeless and
ordinary.' Commercial interests come in for particularly strong criticism.
One assessor pointed out the horror of a group of truly awful luxury
headquarters built by nationally known insurance and financial institutions.
The overall gloom of the report makes the highlighting of the few good
schemes more important. There are some 18 award winners and one special
Redland Prize. The winners do not exactly glow like beacons of quality, but
a few are exceptional and several are on the road to excellence. In terms of
sheer architectural quality, Stansted Airport and the Crescent Wing at the
Sainsbury Centre for the Visual Arts at the University of East Anglia, both
designed by Sir Norman Foster and Partners, are outstanding.
The two commercial award winners are good, but not quite in the Foster
league. Royal Insurance House, on a landscaped country site near
Peterborough designed by Arup Associates, is distinguished by its successful
integration of buildings and landscape. The landscaping, a series of outdoor
rooms with beech and lime plantings, is by Derek Lovejoy and Partners. The
second commercial scheme is a shopping and office development in Belfast by
the Building Design Partnership for John Laing Developments. I have not seen
this in the flesh, but it looks to be only of average standard from the
photographs.
If these awards are in any way a reflection of the economic state of the
nation, then we have to face the fact that the growth area seems to be in
tourism and restoration of historic buildings. The assessors were full of
praise for high standard of much conservation work and it is undoubtedly
true that the architects who work in this area show dedication and skills
that are absent from much new development. It appears that, when faced with
a clean slate, architects are unable to decide what to do with any real
conviction.
One award winning building is a set of studios and workshops dedicated to
training courses in crafts and restoration at West Dean College, near
Chichester, Sussex. In designing an addition to the long range of a partly
17th-century listed mansion, The Architectural and Planning Partnership has
pulled off something of a coup. The firm has designed a strong flint and
stone wing with almost William Burgess-like projecting windows: powerful
stuff. At Buckfast Abbey, Devon the addition of a restaurant in stone and
slate shows the value of using local materials as well as the ingenuity of
incorporating the remains of a 13th-century gatehouse.
There is one inevitable but usually grim modern building that architects
have failed to tackle convincingly: the multi-storey car park. This year
there are two among the 18 award winners. The Cathedral and Quay Car Park in
Exeter, designed by Niall Phillips Architects, is singled out for the
special Redland Award because of the way it achieves the remarkable feat of
fitting a car park onto a city slope, and in the process managing to dignify
the whole function of car parking. The other car park award winner is the
more flamboyant and controversial Avenue de Chartres car park in Chichester,
Sussex, designed by Birds, Portchmouth, Russum Architects. This intriguing
complex won an architectural competition, and its five circular brick towers
and honeycomb brick walls have become a landmark.
Tourist buildings and visitors centres that have won awards include the
extraordinary White Cliffs experience in Dover and the more discreet
reception centre at Brodick Castle on the Isle of Arran. A lead mine, an
iron furnace, disused Welsh quarries and restored canals all reflect the new
uses for a defunct industrial past, and all are good of their kind.
But what is missing from this year's awards are any significant and good new
houses. The Civic Trust rightly complains of the low standards that are
accepted by the volume house builders. This is ultimately the most
depressing element of all. A low standard of house design means a
universally low awareness of the value of good design. And good design, like
so many other values, begins at home. The people of Britain suffer from a
design vacuum on the domestic front, which is not a good omen for the
future.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 15
</PAGE>
</DOC>
