ID: 146	RANK: 7	SCORE: 11.329638
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-13590</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CGMA3ABEFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920713
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  13 JUL 92 / Arts: New York's oasis of the park - Architecture
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By COLIN AMERY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
It's summertime in New York and the heat is driving you crazy. The streets
are steaming, the hydrants are streaming and only the oasis of the park can
help to keep you sane. There cannot be another city in the world where a
park is of such importance. It is like St. Mark's Square in Venice - an
outdoor drawing room. But it is so much more than that. It really is rus in
urbe and it was intended to be by its nineteenth century creators.
When the Street Commissioners of 1807 impressed the island of Manhattan with
an immovable grid, they felt that the miles of waterfront around the
shoreline would be enough to give the city breathing space and plenty of
room for exercise and recreation. They were wrong. Commerce and the piers
took up the waterfront and soon the highways, the bridges, the entries and
exits from the tunnels filled up the desireable waterside places. There was
a need for a lung.
It was not until 1858 that the city held a competition for the Central Park.
It was won by a writer, Frederick Law Olmsted and an architect, Calvert
Vaux. Their scheme was called 'The Greensward'.
There was something very original about their plan at the time. It was
nothing to do with the classical ideas of the eighteenth century but it was
deeply romantic and picturesque. It was to look like untamed nature but
every inch of it was to be planned and designed. It was also to have whole
areas where the denizens of New York could promenade in a more formal manner
 -taking the air in a leisurely way - long before the advent of jogging and
manic movement. The Park was also to house some cultural activities and
among the rustic arbours and fountains music would be played and civilised
pleasures provided.
Many of the wishes of the founders of the park have been fulfilled over the
years. But there was a time when the joys of Central Park were overshadowed
by its dangers. In the 1960s and 1970s vandals and criminals began to ruin
the Prk systematically. Only in the recent past has the New York City's
Parks Department, with the considerable help of the private fund raising
group known as The Central Park Conservancy, been able to reverse the
decline and begin the restoration of much of the park to the original
design.
One of the areas that has been the subject of much restoration work and
expenditure has been the park's mall, which stretches from 66th Street to
72nd Street on the east side of the park. An area just to the east of this
mall is known as the Concert Grounds and here stands the remarkably handsome
and appropriate Naumburg Band shell - a gift to the City of New York in 1921
from a music enthusiast, Elkan Naumburg. The limestone band shell resembles
a giant ruined portion of a Roman building and its great coffered half-domed
ceiling, while looking marvellous also projects the sound of an orchestra or
band perfectly. The shell is inscribed 'Presented to the City of New York
and its Music Lovers', and it is not just a handsome object in the park but
also a monument to the generosity of a private citizen. It has hosted
concerts by Duke Ellington, Percy Grainger, Sousa, Irving Berlin, Benny
Goodman and many others. It is, amazingly, to be demolished by The Parks
Department.
The row over this perverse decision has grown and grown and complex legal
proceedings are underway to try and save this part of the history of Central
Park. If it is demolished it will be a great loss and it is hard to
understand the reasons for its removal. These arguments are that it is
'obsolete for today's amplified concerts' and the Central Park Conservancy
are opposed to permanent concert sites in the park. I would have thought
that many musicians are anxious to play in 'natural' acoustic conditions
today, and that there is more than enough amplification of sound in a city
like New York. The other main argument seems to be that the shell was not
part of Olmsted's original design and that it partially blocks a view from
the newly restored Wisteria Pergola. The other argument seems very spurious
 -that the band shell attracts the homeless, drug dealers and vandalism. As
one opponent of the demolition has written, 'if that argument is used in
favour of the demolition of historic buildings then New York should start
with the demolition of Grand Central Station and work down.'
The argument over the demolition of an agreeable, useful and important
monument in Central Park demonstrates how vulnerable historic buildings are.
I suspect that the 'improvers' of Central Park who give generously of time
and money think that they are doing the right thing.
But in fact they are demonstrating the fallibility those who believe in
'authentic restoration'. As the New York architect Robert Stern has written:
'Central Park is no longer a 'pure' work of Olmsted and Vaux's. It is a
palimpsest with many layers . . . History demands that we take a longer
view, preserving all the best elements of the past, which is invariably more
complex and varied than simply returning the clock to a particular moment
will allow. The past should not be erased.'
How right he is. But will politicians see the subtlety of his point or will
they wantonly destroy one of the survivors of the City Beautiful Movement?
The band shell may be a small object in a great city, but the fight over its
future concentrates the mind on the complex history of our surroundings. It
is too easy to wipe out the generosity of the past and too easy to believe
in the false gods of 'authentic restoration' to remove anything that may get
in their way.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 9
</PAGE>
</DOC>
