ID: 119	RANK: 18	SCORE: 33.203403
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP881216-0221 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-12-16-88 1335EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>s i BC-MediterraneanTourism Adv25-1stadd   12-16 0643</FIRST>
<SECOND>BC-Mediterranean Tourism, Adv25-1st add,0659</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv25</NOTE>
<NOTE>For Release Sunday, Dec. 25, and Thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>CAIRO: historic remains.</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   Lanny Bell, director of Chicago House, a special arm of the
University of Chicago's Oriental Institute, has wrestled for 11
years with how to save decaying monuments in southern Egypt's Luxor
area, the greatest concentration of monuments on earth.
   Using photography and hand drawings, Chicago House is recording
some of Egypt's best-known monuments before they disappear.
   ``In many respects the modern Egyptians live in a huge outdoor
museum, and museums are to be visited,'' Bell said. ``The question
remains one of finding the best way to display an artifact, even an
artifact as large as a temple, to best advantage.''
   Most Egyptian monuments were built as places of worship with
restricted entry. Bell said the dilemma for antiquities officials is
keeping monuments in their natural settings while insulating them
against tourist hordes.
   ``Tourism is both necessary and desirable,'' he said. ``But if
the present rate of decay continues, as it has for 100 years, there
will be no need for tourists 200 years from now to visit Luxor for
its monuments.''
   Zahi Hawass, who controls Giza Plateau, Egypt's best-known
tourist area, is trying to make it safer both for tourists and its
monuments, the Giza pyramids and the Sphinx. He hopes television
monitors being installed inside the pyramids can stop tourist antics
that began 1,100 years ago when treasure hunters forced their way
into Cheops Pyramid.
   ``For the past 100 years this place has been a zoo, and for the
past 50 years antiquities authorities have had no plans to protect
the monuments from tourists,'' Hawass said. ``Our biggest problem in
Egypt is we have no concept that a monument should be a national
park, where people come to enjoy but behave.''
   Tourism has become Egypt's second largest earner of foreign
currency, with almost 2 million visitors in 1988 spending more than
$2 billion. The Tourism Promotion Board's Moussa wants to double the
number within a few years.
   Moussa said officials recognize the appeal of Egypt's monuments
but must look beyond history to encourage mass tourism.
   ``If you're thinking of coming to Egypt only for its monuments,
you can always put it off, because the monuments will still be
here,'' he said.
   ``Our best bet to help both tourism and monuments is to provide a
number of alternative sites throughout the country, drawing tourists
away from congested monuments. We also can help find ways to stem
the tourist flow into popular sites.''
   Tourism officials and the World Bank have devised a plan they say
will ease congestion in the temples and tombs on Luxor's West Bank.
It includes new roads and a visitors' center that will control
visits to the main attractions by computer.
   Two of the most famous tombs in the Valley of the Kings _ Seti I
and Tutankhamun _ are endangered but remain open to the public.
   A year ago the frail tomb of Seti I was reopened after
restoration. A few weeks later, a zodiac design painted on its
ceiling, unique among Egyptian monuments, came crashing to the floor.
   Workers are restoring the zodiac behind a rope barrier, because
``every time we close Seti, we get objections from tourist
agencies,'' said Upper Egyptian antiquities director Balboush.
   In King Tut's tomb, visited every day of the tourist season by
2,500 and more, scientists found in November that bacteria were
eating away the colorful wall paintings.
   To accommodate tourist traffic, plans were made for restorers to
apply an antidote to the infested walls before and after hours. Once
they saw how serious the infestation was, however, experts decided
to work nonstop for three days.
   Tourists didn't hamper the work: the antidote smelled so foul
that once visitors took a whiff, they rushed out, leaving restorers
to their work.
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv for Sunday, Dec. 25</NOTE>
</DOC>
