ID: 306	RANK: 2	SCORE: 27.202934
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910222-0177
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910222-0177.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   You Can Call It Silly, but the Stuff
   Definitely Has a Nice Wring to It
   ----
   By Carrie Dolan
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
02/22/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<IN>
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)
</IN>
<LP>
   SAN FRANCISCO -- For David Latimer, "Silly Putty was
definitely a big part of my youth." It represents a simpler
time, he says, before high-tech, high-priced video games. It
also "made really good G.I. Joe or Barbie brains."
   Mr. Latimer is co-organizer of a party planned for
tomorrow night, honoring 40 years of Silly Putty popularity.
The gala event will include showings of vintage Silly Putty
commercials, a punk trombone band and a special appearance by
the granddaughter of the man who put the putty into the hands
of the masses.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   To commemorate one of the favorite uses for Silly Putty --
pressing it onto a newspaper or comic book and transferring
the image to the putty -- the party will also feature a
"transfer" booth, hosted by people wearing clothes made out
of newspaper. (This classic use has been somewhat thwarted by
technology. "It won't work on the San Francisco newspapers
because they use new nonsmear ink," says Dennis Juarez, owner
of Spike's Cafe, the club throwing the party).
   The event wraps up a yearlong celebration for the goo,
which was introduced commercially on March 6, 1950. As part
of the festivities, Binney &amp; Smith, a Hallmark Cards unit
that now makes the putty, created a 500-pound Silly Putty
birthday cake and commissioned a $5,000 piece of Silly Putty
artwork. And retailer Neiman Marcus offered sterling silver
Silly Putty eggs for $95.
   Silly Putty was a war baby. A General Electric scientist
in New Haven, Conn., stumbled upon its formula while trying
to make synthetic rubber during World War II. In a vain
attempt to find a use for the stuff, GE sent samples to
engineers around the world.
   Eventually, a New Haven toy-store owner brought the putty
to the attention of marketing consultant Peter Hodgson. "He
was the genius who had the insight" to mold the putty into a
commercial success, says Brad Drexler, a spokesman for Binney
&amp; Smith, which acquired Silly Putty rights after Mr.
Hodgson's death in 1976.
   About 200 million Silly Putty eggs have been sold in the
past four decades. Currently, the U.S. is in the midst of a
Silly Putty renaissance, spurred by the introduction of
fluorescent putty and this year's new glow-in-the-dark
version. Sales rose 60% last year, to six million eggs.
Children are the main putty buyers, but Mr. Drexler says that
"when adults get hold of it, they still find things to do
with it."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
