ID: 177	RANK: 13	SCORE: 34.254723
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900717-0169 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-17-90 1134EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>a i PM-MenacingMollusks Adv23   07-17 0946</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Menacing Mollusks, Adv 23,0978</SECOND>
<NOTE>$Adv23</NOTE>
<NOTE>For Release PMs Monday July 23 and Thereafter</NOTE>
<HEAD>European Mollusks Invading Great Lakes Are Here To Stay</HEAD>
<TEXT>
   By JEFFREY ULBRICH&equals;
Associated Press Writer&equals;
   TORONTO (AP) _ A small European freshwater mollusk called the
zebra mussel has spread at an alarming rate since it was found in
the Great Lakes in 1988, threatening the ecosystem and clogging up
industry.
   Experts say there is no way to wipe the mussels out.
   ``In the Great Lakes, all we can do is accept the fact that they
are here and learn to live with it,'' said Gerry Mackie, a biology
professor at the University of Guelph who specializes in freshwater
bivalves.
   Criticism in Canada focuses on the government's slowness in
attacking the problem.
   ``The invasion of the zebra mussels was preventable,'' the
Toronto Globe and Mail said in an editorial. ``Canada's complacency
let it happen, and may enable similar invasions unless the country
takes strong preventive measures.''
   Joe Comuzzi, a Liberal member of Parliament, complained recently
that Ottawa had committed only $230,000 ($195,500 U.S.) to the
problem. He said that ``doesn't even pay for the paper to write a
report.''
   The mussel invasion has been expensive for Ontario Hydro, which
has power plants along the lake shore.
   Zebra mussels produce a sticky thread that attaches them to
solid objects _ water pipes in Ontario Hydro's case. The mussels
are capable of sticking in such numbers that they stop or greatly
reduce the flow of water.
   Large intake pipes are not affected, but the mussels swim up
into the small-diameter service piping inside the plants.
   Their presence also leads to corrosion.
   ``It has cost us well over $6 million to retrofit all of the
stations for this year, and it's costing us lots in research,''
said Renata Claudi, a senior scientist with the utility company.
   Representatives of 13 companies in the Chemical Valley of
Sarnia, Ontario, got together this month to work out a common
strategy against the mollusks.
   The zebra mussel, about 1{ inches in diameter, is a
dark-colored, clam-like creature with white stripes.
   It has a larval stage of about a month when it swims with the
currents. That accounts for much of its rapid spread throug the
Great Lakes.
   Some of the mollusks hitch rides on ships up the lakes through
Huron, Michigan and Superior and others swim down the current into
the St. Lawrence Seaway.
   A female produces 30,000 to 40,000 eggs in each of its two or
three years of life.
   Experts agree zebra mussels entered the Great Lakes system in
Lake St. Clair in the summer of 1985 or 1986. They probably were
flushed from the ballast of a ship that came from Europe.
   All the Great Lakes now are infested and scientists say their
passage into the Mississippi River system is inevitable.
   ``They have gone through the Niagara River and into Lake
Ontario,'' Ms. Claudi said. ``Now they are swimming their way
toward Toronto.''
   Scientists are not sure what the ecological impact will be, but
are fearful of it.
   ``You have to keep it in perspective,'' said Joe Leach, a
research scientist with the Ontario Natural Resources Ministry.
``The major impacts right now are with the technical devices, pipes
and so on. We ... are looking at potention impacts on ... fishes,
but at the present time there is no indication of major ecological
impact.''
   Leach said the main fears were disruption of spawning for fish
like walleye, which lay their eggs on hard, rocky areas, and that
the food chain would be altered.
   ``These things are filter feeders,'' he said. ``They filter an
enormous amount of water and take everything out of it. What they
don't use, they put mucus around and drop it down to the bottom.''
   That shifts a lot of organic matter from the water to the bottom
of the lake. Leach said it eventually could change fish populations
by reducing the number of water column feeders, such as walleye and
trout, and increasing catfish, sturgeon and other bottom feeders.
   There also is increasing evidence of zebra mussels attaching to
other bivalves and smothering them.
   ``As it stands now, there isn't anything you can do,'' Leach
said. ``There is no way you can control them. If you use poison,
you are going to poison the system.''
   Ontario Hydro uses chlorine, the most effective molluscicide
found so far.
   In one affected plant, Ms. Claudi said, the company ``applied
sodium hypochlorite in relatively small doses for about two weeks.
That basically did them in and all we had to worry about was
cleaning out the shells.''
   She added that the amount used, in an agreement with the
Environment Ministry, ``is never more than 10 parts per billion.
Compare that with the five parts per million of the same stuff in
the drinking water we happily drink every day.''
   Ms. Claudi says Ontario Hydro was talking to other utilities
across the lakes, the American Waterworks Association and Electric
Power Research Association, ``but we're finding that we are way
ahead or at the same level as these guys'' in research.
   Most experts believe the zebra mussel population eventually will
level off and perhaps even decline, but Mackie said the problem was
``trying to determine at what point they will level off or if they
will crash.''
   Geoff Holland of the federal fisheries and oceans department
said Canadian officials probably would meet with provincial and
U.S. representatives this fall to work out a budget for fighting
the zebra mussel.
   As for Ontario Hydro, Ms. Claudi said: ``Prevention is really
what we're looking at. We just don't want those guys in our pipe.''
</TEXT>
<NOTE>End Adv PMs Monday July 23</NOTE>
</DOC>
