ID: 177	RANK: 58	SCORE: 10.608406
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911122-0099
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911122-0099.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Environment:
   Toxic Red Tides Seem to Be on the Rise,
   Increasing the Risks of Eating Shellfish
   ----
   By David Stipp
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
11/22/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<IN>
ENVIRONMENT (ENV)
</IN>
<NS>
ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)
</NS>
<RE>
AUSTRALIA (ASA)
CALIFORNIA (CA)
FAR EAST (FE)
JAPAN (JA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
OREGON (ORG)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
WASHINGTON (WA)
</RE>
<LP>
   Alfonso Falon owes his life to bad cooking.
   When the Galicia I, a New Bedford, Mass., fishing boat,
landed some mussels last year, Mr. Falon and other crew
members decided to eat them for supper. By the time the
shellfish began boiling, though, the crew was busy catching
cod. Ninety minutes later, the mussels were as tough as
rubber bands, but Mr. Falon was ravenous and ate more than a
dozen.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The mussels were caught near Georges Bank, a rich fishing
area 150 miles off Massachusetts. Unknown to the Galicia's
crew, state health officials had issued a warning two weeks
earlier that a deadly nerve toxin had been found in the
area's shellfish.
   Mr. Falon's first symptom of the paralytic shellfish
poisoning, or PSP, was numbness in his lips. Soon other crew
members were similarly affected. Mr. Falon eventually lost
all feeling below the neck, went into convulsions and passed
out. Captain David Cabral, who had eaten a cheeseburger for
supper, gunned the boat toward shore for help.
   Analysis showed that eating just a few of the raw mussels
could have been lethal. But lengthy cooking had leached out
most of the poison, and Mr. Falon recovered.
   The Galicia's crew would seem to have had little reason to
worry about the mussels. Red tides, the "blooms" of algae
that cause such toxic episodes, were thought to occur only
near the shore. But to many red tide experts, PSP's spread to
Georges Bank wasn't too surprising.
   A world-wide "epidemic" of harmful algal blooms has
developed during the past few years, says Theodore Smayda, a
University of Rhode Island oceanography professor. Blooms are
cropping up in new places, and formerly nontoxic algae are
turning toxic. The pattern suggests red tides are becoming a
"major planetary trend," like acid rain and ozone-layer
thinning. Common underlying causes may be at work -- coastal
pollution and possibly global warming -- he adds.
   The latest U.S. outbreak is on the West Coast, where a red
tide toxin called domoic acid has appeared for the first time
-- first in anchovies off California and last week in razor
clams off Oregon and Washington. It has apparently killed
only sea birds so far. But the outbreak "is very significant
and disheartening," says Sandra Shumway, a red tide expert
with the Maine Department of Marine Resources. In 1987,
mussels laced with domoic acid poisoned 153 people on
Canada's Prince Edward Island, leaving 10 with brain damage
and killing three.
   Despite such episodes, many scientists dispute that red
tides have reached epidemic proportions. Better monitoring of
toxic blooms with satellites and other high technology may
account for much of the apparent rise in frequency, they say.
Moreover, fallout from red tides may be growing more as a
result of an increase in coastal shellfish farming than
because of the spread of toxic algae, says Donald M.
Anderson, researcher at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
in Massachusetts.
   But researchers generally agree that red tides are on the
rise, at least to some extent. Some shellfish operators now
carry mice on their boats. If the rodents keel over when
they're injected with extracts of freshly caught mollusks,
red tide toxins are probably present and the boats move on,
says Patricia Tester, a red tide expert with the National
Marine Fisheries Service in Beaufort, N.C.
   Red tides are bursts of growth by different species of
algae, or microscopic floating plants at the base of the
ocean food chain. They usually aren't toxic and often aren't
red -- they can be brown, yellow or colorless. The poisons in
toxic red tides are transmitted to people through
"filter-feeding" shellfish -- such as mussels, clams and
oysters -- which strain nutrients from sea water and
concentrate toxins in their internal organs.
   Saxitoxin, which sickened the Galicia's crew, is one of
the most deadly poisons known. It's found in algae off the
north Atlantic and Pacific coasts. In the Southern U.S., a
common red tide poison is brevetoxin, found in algae that
grow in the Gulf of Mexico. Less toxic than saxitoxin, it
typically causes a nonfatal flu-like illness. But some
coastal residents are so sensitive to it that they get
"choky" from the tiny amounts misted off waves, says Richard
Pierce, research director at Mote Marine Laboratory in
Sarasota, Fla.
   Red tides have been known for centuries. But during the
past two decades, blooms have occurred with portentous
regularity. In 1972, a massive red tide bloom first brought
paralytic shellfish poisoning to New England's southern
coast; PSP blooms have occurred there annually since. In
1983, the Philippines' first known PSP bloom killed 21 people
who ate affected shellfish. In 1987, PSP brought disaster to
Guatemala, killing 26. Less deadly blooms have also occurred
frequently during the past few years, including dense "brown"
tides that have devastated Long Island's scallops.
   Scientists are only beginning to puzzle out root causes.
Japanese ships have apparently transported harmful algae to
Australia in ballast water, says Matt Murphy, a red tide
expert on Ireland's Sherkin Island. The water is pumped out
as ships get close to port to take on cargo.
   Most red tide stories are more complicated, though. In
1987, for example, hundreds of dead and dying bottle-nosed
dolphins mysteriously washed up on the shores between New
Jersey and Florida. Many had pox-like blisters, suggesting a
bacterial or viral culprit. Tissue analyses also showed high
levels of toxic man-made chemicals in some. But researchers
were baffled -- the widespread dying didn't fit known
patterns of disease or chemical dumping. Meanwhile, an
estimated half of the East Coast dolphins were wiped out by
early 1988.
   In late 1987, 14 humpback whales beached and died on Cape
Cod, providing a critical clue. An analysis showed mackerel
in their stomachs contained saxitoxin -- the first time red
tide had been linked to the mass death of marine mammals,
says Joseph Geraci, a veterinarian at the University of
Guelph in Ontario, Canada. Based on that finding, researchers
eventually traced the dolphin deaths to an unprecedented
Atlantic coast outbreak of brevetoxin.
   The red tide poisons had apparently weakened the animals,
making them easy prey for diseases and chemicals they
normally could cope with. A contributing factor, says Dr.
Geraci, could be a switch in the animals' diets to include
more fish tainted with red tide toxins. The mammals' favored
food is growing scarce under heavy fishing-industry pressure.
And numbers of some legally protected mammals, such as
humpback whales, may have risen in certain places to the
"carrying capacity" of the habitat, perhaps causing them to
expand their dietary horizons, Dr. Geraci says.
   But the most common causal thread running through the red
tide story is pollution. In "a good half-dozen places" around
the world, long-term increases in the abundance of harmful
algae have been correlated with rising levels of nutrients
from sewers, fertilizer runoff and other sources, says the
University of Rhode Island's Dr. Smayda. Woods Hole's Dr.
Anderson says anti-pollution measures such as greater use of
"phosphate-free" detergents may also contribute to red tides
by changing chemical ratios in coastal waters in ways that
favor toxic algae.
   If pollution is promoting red tides, the blooms are likely
to get much worse in coming years. The population along the
U.S. coasts is expected to grow to 127 million by 2010 from
80 million in 1960, greatly increasing the amount of sewage
and other pollutants spewed into the sea. The percentage of
U.S. shellfish beds in which harvests are banned or limited
because of high levels of fecal coliform bacteria is already
rising fast -- to 37% in 1990 from 31% in 1985, according to
a recent report by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration. There's "an almost inexorable trend that
threatens to destroy the harvest of wild or natural
shellfish" in U.S. waters, the report concludes.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
