ID: 177	RANK: 78	SCORE: 9.789801
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP880705-0005 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-07-05-88 2350EDT</FILEID>
<FIRST>u a AM-DroughtRdp 3rdLd-Writethru a0737 07-05 0992</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Drought Rdp, 3rd Ld - Writethru, a0737,1020</SECOND>
<HEAD>Iowa Faces Possible Emergency; Southern Farmers Celebrate Rain</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: INSERTS 2 grafs after 12th graf `What's on ...' to UPDATE
with ConAgra comment; picks up 13th graf pvs, `Side effects ...'
SUBS 25th graf pvs, `The drought ...' to CORRECT to least tern sted
leased; picks up 26th graf, `The islands ...'</NOTE>
<HEAD>LaserPhoto PAD1</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By RICHARD HERZFELDER</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Iowa's governor said Tuesday he might declare a statewide
drought emergency, and an Indiana official warned of possible power
shortages as generating plants ran low on cooling water.
   Farmers in the Southeast celebrated rain and high prices because
of the Midwest's problems, and a new heat wave spread water
restrictions and brushfires into the Northeast.
   A dispute over diversion of Lake Michigan water continued to
cause friction between Great Lakes and Mississippi Valley states as
one of the Mississippi River's shipping channels shrank to a depth
of only 7 feet.
   Iowa Gov. Terry Branstad said he may issue an emergency
declaration unless rainfall is widespread this week, even though
federal officials say it's too early to assess drought damage.
   ``It's early enough to know it's a real disaster,'' said
Branstad, who is carrying his case for emergency aid to Washington
this week. ``We don't want to see a lot of farm families forced
back into bankruptcy.''
   But South Carolina farmers were optimistic that record yields
would combine with higher prices, although rain in the Southeast
helped push corn and soybean prices down on the Chicago Commodities
Exchange.
   ``We're looking at another billion dollar year,'' said state
Agriculture Commissioner D. Leslie Tindal.
   Sen. Dave Durenberger, R-Minn., said Tuesday that the drought
will save the federal government $5.3 billion to $10.85 billion in
reduced farm subsidies and the entire amount should be allocated to
rural America.
   ``The good Lord in effect made the money available by
devastasting a lot of farmers,'' said Durenburger, who is in a
heated re-election campaign.
   Meanwhile, a coalition of mainly liberal farm groups called for
an investigation of the federal government's grain reserve program.
   The Iowa Farm Unity Coalition said export subsidies created
profits for grain companies and drained reserves just when they
were needed by small livestock producers.
   ``What's on the line in this drought is the future of the family
farm system,'' said coalition spokesman Dixon Terry.
   A spokeswoman for ConAgra, an Omaha, Neb., grain company,
dismissed the coalition's claim, saying the company tends to
prosper when farmers do well.
   ``We have seen no big new profits in grain merchandising because
of the drought,'' said spokeswoman Lynn Phares.
   She said her company tends to do well when farmers do well, not
when times are tough in agriculture.
   Side effects continued to spread, with bug experts saying
conditions are ideal for grasshoppers and golfers celebrating as
balls bounced farther down hard, dry fairways.
   Wisconsin Gov. Tommy Thompson, who fears temporary diversions to
the Mississippi would become permanent and lower lake levels, said
Illinois actually wanted Lake Michigan water to flush out Chicago's
sewage. Chicago officials said the drought had had no effect on
sewage.
   More than 2,000 barges were backed up Tuesday by shallow water
at Natchez and Greenville, Miss., where a dredge was deepening the
channel from 7 to 15 feet. Some towboat operators were working in
convoy so they could help each other off sandbars.
   Robert D. Glazier of the Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission
said a prolonged drought would leave some power plants with less
cooling water and might create environmental problems if too much
hot water was pumped back into low streams.
   Further downriver, officials said the tip of a wedge of salt
water moving up from the Gulf of Mexico may reach New Orleans water
intakes Wednesday. They was trying to determine how much salt water
the processing system can handle.
   Dry conditions and July Fourth fireworks encouraged fires across
the nation, but most were under control Tuesday.
   Hunting restrictions on waterfowl were being considered because
normal breeding areas had dried out, but the same conditions also
prevented mosquitoes from reproducing. Fish faced a mixed blessing
_ less water to swim in, fewer fishermen to dodge.
   ``It's not aesthetically pleasing to sit out in the sun and cook
your brains out,'' said Ted Crowell of Kentucky's Department of
Fish and Wildlife Resources.
   Dry weather has spread to the Northeast in recent weeks, causing
fires in Connecticut, New York and New Jersey and leading to water
restrictions and warnings to campers in some areas.
   ``We haven't had any appreciable rain in the region since June
17,'' said Capt. Ray Wood, a New York state park ranger.
   Southwestern Virginia has begun suffering drought conditions,
and officials concerned that it was spreading scheduled a meeting
Wednesday.
   Connecticut dairy and poultry farmers were hurting because the
price of feed grain has risen astronomically, according to Gabe
Moquin, spokesman for the Connecticut Department of Agriculture.
   The drought is also posing a threat to the least tern, an
endangered species that nests on sand islands in the Mississippi,
said Jim Czarnezki, a biologist with the Missouri Department of
Conservation.
   ``The islands are now attached to the mainland, and the nests
are being destroyed by land predators,'' he said. ``And now the
islands also are accessible by all-terrain vehicles.''
   Emma Yates, of Lexington, Ky., found an inventive way to comply
with water restrictions by catching air-conditioner drip to water
her roses.
   With the National Weather Service predicting hot weather and no
rain in sight, truck farmers and gardeners in the Northeast were
trying to cope.
   ``We only got half a dozen rows of cauliflower, and those didn't
have much of a head. They were real small, some not big enough to
cut,'' said Fred Vollmer, who arms 80 acres of vegetables north of
Syracuse, N.Y.
   And it's been a slow summer for George Yund, who operates a
lawn-mowing business in Albany, N.Y.
   ``We can't mow because the grass doesn't grow,'' Yund said.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
