ID: 307	RANK: 39	SCORE: 27.295233
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP891114-0079 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-11-14-89 1245EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>u i PM-EastGermany 5thLd-Writethru   11-14 1079</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-East Germany, 5th Ld - Writethru,a0555,1108</SECOND>
<HEAD>West Germany Offers Aid Package if East German Changes Economy</HEAD>
<HEAD>Eds: LEADS with six grafs to UPDATE with new passage to be possibly
opened at historic Brandenburg gate; picks up 5th pvs: Since the ...</HEAD>
<HEAD>LaserPhotos NY4,6</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By ABNER KATZMAN</BYLINE>
<BYLINE>Associated Press Writer</BYLINE>
<DATELINE>BERLIN (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   West Germany today offered massive financial aid
to East Germany if the Communist nation revamps its centralized
economy, and West Berlin's mayor warned of economic problems caused
by the newly opened borders.
   Also today, East Germany's new premier called for a coalition
government but gave no indication the opposition will be part in
it, despite widespread protests pressing for an end to the
Communist monopoly on power.
   Hans Modrow, considered a reformer, also said the Berlin Wall,
though open to travel, must remain standing to keep AIDS, crime and
other Western problems out of his Communist country, a newspaper
said today.
   A leader of East Germany's biggest opposition group, New Forum,
said today that the movement could work with a revamped Communist
Party but that naming Modrow premier was not enough.
   Also today, the official East German news agency ADN reported
that the government was considering opening part of the Berlin Wall
near the Brandenburg Gate as yet another passage between East and
West Berlin. The gate, a huge columned monument, is one of the
city's best-known symbols.
   Before East Germany opened its borders, the gate had been a
major rallying point for demonstrators seeking freedom to travel to
the West.
   Since the opening of East Germany's borders last week, there has
been growing speculation and concern about the implications for the
East German and West German economies.
   West German Economics Minister Helmut Haussmann, in announcing
the aid package today, compared his conditional offer to the
Marshall Plan put together by the United States to help Europe
recover from World War II destruction.
   Haussmann did not name a figure for the proposed aid, and said
the plan would be useless if East Germany did not carry out a
``thorough change'' of its troubled centrally planned economy.
   Speaking to reporters in Bonn, Haussmann said reforms promised
by East Germany's new Communist Party leader Egon Krenz had so far
led to more questions than answers.
   The minister said the aid plan being offered by Bonn would
include massive investments in East Germany and joint ventures, as
well as revamping East Germany's outdated communications and
transport system.
   East Germany's Communist governments in the past have flatly
ruled out free-market principles in the Socialist state.
   West Berlin Mayor Walter Momper urged the federal government to
meet with East German officials to discuss ``pressing economic
problems'' created by the sudden opening of East Germany's borders.
   Among the issues mentioned by Momper were currency problems,
traffic and other economic problems.
   Modrow was chosen Monday in a session of unprecedented
liveliness in East Germany's Parliament. Lawmakers, long
subservient to the Communist leadership, voted by secret ballot for
the first time and endorsed opposition calls for free elections.
They also elected their first non-Communist Parliament speaker.
   Some deputies even called for stripping the constitution of a
clause that designates the country ``socialist.''
   The Communist Party daily newspaper Neues Deutschland
acknowledged today the country is in a ``deep crisis,'' but is
experiencing an ``awakening'' leading toward change.
   Modrow, 61, is an anti-establishment Communist figure who built
his power base from his former position as Dresden's Communist
Party chief. He replaced Willi Stoph, who resigned last week along
with his entire 44-member Cabinet.
   The new premier supports step-by-step economic reforms,
including the scaling down of East Germany's ponderous government
bureaucracy.
   Still, Modrow said the government has no intention of tearing
down the Berlin Wall, despite carving new passages through it for
the past five days in an effort to halt an exodus of refugees and
growing public unrest.
   ``In our country there is little criminal activity ... cases of
AIDS and drugs are virtually unknown. Our people are asking
themselves why they shouldn't just leave that as it is,'' West
Germany's Bild newspaper quoted Modrow as saying.
   He said doing away with the barrier completely could cause
``chaos,'' echoing the Communist line that the wall was designed to
protect East Germany from threats of the West.
   Modrow is to present his Cabinet on Friday. The official ADN
news agency quoted him as saying Monday night that the country
needs a ``real coalition government.''
   ``This will naturally be a broader cooperation within our
alliance,'' he said, referring to four small Communist-aligned
parties that have had Cabinet positions in the past but never
important ones.
   There was no indication he intended to offer Cabinet ministries
to opposition leaders.
   The election of Modrow came as hundreds of thousands of
demonstrators gathered around the nation, spurred by last week's
opening of East Germany's borders with the West. They shouted
anti-Communist slogans and demanded an end to the party's monopoly
on power.
   In the city of Leipzig, about 300,000 people paraded through the
streets in what has become a Monday night ritual, chanting ``We are
the people!'' Protesters shouted `Lazy bunch!'' outside the local
headquarters of the secret police.
   Juergen Tallig, the Leipzig spokesman for New Forum, told West
Germany's Hesse state radio today, ``I can imagine cooperating with
a reformed Communist party.''
   He praised Modrow as a ``competent politician'' but said,
``There are still too many people in top positions with whom
dialogue is not possible.''
   Krenz permanently opened East Germany's borders Friday in an
attempt to stop hundreds of thousands of East Germans from fleeing
West and to buy time for his promised reforms.
   The gamble appears to have paid off. The official ADN news
agency reported that more than 5 million visas had been issued
since Thursday, but that only about 10,000 people applied to
emigrate.
   Monday's frequently uproarious parliamentary session was the
first translation of East Germany's euphoria into concrete
political action.
   During the meeting, some parliamentarians blamed the previous
party and state leadership for the economic and social morass that
has engulfed this nation of 16.5 million.
   Party leader Erich Honecker was ousted Oct. 18 at the height of
the exodus, and there have been calls for the entire party Central
Committee to step down.
   The new speaker of Parliament is Guenther Maleuda. The
Communists did not field a challenger to his candidacy. Maleuda
heads the Democratic Peasants, one of four non-Communist parties
that had been allowed to exist in exchange for accepting Communist
supremacy.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
