ID: 152	RANK: 87	SCORE: 6.191798
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910313-0187
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910313-0187.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Richard III Fans
   Get Their Backs Up
   Over All Those Lies
   ---
   Armed With Facts and Fury,
   They Aim to Vindicate
   This Ruler of Ill Repute
   ----
   By Cynthia Crossen
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
03/13/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<LP>
   He spent two years in the womb and was born with a full
set of teeth and claws. He had a hunchback and a withered
arm. As an adult, he killed his nephews. He ate live frogs.
   This is what history says about Richard III, the king of
England from 1483 to 1485. Some of the history was recorded
by no less an authority than St. Thomas More in 1513. Eighty
years later, William Shakespeare turned More's account into a
play about "this poisonous bunch-backed toad" (the Bard
spelled it that way).
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But More's account is nothing more than malicious gossip,
and Shakespeare's play is "docu-drama," claim the crusaders
of the Richard III Society. Far from being evil incarnate,
Richard was a victim of vicious lies, and many will go to
their graves trying to prove it.
   Laura Blanchard, a member of the Richard III chapter in
New Jersey, is adamant on the subject. She got hooked on
Richard after seeing Laurence Olivier play him in the 1956
movie. Since then, Ms. Blanchard has dedicated much of her
free time to clearing the king's bad name. For one thing, she
has prepared a talk on Richard's physical afflictions called
"Hump? What Hump?"
   She shares her findings and enthusiasms with other
Ricardians, as they call themselves, and anyone else who will
listen. The Ricardians -- part romantic, part detective, part
pedant, part historian -- zealously sift through the few
facts known about the era in search of tiny bits that might
vindicate their hero. They sponsor scholars who study his
era. They erect statues and plaques. They sell wind breakers
for $24 that say, "I WAS FRAMED."
   As one might expect, most Ricardians live in England. But
Richard's fire also burns bright in America. By day, the
roughly 750 American members of the Richard III Society teach
school or manage small businesses or write computer programs.
By night they gather in suburban living rooms, revisiting
such popular subjects as whether Richard killed his nephews
and whether his arm really was withered.
   Ms. Blanchard's talk on Richard's physique is typical of
their fervent pursuit of historical revision. According to
her, the only portrait showing Richard with what could be
considered a hump was X-rayed a few years ago for a
restoration project. The finding: The hump was added years
after the late-16th century painting was finished. As for the
arm, Ms. Blanchard says it defies logic that a man whose
tools of trade were armor, sword and shield could also ride
around on a big horse and slay enemies -- all with a
shriveled limb.
   The catalyst for many Ricardian conversions is "A Daughter
in Time," a 1951 mystery novel by the late Josephine Tey. The
book tells of a modern detective investigating the case
against Richard and concluding that it was a frame-up by the
Tudors, specifically, Henry VII, who succeeded Richard to the
throne.
   But the book has its skeptics. It "seems to encourage
{people's} darker and more aggressive propensities," wrote
Louis R. Bisceglia, a professor of history at San Jose State
University about students' reactions to Miss Tey's book. "She
inspires . . . a stirring of latent, anti-intellectual
leanings, as if to confirm an earlier conviction: `I knew
those pompous historians had not the slightest idea of what
they were talking about.'"
   Carole Rike, a New Orleans Ricardian who runs a word
processing and printing business, describes her own
conversion after reading the Tey book as sudden, total and a
trial to her loved ones. "I became rabid," she says. "My
children would walk around the house pretending to have a
hunchback or they would make some comment at the dinner table
about the kind of man who would smother his nephews with
pillows, and I'd be in tears. It's as if you'd discovered
that what you had always believed -- that life is fair --
isn't true."
   Many converts suffer lonely years before they discover the
Richard III Society, usually by happening upon one of the
annual notices the society places in newspapers on the
anniversary of Richard's death (Aug. 22). "It was like coming
out of the closet," says Ms. Rike. "Who else do you know who
wants to talk about Richard III? Nobody."
   The most famous Ricardian memorial notice was written by
an early disciple, the popular mystery writer Rex Stout. He
described Richard as a "great king and true friend of the
rights of man . . . murdered by traitors and, dead, maligned
by knaves. . . ." Richard, the last king of the house of
York, died at the age of 32 on a battlefield called Bosworth
Field, defending against a Tudor invasion.
   Mr. Stout was an honorary member of the U.S. society in
its nascent stages in the 1930s; other members were James
Thurber, Salvador Dali and Tallulah Bankhead. But far from
being a celebrity cabal, the society has always welcomed all
comers, never requiring loyalty tests or oaths, although
Ricardians sometimes make nervous jokes about Tudor moles.
The result of this "aloha principle," as Jeremy Potter,
author of "Good King Richard?" puts it, is that the society
is variously seen as a crusade for truth, an academically
disreputable assembly or a ridiculous manifestation of
English eccentricity.
   You get a taste of all three in the Ricardian Register,
the American branch's quarterly newsletter. In last fall's
issue, one John Duffer indignantly reproaches a Mrs. Fuchs
for saying people shouldn't take their Ricardianism too
seriously -- "let's be deadly serious about it]]]" he writes.
Rachel DeWolf of Newport, R.I., wants to sort out the
question of Lambert Simnel, one of the era's secondary
players. One history book says he impersonated the earl of
Warwick, another that he impersonated the duke of York. The
contradictory accounts frustrate Ms. DeWolf, who says, "What
if someone whom I am trying to interest in Richard III's
times and tribulations and Henry VII's villainy, asks me,
`Well, just who did this Simnel impersonate?' What am I
supposed to say, `I don't know' or `Authorities differ'?"
   Ricardians support graduate students who study Richard's
era, including one who researched how beer was made back
then. But original scholarship is complicated by the fact
that most of the primary sources of the time have already
been found, and secondary sources simply repeat the lies.
"You'd think a chap writing at the time must know what he's
talking about, but that's not true," says Mr. Potter, former
chairman of the Richard III Society in England.
   At least once in their lifetimes, American Ricardians try
to take the Ricardian bus tour of England. Ms. Rike remembers
Bosworth Field, where the group laid a wreath, as a high
point. "We'd climb over the barbed wire looking for the well
where Richard drank before battle, and the farmer would come
out and scream at us to get out of his field," she says. "Now
it's a big tourist deal." In times past, some Ricardians
would jeer the beefeaters at the Tower of London for telling
tourists that Richard smothered his two nephews there.
Ricardians credit themselves with bringing about a change in
the beefeaters' spiel: Now they merely say that the two boys
were mysteriously killed there.
   Ricardians say they will keep at it until the world
realizes, and admits, its mistake. In the meantime, they
still meet at places like Genitti's Hole-in-the-Wall Italian
Restaurant in Michigan to celebrate Richard's coronation.
   They will put on a medieval fashion show at their annual
convention in October. They will debate who really killed the
two boys in the tower. "If you're a scholar, whether you like
it or not, the truth is the only thing you look for," says
Morris McGee, professor emeritus of Montclair State College
in New Jersey and a longtime Ricardian. "We're looking for
the truth, and maybe we're looking for a fair shake for a man
who's gotten 500 years of bad press."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
