ID: 121	RANK: 65	SCORE: 15.210612
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910926-0160
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910926-0160.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
   TV: Men at War, a Woman's Personal Battle
   ----
   By Dorothy Rabinowitz
</HL>
<DATE>
09/26/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A17
</SO>
<LP>

                     Mission of the Shark
                                                                                                       

</LP>
<TEXT>
   This enormously gripping fact-based story of the fate of
the men of the U.S.S. Indianapolis -- sunk by the Japanese in
1945 -- is sometimes hard to watch, as the cruelly vivid
details of death -- and survival -- pile on. In July of '45,
the Indianapolis delivered components necessary for the
bombing of Hiroshima. On the way back the ship was torpedoed,
and 850 survivors were sent hurtling into the sea. Wrought
with a crisp intelligence, this is no standard blood-and-gore
war story. Alan Sharp wrote the script. Stacy Keach is first
rate as the commander who ultimately faces a court martial.
   -- 9-11 p.m. EDT, on CBS.
                                                                                                       

                       Keeping Secrets
                                                                                                       

   Video recorders were made for nights like this. This show,
which runs opposite "Mission of the Shark," concerns actress
Suzanne Somers's grim history as the child of an odiously
aggressive alcoholic father. It is a potent tale of a family
gone to ruin. Successfully avoiding the fate of her brothers
and sister -- who become alcoholics in turn -- Ms. Somers
(who plays herself) instead forges checks, tells lies and
otherwise shows signs of a character in dire need of repair.
The habit of lying and evasion come naturally, the
inheritance of a childhood spent watching her mother (Michael
Learned) trying to manage life with the head of the family.
This is an extraordinarily unsparing biography -- one that
has the ring of truth, or at least a close approximation
thereof. Its undeniable star is Ken Kercheval, whose
portrayal of a blustering alcoholic personality is dead
accurate and frequently terrifying.
   -- 9-11 p.m. EDT, on ABC.
                                                                                                       

                       Monday, Sept. 30
                             LBJ
                                                                                                       

   This four-hour film (part two airs the following night),
written and produced for "The American Experience" by David
Grubin, is a rich chronicle of Lyndon Johnson's career and,
what may be more important, of his times. Beginning in the
early Roosevelt era, the narrative follows Johnson's career
to its end, and it is a stirring ride. The film is jammed
with political war stories and detail, such as Robert
Kennedy's spiteful efforts to humiliate his brother's vice
president. Fans of Lady Bird Johnson will be pleased --
though not surprised -- to see that the former First Lady has
lost none of her regal charm. In addition, friends of Johnson
and various other eminences provide generally fascinating
details -- though we could have done with less of the
psychohistory-babble school of LBJ scholarship on display
here by a Johnson biographer.
   -- 9-11 p.m. EDT, on PBS. PBS dates and air times vary, so
check local listings.
                                                                                                       

                       Thursday, Oct. 3
                     Devices and Desires
                                                                                                       

   Commander Adam Dalgliesh (Roy Marsden) returns in a new
and sturdy (six-part) P.D. James "Mystery]" The mood is as
usual quietly overwrought, the plot an ever thickening brew
larded with up-to-date themes including nuclear power,
terrorism, child sex abuse, etc. It is a complicated,
sometimes confusing brew, but that shouldn't keep anyone from
enjoying the atmospherics. Fans of Roy Marsden -- now
something of an international heartthrob thanks to his
portrayal of the gallant Dalgliesh -- should take special
pleasure in this production, which gives us closeup after
closeup of Mr. Marsden's rueful smile and manly stride.
   -- 9-10 p.m. EDT, on PBS.
                                                                                                       

                        Sunday, Oct. 6
                       Fire in the Dark
                                                                                                       

   The first thing to say about this film is that it is a
brave enterprise, a portrait of old age that is grimly
determined not to flinch from realities. The result is an
unrelievedly harrowing tale so bound by that determination as
to drain all dimension -- except suffering -- from its
characters. The story is faithful to a kind of clinical
truth, but drama requires more than clinical truths. The
film's real power derives from stellar performances by
Olympia Dukakis, Jean Stapleton, Lindsay Wagner and the
unalterably dignified Edward Hermann, somewhat miscast as a
loutish son.
   -- 9-11 p.m. EDT, on CBS.
                                                                                                       

                          Babe Ruth
                                                                                                       

   This paean to Babe Ruth retraces largely familiar grounds,
including his early life, his womanizing and general
hellraising. For most of this film, the Ruth (Stephen Lang)
that emerges is a thoroughly unappetizing fellow -- though
one who does in time mature into a gentler, wiser home-run
king. Neither of these Ruths is particularly interesting, in
fact. Still, the film does offer a concentrated -- if
simple-minded -- dose of baseball history, which could be
just the thing for viewers with two otherwise desperately
empty hours on their hands.
   -- 9-11 p.m. EDT, on NBC.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
