ID: 156	RANK: 33	SCORE: 9.736031
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910313-0076
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910313-0076.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Microsoft Says FTC Inquiry Is Limited
   To Window Program; Stock Falls $3.50
   ----
   By G. Pascal Zachary and Chip Johnson
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
03/13/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A5
</SO>
<CO>
   MSFT IBM
</CO>
<IN>
SOFTWARE (SOF)
</IN>
<GV>
FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION (FTC)
</GV>
<LP>
   William Gates III, chairman of Microsoft Corp., downplayed
the significance of a Federal Trade Commission inquiry,
saying it focuses narrowly on an allegation that the company
made an attempt at "restricting the functionality and
features" of its flagship Windows program.
   "It is not broader than that," said Mr. Gates, who
disputed assertions that the FTC was more broadly
scrutinizing the company's competitive practices. The inquiry
"has no relationship to systems and applications in any way
shape or form," he said, referring to the two basic parts of
Microsoft's business.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Microsoft's stock was jolted, falling $3.50 to $95.75 in
national over-the-counter trading on news of the
investigation into the Redmond, Wash., company, the country's
largest supplier of personal-computer software.
   Mr. Gates said that the FTC probe, which began last June,
also covers International Business Machines Corp., the
nation's largest computer maker and a key Microsoft partner
for a decade. He said that the probe strictly flows out of a
joint announcement from the two companies in November 1989
regarding mutual software plans. In that announcement, the
two companies disclosed plans to limit the capabilities given
to Windows and add other features to OS/2, another systems
software developed by the two firms.
   Since then, Microsoft has boosted the capabilities of
Windows and downgraded the importance of OS/2 in a move at
odds with IBM. This flip-flop by Microsoft may concern the
FTC because some software makers complain that it gave
Microsoft an unfair advantage in developing other products.
   Mr. Gates said he's tried to convince investigators that
the issue of limiting Windows is "moot because of the
aggressiveness we've had with Windows." He said, however,
that the FTC hasn't relented in its inquiry, indicating that
Microsoft's shifting postures toward Windows over the past 18
months concern the FTC.
   A senior FTC official declined to confirm or deny that IBM
is under scrutiny.
   An IBM spokesman in Armonk, N.Y., said: "We are aware of a
nonpublic FTC investigation relating to a press release
issued in 1989. The FTC has asked us for some information,
and we've cooperated fully."
   Attorneys who specialize in antitrust law said that
Microsoft may have gotten the attention of government
investigators simply because it has obtained so much sway
over the software industry through its virtual control over
system software, key programs which control the basic
operations of a personal computer.
   Yet bigness doesn't necessarily mean badness, attorneys
cautioned. And even when companies dominating huge markets
play loose with the rules it is exceedingly hard to
demonstrate in court.
   "It's very hard to establish that a company is doing
anything other than normal puffing and promotion," said
Thomas E. Kauper, a law professor at the University of
Michigan Law School.
   Still, once the FTC digs into a case, it can uncover other
areas of concern. Mr. Gates conceded that the FTC already has
sought a substantial amount of company-confidential material
and that before it is finished with its inquiry he expects
investigators "to get more boxes of documents . . . They'll
have a lot of paper to read."
   Legal specialists say that, as described, the inquiry
sounds extensive. "When they {the FTC} start seeking
documents, the investigation reaches a level of real
seriousness," said William E. Kovacic, a former FTC attorney
and a professor at George Mason University School of Law.
   Such an inquiry also can turn up fresh areas of concern,
such as an alleged practice whereby Microsoft "ties" the
purchase of one set of products, such as word processing
programs, to the purchase of another set of products such as
system software. The practice of tying isn't unusual, and
"the law is unclear on it," said Boris Feldman, an attorney
in Palo Alto, Calif.
   Mr. Gates said that the FTC isn't looking at any potential
leverage in the market that Microsoft gains from having a
dominant position in system software and an increasingly
strong one in applications software. However, Microsoft's
decision to at first limit Windows, and then expand its
utility, have led other software companies to raise broad
issues of unfair competition and manipulation.
   The prospect of a detailed probe into Microsoft worries
investors who are valuing the stock at roughly $10 billion,
or about 25 times Microsoft's expected earnings in fiscal
year 1991. "Any FTC investigation should be taken seriously,"
said Bob Therrien, an analyst at PaineWebber.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
