ID: 156	RANK: 48	SCORE: 9.512832
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911001-0172
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911001-0172.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Computers:
   IBM, Microsoft
   Are Deadlocked
   Over Royalties
   ----
   By G. Pascal Zachary
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
10/01/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   IBM MSFT
</CO>
<MS>
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)
SOFTWARE (SOF)
</IN>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
WASHINGTON (WA)
</RE>
<LP>
   Microsoft Corp. and International Business Machines Corp.
are deadlocked in a dispute over future royalty payments that
could total tens of millions of dollars, say people familiar
with the negotiations.
   The dispute, between the two most influential companies in
the personal computer industry, centers on a decision by IBM
to incorporate code from Microsoft's Windows program in a
future version of its OS/2 operating system software, called
2.0.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   People familiar with the matter say IBM wants to pay a
fraction of the roughly $35 it usually pays Microsoft for a
copy of Windows. Microsoft insists that IBM pay close to the
full amount. The Windows code is essential to IBM's claim
that OS/2 will be able to run Windows applications "better
than" Windows.
   Both companies cite passages in their cross-licensing
contracts to support their respective positions and believe
they can settle the "differences of interpretation" without
resorting to arbitration or legal action, one person said.
Nonetheless, the dispute appears to signal an escalating of
hostilities between the one-time partners. Neither IBM, based
in Armonk, N.Y., nor Microsoft, based in Redmond, Wash., will
comment on the matter.
   The outcome of the dispute may help determine whether IBM
can lure away a substantial number of Windows customers in
favor of OS/2. OS/2 and Windows have a list price of about
$150 each.
   "If IBM has to pay a big royalty to Microsoft for the
code, it may make it hard for IBM to keep the price of OS/2
low," said Rick Sherlund, an analyst with Goldman Sachs.
   The dispute represents the second time IBM and Microsoft
have argued bitterly about royalty payments in the past year.
   IBM pays a royalty to Microsoft whenever it sells a copy
of OS/2. Microsoft helped develop early versions of the
program.
   This summer, IBM made a lump-sum payment to Microsoft of
more than $5 million in overdue royalties related to sales of
OS/2, ending a squabble that began the prior October.
Microsoft says it is the biggest single payment it has
received from IBM.
   IBM says it voluntarily paid the royalty after an internal
audit showed that it had substantially undercounted the
number of OS/2 copies sold world-wide. Last fall, the total
number of OS/2 copies sold by Microsoft and IBM totaled
barely 300,000.
   In April, IBM said the figure was 600,000. The use of the
600,000 number coincided with the start of a push by IBM to
revive OS/2.
   In a July interview, William Gates III, Microsoft's
chairman, suggested that IBM may have inflated the number of
copies of OS/2 it has sold to make it seem that OS/2 is more
popular than it actually is.
   Mr. Gates said that IBM made the royalty payment only
after Microsoft in April threatened to publicly contradict
IBM's claim regarding OS/2. Mr. Gates said he essentially
told IBM to "pay up for those bragging rights" to say that
600,000 copies of OS/2 had been sold, Mr. Gates added.
   IBM strongly denies Mr. Gates's charges. "Mr. Gates's
claim is absolutely inaccurate," said a spokeswoman.
   IBM and Microsoft were close allies during the 1980s but
turned into bitter rivals when they split over the future of
PC software -- Microsoft choosing Windows and Big Blue opting
for OS/2.
   The royalty dispute illustrates how difficult it is for
IBM and Microsoft to free themselves of one another. That's
because they continue to be at least partly ruled by a
patchwork of contracts that give each the rights to certain
system software developed by the other.
   System software, which handles the basic operations of a
computer and creates its distinctive "look and feel," has
become a battleground in recent years because many makers of
personal computers, including IBM, have come to believe that
whoever controls system software essentially defines the
features of a PC.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
