ID: 156	RANK: 5	SCORE: 11.781783
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910129-0082
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910129-0082.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Technology &amp; Health:
   Microsoft Confirms
   Plans for Windows,
   But OS/2 Will Stay
   ----
   By G. Pascal Zachary
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/29/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B7
</SO>
<CO>
   MSFT
</CO>
<IN>
SOFTWARE (SOF)
</IN>
<LP>
   Microsoft Corp. confirmed that it plans to build its
future operating software for personal computers around its
Windows program, but it denied that it will completely drop
OS/2, an alternative program it is developing.
   The disclosure followed a report in The Wall Street
Journal that said Microsoft was, in effect, abandoning OS/2
and putting Windows in its place.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   In an interview yesterday, Steve Ballmer, who runs
Microsoft's system software division, said that the company
plans to keep on marketing products under the OS/2 moniker,
and that its future operating systems will support programs
tailored to OS/2's original specifications. But programs
written for Windows won't run on International Business
Machine Corp.'s version of OS/2, which uses a command system
called Presentation Manager. This divergence strikes many
observers as an abandonment of future OS/2 development,
further distancing Microsoft from IBM.
   But Mr. Ballmer emphasized that Windows software would
work with future versions of OS/2 relying on Presentation
Manager. "It's a bit of a chameleon," said Mr. Ballmer,
referring to future versions.
   Microsoft may be pledging to market OS/2 so as not to hurt
IBM's investment. "Microsoft is under enormous pressure to
rationalize {their message} from an industry standpoint,"
said Peter Rogers, an analyst at Robertson Stephens &amp; Co.
"They don't want to do disproportionate harm to IBM in the
process."
   Four years ago, Microsoft and IBM jointly announced that
they would produce a new program to replace the function
performed by DOS, which controls the basic operations of the
PC. The two companies, which had worked together to establish
DOS as a standard, called the new program OS/2 and told
makers of applications to design their OS/2 products around a
set of specifications called Presentation Manager.
   But OS/2 never caught on with customers. Instead, Windows
won the hearts of customers, who are pressing Microsoft for
an iron-clad assurance that today's Windows' applications
will work with the company's future operating system.
   Mr. Ballmer acknowledged that Microsoft's future operating
system is no longer solely made up of OS/2 and Presentation
Manager, but will include "subsystems" that make it
impossible for customers to tell it apart from Windows. He
also confirmed that recently he has told designers of new
applications to "target new development at {the} Windows"
subsystem.
   However, under Microsoft's revised approach, operating
systems are like invisible sentries, maintaining the basic
operations of a computer with little apparent trace. "From
the developers and users standpoint, then, the operating
system is irrelevant," Mr. Rogers, the analyst, said. "It's
Windows where everyone has the assets. Microsoft does too."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
