ID: 156	RANK: 55	SCORE: 9.429877
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910128-0135
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910128-0135.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Computers:
   Microsoft Corp.
   To Scrap OS/2,
   Refine Windows
   ----
   By G. Pascal Zachary
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
01/28/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   MSFT IBM
</CO>
<IN>
SOFTWARE (SOF)
</IN>
<LP>
   Microsoft Corp., the biggest supplier of software for
personal computers, is dropping OS/2, a software program that
four years ago it declared would replace DOS as the system
that controls the basic operations of the PC.
   In its place, industry executives said, Microsoft plans to
build its future operating software around Windows, a program
that displays information in pictures and menus instead of
strings of characters. Since an updated version was released
last May, Windows has caught on like wildfire, and
practically every important PC application has been or is
being redone to make use of Windows' graphical features.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Microsoft said it will offer details tomorrow at a meeting
at its offices in Redmond, Wash. But in response to
questions, Steve Ballmer, who runs the company's system
software division, said "there are elements of truth" in the
idea that Microsoft was swinging all its marketing efforts
behind Windows. Mr. Ballmer declined to elaborate, but
executives familiar with Microsoft's plans said it will
salvage much of its OS/2 code by incorporating it into future
Windows programs.
   Microsoft's action further strains relations with its
longtime ally, International Business Machines Corp., the
biggest PC maker. IBM, based in Armonk, N.Y., has been
lukewarm in its support for Windows, but has been a major
booster of OS/2, even to the point of assuming a central role
in its design last September. Still, Microsoft executives
privately have hinted for many months that the surging
popularity of Windows meant the death-knell for OS/2, a
technically impressive program that has never caught on with
customers.
   James Cannavino, who heads IBM's desktop computer
operations, conceded that differences exist between Microsoft
and IBM on the question of future PC operating systems, but
he said the partnership between the two companies isn't
threatened. Mr. Cannavino said IBM is committed to delivering
fresh versions of OS/2 and added that "as we start attracting
more customers (to OS/2), Microsoft will see (OS/2) as an
opportunity."
   Others doubt that will happen. "OS/2 was a millstone for
Microsoft," said Ruthann Quindlen, who specializes in
software deals for investment banker Alex Brown. "Now they
want to campaign on behalf of something else."
   The way Microsoft markets its operating software has
sparked controversy for years. Some rivals complain the
company uses its position to strengthen its business in
applications -- word-processing, spreadsheet and other
programs. Indeed, Microsoft, which years ago derived most of
its revenue from DOS-related products, now is a huge supplier
of applications.
   Others accuse Microsoft of having tricked its rivals into
spending huge sums to develop applications for OS/2, while
all along believing Windows would replace DOS as the standard
for PC software. "I've been saying all along that Microsoft's
strategy is really Windows," said Phillipe Kahn, chief
executive officer of software maker Borland International
Inc., Scotts Valley, Calif.
   Microsoft repeatedly has insisted it hasn't deceived
anyone about its plans, but many in the industry think
Microsoft never fully supported OS/2, but agreed to develop
it as a concession to IBM. Now that Windows has caught on,
Microsoft wants Windows applications to work with any future
replacement for DOS. Microsoft had been calling this future
system "portable OS/2." Now it's known internally as "NT Win
32," which refers to new code that enables Windows to process
32 bits of data at once rather than 16 bits.
   A version of OS/2 -- to be released later this year by IBM
-- also will have 32-bit power. But OS/2 is designed for
computers built around chips made by Intel Corp., Santa
Clara, Calif., while Microsoft now promises that future
Windows systems will run on any computer hardware.
   In building its future operating system, Microsoft isn't
starting from scratch, but will salvage a great deal of the
code it has developed for OS/2. So extensive is Microsoft's
reliance on OS/2 code that Fred Gibbons, chief executive
officer of Software Publishing Corp. in Mountain View,
Calif., concludes, "Win32 is simply OS/2 by another name."
   Not quite. A key part of OS/2 is Presentation Manager,
another software menu system. Microsoft is scrapping
Presentation Manager in favor of it Windows menu in future
operating systems; that stings Lotus Development Corp.,
Cambridge, Mass., and other Microsoft rivals who invested
heavily in writing software for Presentation Manager. It also
hurts IBM, which has told many of its largest customers that
the combination of OS/2 and Presentation Manager is a big
part of its effort to neatly tie together PCs with its
mainframe computers. Indeed, at press time, IBM -- concerned
about a backlash from its own big accounts -- was lobbying
Microsoft to speak in support of Presentation Manager
tomorrow, one software executive said.
   "Basically, Presentation Manager is a dead-end for
software developers," said Rick Sherlund, a Goldman Sachs
analyst.
   People in the industry say that Microsoft's strategy
generally should benefit PC owners, who will be assured that
applications they buy today will work on future combinations
of hardware and software. "Windows has won a central role in
the (PCs) of the future," said Paul Grayson, chief executive
of Micrografx Inc., a Richardson, Texas, software company.
   Nevertheless, Microsoft's decision to bind itself more
tightly to Windows could backfire if it pushes IBM into the
arms of another software supplier. Big Blue already has cut a
deal with a Microsoft rival to produce basic software for a
new class of computers without keyboards. And last year, it
struck a deal with Metaphor Computer Systems Inc. to jointly
develop an entirely new approach to operating software for
PCs.
   Mr. Cannavino, of IBM, said it was too soon to tell where
Metaphor, based in Mountain View, fits into future plans, but
the partnership may result in an alternative operating system
that doesn't have "the liabilities you collected over the
past 10 years" with DOS and Windows.
   Many industry executives think IBM's ties to Metaphor and
other software developers give it leverage over Microsoft --
leverage IBM needs if it is to convince Microsoft that it
should continue to support standards such as Presentation
Manager, which is important to some large IBM customers.
Others, however, argue it's too late for IBM to set the
standard for PC software.
   "Microsoft is now driving the industry, not IBM; the game
is over," said Mr. Gibbons, of Software Publishing. He added
that Microsoft had won for the right reasons, because it is
"more of a champion of the customer, so they won the game on
fundamentals, not on Machiavellian techniques."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
