ID: 156	RANK: 56	SCORE: 9.405353
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910308-0141
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910308-0141.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   IBM Is Mustering Its Forces to Save OS/2
   ----
   By Laurence Hooper
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
03/08/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   IBM MSFT AAPL
</CO>
<IN>
SOFTWARE (SOF)
LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)
</IN>
<LP>
   International Business Machines Corp. is readying a
last-ditch effort to make a winner of its OS/2 operating
software, even at the price of an open break with Microsoft
Corp., its partner on the project.
   The aggressive push, to be launched at a "software summit"
in April or May, will focus on a new version of OS/2 designed
for personal computers that use Intel Corp.'s most powerful
microchips. But IBM also is hoping to regain its credibility
by taking a hard line with Microsoft, which has called the
shots so far in an increasingly shaky relationship.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "The world will perceive a difference" in IBM's stance on
OS/2, says Lee Reiswig, the company's main strategist for PC
operating software. In an interview, Mr. Reiswig says the
change will mainly be reflected in IBM's public attitude
toward OS/2, which the computer giant has promoted
ineffectively so far.
   "We're going to be a lot more vocal and a lot more
supportive" of OS/2, he says, promising big trade-show
displays and high-profile statements of support. The
marketing crusade may eventually cost more than $40 million.
The aim, says Mr. Reiswig, is to give OS/2 the same
visibility as Microsoft's popular Windows program, which has
threatened to shove an ailing OS/2 into the grave.
   Once seen as the future of personal computing, OS/2 sold
only 300,000 copies in 1990, capturing a meager 2% of the PC
operating-system market, according to Dataquest Inc. But Mr.
Reiswig predicts shipments will double this year and double
again in 1992 to more than one million, finally making OS/2 a
viable contender.
   Mr. Reiswig also outlines several areas of disagreement
with Microsoft, showing that IBM is no longer willing to
plaster over cracks in their partnership. For example, he
says bluntly that IBM no longer views an advanced operating
system planned by Microsoft -- called OS/2 3.0, or "NT" for
new technology -- as the necessary successor to IBM's version
of OS/2.
   That statement could throw Microsoft's entire
operating-system strategy into doubt: Microsoft has said NT
is a vital product that will unite Windows and OS/2, finally
bringing order to a chaotic PC world. If IBM doesn't
cooperate in that vision, however, Microsoft could find
itself promoting a product that's unsupported by the world's
biggest computer company.
   Coming on the heels of gains by Apple Computer Inc. in its
copyright-infringement lawsuit against Microsoft, such
uncertainty could magnify concerns about Windows. IBM also
would be adversely affected by an Apple victory over
Microsoft -- the screen design used by OS/2 looks a lot like
Windows, whose design Apple has challenged -- but IBM is more
diversified than Microsoft.
   Mr. Reiswig notes that IBM hasn't made any firm decision
on NT, which IBM executives worry is veering from its
original conception as an OS/2 product, and denies reports
that IBM is developing its own version of NT.
   Mr. Reiswig also says he doesn't see any need for
Windows-32, a powerful new version of Windows that will
compete directly with IBM's new OS/2. Microsoft has promised
to deliver that product next year and has told software
developers it's more important than IBM's OS/2.
   Mr. Reiswig contends that IBM "won't allow OS/2 to not be
successful because Microsoft doesn't support it." He adds
that "at this point, we don't have a great dependence on
Microsoft . . . If doing it {means working} without
Microsoft, then, yeah, we can do that."
   Steve Ballmer, who runs Microsoft's system software
division, responds that Mr. Reiswig's uncertain view of NT
doesn't jibe with Microsoft's understanding of the situation.
But even if IBM were backing off NT, he says, "that isn't
something I want to comment on much." Mr. Ballmer adds that
Microsoft will promote IBM's new version of OS/2
"aggressively. And we will work hard to make {NT} a successor
to {IBM's version of} OS/2."
   IBM and Microsoft teamed up in 1987 to develop OS/2 as a
replacement for DOS, the operating system that Microsoft had
developed and IBM had popularized. Like other operating
systems, OS/2 controls the basic functions of a PC.
   OS/2 didn't take off the way IBM and Microsoft had
expected, because users found early versions of the software
slow and clunky. The biggest setback came last year, when
Microsoft came up with a new version of Windows, a
DOS-enhancing program that met with huge success. That took
the remaining wind out of OS/2's sails and seemed to ensure
that DOS/Windows would dominate the future, even though OS/2
is more powerful and will leap further ahead when IBM
releases its new version later this year.
   Microsoft has shipped almost three million copies of
Windows since last spring and will collect money no matter
which operating system wins. But for IBM, which has built
OS/2 into its long-term plans to make all of its computers
work together, the success of OS/2 is more urgent.
   Because of such considerations, IBM and Microsoft divided
up their work on OS/2 last fall. IBM took on all near-term
versions of the software, while Microsoft said it would focus
on Windows and longerterm OS/2 projects. At the time,
industry analysts thought Microsoft had gotten all the
goodies.
   But Mr. Reiswig's comments reinforce several actions taken
by IBM recently to distance itself from Microsoft, and they
raise the possibility that IBM is formulating an
operating-system plan that doesn't involve Microsoft. For
example, IBM recently teamed up with Novell Inc., a big
Microsoft competitor, to develop important OS/2 software that
links PCs.
   While a new IBM operating-system plan would further
confuse a complex situation -- and could very easily backfire
for IBM -- it also would please the computer industry's
peanut gallery, which has been increasingly resentful of
Microsoft.
   IBM seems to be betting that the superior technology of
OS/2 will force Microsoft to surrender. IBM, based in Armonk,
N.Y., says its product, which early viewers have called
impressive, will do everything that Microsoft has promised
for Windows-32, but a year earlier. Among other things, the
new OS/2 will support and enhance both DOS and Windows,
meaning that users won't lose anything by switching, Mr.
Reiswig claims.
   But Stewart Alsop, publisher of a newsletter, says the
improvements won't be enough to make OS/2 a winner. "IBM
thinks that just because they want something to happen, it
will happen. Well, it doesn't matter what IBM wants. . . .
Every single decision they've made about operating systems so
far has been wrong."
   (See related story: "Microsoft's Windows Opens a Big Lead
-- But Users Gripe About Slowness and Extra Costs" -- WSJ
March 8, 1991)
</TEXT>
</DOC>
