ID: 156	RANK: 69	SCORE: 9.280684
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910729-0029
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910729-0029.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Technology:
   Two Computing Leaders Have New Plans
   ---
   Microsoft Intends to Boost
   Windows and Undercut
   IBM-Supported OS/2
   ----
   By G. Pascal Zachary
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
07/29/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B2
</SO>
<CO>
   IBM MSFT SUNW
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
INDUSTRIAL (IDU)
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
UTILITIES (UTI)
</MS>
<IN>
COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)
ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS AND EQUIPMENT (ELQ)
HOME ELECTRONICS, FURNISHINGS, APPLIANCES (HMF)
MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)
SOFTWARE (SOF)
TELEPHONE SYSTEMS, INCLUDING CELLULAR (TLS)
</IN>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
WASHINGTON (WA)
</RE>
<LP>
   REDMOND, Wash. -- Microsoft Corp. outlined a fresh
strategy last week aimed at boosting its Windows software
system and choking off support for OS/2, a rival approach
backed by International Business Machines Corp.
   The personal-computer software supplier also disclosed
plans to pursue new opportunities in high-definition
television and telephone messaging systems. William Gates
III, Microsoft's chairman, downplayed the recent dismal
results from some leading PC makers, saying he still expected
the global market for PCs to grow by a respectable 10% this
year. And Mr. Gates held out the possibility of Windows
running on computers made by Sun Microsystems Inc., which
currently bundles a version of the Unix operating system with
its machines.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "There's no reason for Windows not to be everywhere," Mr.
Gates said in an interview.
   Mr. Gates also said Microsoft's longawaited Windows
database product, which some analysts expect the company to
introduce this year, won't be ready before 1992; the product
is proving more difficult to finish than expected. Currently,
database is the only major software category in which
Microsoft doesn't own an offering.
   Once the chief backer of OS/2, Microsoft now considers the
operating system a dead end. The company said it no longer
plans to release an advanced desktop version of OS/2, called
3.0. Instead, it will release, perhaps no sooner than 1993, a
program that simply allows OS/2 customers to "migrate" to
Windows.
   For months, Microsoft had denied reports that it had
scrapped OS/2 3.0, but last week Steve Ballmer, a senior
Microsoft executive, confirmed the decision at a meeting with
securities analysts and cited IBM's lack of support as the
reason for scrapping OS/2 3.0. IBM, which continues to view
future versions of OS/2 as the key to its bid to regain its
once-dominant role in the PC market, declined to comment.
   The war between Windows and OS/2 has huge implications for
the future of $70 billion PC market. Already, the growing
popularity of Windows has vastly changed the balance of power
among software developers, causing sales of Microsoft
applications to rise and slowing growth of Lotus Development
Corp. and WordPerfect Corp, two applications giants.
Conversely, the failure of OS/2 to catch on is one of the
chief reasons for IBM's weak PC sales, which are running
roughly 20% below year-ago levels.
   Windows was conceived in 1983 as an add-on to MS-DOS,
which controls the basic operations of most PCs. Windows
makes MS-DOS easier to learn and use by allowing users to
open multiple applications, or "windows," on screen, and by
letting them control their PC by pointing at icons, or
pictures, with a control-device rather than typing in strings
of characters.
   Today, Microsoft views Windows as a system in its own
right. The company is considering incorporating future
versions of MS-DOS into Windows and has announced plans to
release Windows programs that recognize handwriting and
manage sound, images and video. These and other versions of
Windows will be "scaled" to fit different types of personal
computers as well as other electronic devices. The big
advantage of the approach: it allows customers to learn only
one set of operating instructions, which apply to any size or
type of personal computer.
   "This has never been done in software before," said Mr.
Gates. In the past, system software has been tied to the
choice of a microprocessor, the basic part of every piece of
electronics. Microsoft's Windows software today is limited to
running on machines powered by processors from Intel Corp.
But a future version of Windows, which Mr. Gates said will be
ready next year, is designed to operate on any
microprocessor.
   Mr. Gates said he believed "scalable Windows" could serve
as the basic software for telephone voice-mail systems,
future high-definition televisions, fax machines and
photocopy machines. Microsoft currently has no presence in
these huge markets, and Mr. Gates was unclear how he planned
to attack them. But he said he recently formed a television
research project and assigned another group of engineers to
develop a telephone voice-mail system that has Windows at its
core.
   Not that Microsoft is under pressure to diversify. Already
the world's biggest software supplier, the company's sales
grew by 56% to $1.8 billion in its fiscal year ended June 30.
Net income rose 66% to $463 million.
   Microsoft's executives wouldn't be specific, but they
indicated that they expected the company's rapid growth to
continue, though perhaps not at the sizzling levels of the
past.
   Mr. Gates, for instance, threw cold water on fears of a
stagnant market in personal computers. He believes worldwide
revenues from PC sales will grow by at least 10% this year,
or roughly in line with growth in 1989 and 1990.
   The relatively sunny expectation contrasts with
disappointing results reported lately by IBM and Compaq
Computer Corp., two of the three leading PC brand names (the
other, Apple Computer Inc., is posting sales gains, but
profit declines this year). Mr. Gates says the woes of the
big three obscure significant gains achieved by AST Research
Inc., Dell Computer and a bevy of lesser-known manufacturers.
   Still, competition is growing. Lotus and WordPerfect each
expect to rebound against Microsoft once Windows versions of
their popular applications are released later this year. And
Novell Inc., the leader in PC networking software, continues
to take a bite out of Microsoft's bottom line. Mr. Gates
admitted Microsoft was losing money in its bid to win a
greater share of the market for PC networking software.
   Then there is IBM, which is trying to revive the prospects
for OS/2, which most customers and analysts wrote off until
recently. The campaign, which Big Blue kicked off in April,
includes disparaging Windows and claiming that a new version
of OS/2 from IBM will actually run Windows applications more
efficiently than Microsoft's own system software.
   "IBM's strategy is hard to fathom. Whatever it is, I'm
pretty sure it's not working with us," Mr. Ballmer cracked in
his presentation to securities analysts.
   Once Microsoft's chief promoter for OS/2, Mr. Ballmer is a
Windows supporter today and thinks IBM will have little
success in slowing down customer acceptance of Windows. "It
more looks like OS/2 is a dead end," he said.
   (See related story: "IBM Is Expected to State Its New
Mainframes Are Faster Than Promised" -- WSJ July 29, 1991)
</TEXT>
</DOC>
