ID: 156	RANK: 82	SCORE: 9.206979
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910723-0134
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910723-0134.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Computers:
   Software Hit
   Aids Microsoft
   In IBM Duel
   ----
   By Jim Bartimo and G. Pascal Zachary
   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
07/23/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   IBM MSFT
</CO>
<MS>
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)
SOFTWARE (SOF)
</IN>
<RE>
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
WASHINGTON (WA)
</RE>
<LP>
   Microsoft Corp. may have widened its lead over
International Business Machines Corp. in their race to set
standards for personal computer software, by improving a
10-year-old product and, for the first time, selling it in
stores.
   The product, Microsoft's popular MS-DOS computer operating
system, once was sold only through computer makers, which
packaged it with their machines. Last month, though,
Microsoft also started selling the latest MS-DOS version
through retailers -- and consumer response has been strong.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Buying Microsoft's pitch that the new MS-DOS 5.0 Upgrade
is faster and better than older versions, computer users
started a run on the product, snapping up more than a million
copies in 30 days. Despite IBM's attempts to woo computer
users from MS-DOS to its newer system, OS/2, customers
continue sticking with tried-and-true MS-DOS and its sister
program, Windows, which has already given Microsoft an edge
over IBM. Since OS/2's introduction in 1987, sales of that
product have totaled just 600,000 copies. A new version of
OS/2 is due out before year end to compete directly with
MS-DOS.
   The new MS-DOS is "selling much greater than we expected,"
said Larry Carpenter, vice president of marketing for Ingram
Micro Inc., a software distributor which insiders say has
already sold 300,000 copies to mass marketers and computer
stores nationwide. Competing distributor Merisel Inc. says it
sold double what it expected and is on allocation from
Microsoft for more product.
   Egghead Discount Software, a national chain, says it has
sold out of the product in some stores, despite the fact that
its 500,000-copy order was its biggest-ever purchase of a
single software product, industry insiders say. CompUSA, a
chain of discount superstores, is also turning away MS-DOS
customers in some stores while it reorders from Microsoft.
Microsoft says the product is selling faster than expected,
and the company says it will take two weeks before it catches
up with orders.
   Computer users in large corporations say they plan to
upgrade most of their computers to the new version of MS-DOS
right away. Although some companies may use OS/2 as a network
manager in the future, few are buying IBM's pitch that OS/2
could be a new standard for individual PCs. "We're going to
be running MS-DOS for a long time," said Max Hopper, senior
vice president of information systems at American Airlines.
   Microsoft's success is no surprise to observers who say
deep discounting of the software -- to as low as $40 from a
list price of about $100 -- makes it an irresistible buy,
especially since MS-DOS has not been adequately upgraded over
the years to take advantage of advances in computer-chip
technology. Tim McCollum, an analyst at Dean Witter, says
"the real key" to the upgrade's success is the follow-through
by buyers over three to six months.
   While analysts' earnings projections already took MS-DOS
5.0 into account, the software's success gives the company an
edge in the increasingly bitter battle with IBM over
operating system software. Microsoft developed MS-DOS 10
years ago for IBM's first personal computer, then sold
generic versions to makers of IBM clones such as Compaq
Computer Corp. and Tandy Corp. In the process, Microsoft
built a powerful software empire with revenue in excess of $1
billion.
   IBM and Microsoft developed OS/2 together, planning for it
to replace MS-DOS. But the alliance started to come apart
this year when IBM's enthusiasm for OS/2 exceeded
Microsoft's. Now, strong sales of Microsoft's MS-DOS and
Windows, a sister program that makes MS-DOS easier to use,
are rapidly making that combination a new standard, while
OS/2 increasingly looks like a four-year-old failure. "The
average MS-DOS user doesn't even know what OS/2 is," says
David Weiss, director of software for software distributor
Merisel.
   Computer users say they are snapping up the latest MS-DOS
version because it lets them use computer memory more
efficiently when used with Windows. The current version of
MS-DOS, which was updated more than two years ago, can cause
computer glitches when using Windows.
   Meanwhile, IBM has been trying to shore up OS/2's tainted
image, running ads in trade publications that promise: "The
new . . . OS/2 2.0 is being designed to run OS/2 applications
better than earlier versions, DOS applications better than
DOS, and Windows applications better than Windows."
   But even corporate users who plan to use OS/2 to manage
their networks of computers are skeptical about whether the
latest version will live up to its advanced billing. "We'll
have to wait to see if OS/2 is production-quality," said
Ronan McGrath, vice president of information systems at
Canadian National Railways of Montreal.
   The new OS/2 is not priced yet, but few expect it to be
cheaper than the rock-bottom street price of $39.95 for the
MS-DOS Upgrade. Despite IBM's promises of greater speed,
functionality, and power, few expect users switch. "OS/2 will
never be close to DOS and Windows, I don't care what IBM does
to it," said Dewey Thoes, a software buyer for CompUSA.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
