ID: 165	RANK: 23	SCORE: 10.397685
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910521-0070
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910521-0070.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Marketing:
   Firms See Healthy Sales in Fatty Foods
   ----
   By Gabriella Stern
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
05/21/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   CPB CPC GRM HSY WEN Z.NES
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
</MS>
<IN>
ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
FOOD PRODUCTS (FOD)
RESTAURANTS, FAST-FOOD, CATERING (RES)
</IN>
<RE>
NEW JERSEY (NJ)
OHIO (OH)
PENNSYLVANIA (PA)
SWITZERLAND (SZ)
GREAT BRITAIN (UK)
</RE>
<LP>
   Wendy's International Inc. is taking an in-your-face
approach to health-conscious food marketing.
   While McDonald's promotes a seaweed-filled McLean Deluxe
burger with only 310 calories and 9% fat, Wendy's new ads
unabashedly proclaim the delights of a quarter-pound,
all-beef hamburger topped with a slice of cheese, three
sizzling strips of bacon, gooey cheddar cheese sauce and
sliced mushrooms.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   The ads feature beefy Wendy's founder Dave Thomas dodging
obstacles in a car in his rush to reach one of his
restaurants. Once there, he sinks his teeth into the juicy
sandwich, which has at least 600 calories, and says, "When
you got to have one, you got to have one."
   "McDonald's does what it wants to do," says Denny Lynch,
Wendy's vice president for communications in Dublin, Ohio.
"We feel we have our finger on the pulse of what America
wants. They want options."
   Wendy's and other food companies are well aware that
consumers insist they want to eat fat-free foods but still
reach for fat-laden products in supermarkets and restaurants.
At a time when the Pillsbury dough boy has taken to jogging
on a treadmill to promote a new low-fat Lovin' Lite brownie
mix (100 calories, two grams of fat per serving), these
companies are overtly celebrating tasty, caloric, fatty
foods. Their ads use words like "creamy" and "rich" to push
both hefty homestyle foods and gourmet delicacies.
   Consider Pillsbury's Haagen-Dazs. The growing popularity
of frozen yogurt isn't stopping Haagen-Dazs from promoting
its sinfully rich ice cream -- and introducing two new
flavors, coffee toffee crunch (300 calories and 19 grams of
fat per four-ounce serving) and coffee almond crunch -- in
the company's first national TV ad campaign this spring.
   Sixty percent of the $10 million budgeted for the ad
campaign will go to pitch Haagen-Dazs ice cream. The rest
will promote the company's new frozen yogurt (130 calories
and three grams of fat per three ounces of vanilla).
   In one suggestive print ad, a woman describes the
sensation of talking to her boyfriend on the phone while
eating a coffee almond crunch ice cream bar (360 calories, 26
grams of fat). "Slowly his voice started to drift away.
Completely consumed, I carefully lifted the thick Belgian
chocolate off. Then I immersed myself in the creamy center,"
she says seductively.
   "There's a significant difference between consumer
behavior and what consumers say they do," says Yves Coleon,
Haagen-Dazs marketing vice president, reflecting on the
company's marketing strategy. "A year from now, when we look
at McDonald's, 90% of their sales will revolve around their
core product line and not the McLean Deluxe. There's a sense
of absurdity in this whole game."
   Campbell Soup Co., which has seen its cream-based soups
maintain a lead over a low-sodium line, agrees. Campbell's
newest product, cream of broccoli (80 calories and five grams
of fat per eight-ounce serving), has become the company's
most popular soup in 35 years, helped by a
multimillion-dollar campaign this winter. Ads present it as a
creamy ingredient for use in main dishes, appealing to
households accustomed to pouring an old standby, cream of
mushroom (100 calories and seven grams of fat per eight
ounces), into casseroles.
   "We think of it as the right product at the right time,"
says Campbell's communications manager Kevin Lowery of the
broccoli soup. Overall, he adds, consumers still prefer the
company's richer soups, with chicken noodle (60 calories and
two grams of fat per eight ounces) and cream of mushroom
leading the pack and cream of broccoli not far behind.
   The nation's most popular frozen food entree derives 47%
of its calories from fat: Stouffer's macaroni and cheese (250
calories and 13 grams of fat per six ounces). Stouffer made a
multimillion-dollar pitch this winter for its line of
"Homestyle" entrees, which are heavy on gravy and starch and
include fried chicken and mashed potatoes (350 calories, 18
grams of fat in a 7 1/8 ounce serving) and Salisbury steak
with macaroni and cheese (350 calories, 18 grams of fat in 8
5/8 ounces).
   Stouffer ads appealed to consumers' cravings for homemade
food that would fill them up. Print ads promised: "No fads.
No frills. No tricks. No shortcuts." But Stouffer still
hedged its bets; the ads also noted that the dishes each
weigh in at fewer than 370 calories.
   "What we've seen in the last two years is that many of our
basic original products like macaroni and cheese are showing
growth," says Ed Marra, senior vice president, marketing, at
Stouffer Foods, a division of Nestle USA. (Stouffer also
produces Lean Cuisine, a line of low-fat frozen entrees that
is fighting a fierce price war with Heinz's Weight Watchers
and ConAgra's Healthy Choice.)
   In pushing foods that taste rich, marketers are playing on
consumers' search for comfort. "Food is one of the easiest
and cheapest ways to give to ourselves," says Judith Langer,
president of Langer Associates Inc., a New York market
research firm.
   Food marketers also realize that children have a
particular weakness for treats and often influence their
parents' shopping lists. Skippy, in TV ads directed at
children, boasts that it has made its regular peanut butter
creamier and its chunky brand even chunkier with more
peanuts, though both types still have 190 calories and 17
grams of fat in a two tablespoon serving. A new flavor of
peanut butter -- roasted honey nut -- is being test marketed
on the West Coast by Skippy, a brand of CPC International
Inc., Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
   Similarly, Hershey Foods Corp. reformulated its crunchy
Reese's peanut butter cup. It put in three times more peanuts
and raised the fat content from 17 grams to 18 grams. The
confection, which still has 280 calories, hit grocery store
shelves in March. In new TV ads, the candy explodes in a
display of spontaneous combustion.
   "We're not going to become a nation of ascetics," says
Allison Cohen, a specialist in consumer behavior at Ally &amp;
Gargano, a New York ad agency. "The '90s are going to be the
decade of the health-conscious individual, but if {consumers}
have to compromise too much, it's not going to sell."
   Nestle USA, convinced that this is a "back to basics"
decade, is pitching its Tollhouse semisweet chocolate chips
to consumers who, it says, are more eager than ever to bake
at home. Its TV ads, which feature a girl, her mother and her
grandmother mixing up cookies, promote Tollhouse more as a
traditional family activity than a rich dessert product.
   Still, purveyors of rich foods have to choose their words
carefully, says Ms. Langer. "It's OK to market indulgence
food products as rich. But I doubt somebody would come along
and say: `Here's something high in salt.'"
</TEXT>
</DOC>
